
Mora, MN Code of Ordinances


CITY OF MORA, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES



2018 S-8 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 455, passed 1-2-2018



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



ADOPTING ORDINANCE



Ordinance No. 357



   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCE FOR THE CITY OF MORA, KANABEC
COUNTY, MINNESOTA, AMENDING, RESTATING, REVISING, UPDATING, CODIFYING, AND
COMPILING CERTAIN ORDINANCES OF THE CITY DEALING WITH THE SUBJECTS EMBRACED
IN THE CODE OF ORDINANCES, AND PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF THE
CODE OF ORDINANCES.



WHEREAS Minnesota Statutes Sections 415.02 and 415.021 authorize the city to
cause its ordinances to be codified and printed in a book,



NOW THEREFORE the City Council of the City of Mora, Kanabec County,
Minnesota, ordains:



Section 1.  The general ordinances of the City as amended, restated,
revised, updated, codified, and compiled in book form, including penalties
for the violations of various provisions thereof, are hereby adopted and
shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Mora." This Code of
Ordinances also adopts by reference certain statutes and administrative rules
of the State of Minnesota as named in the Code of Ordinances.



Section 2. The Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of
the following titles:



         TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS



         TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION



         TITLE IV: PUBLIC SAFETY



         TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS



         TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE



         TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



         TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS



         TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES



         TITLE XV: LAND USAGE



Section 3. All ordinances adopted prior to ordinance Number 349 adopted on
November 7, 2006, pertaining to the subjects treated in the Code of
Ordinances, shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of
this ordinance, except as they are included and re-ordained in whole or in
part in the Code of Ordinances; provided, this repeal shall not affect any
offense committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the
effective date of this ordinance, nor shall this repeal affect the provisions
of ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching
territory, establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain
persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds
or borrowing of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal
property, granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to
public use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public
places; nor shall this repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or
special nature or pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the
Code of Ordinances.  All fees established in prior ordinances codified in
this Code shall remain in effect unless amended in this code or until an
ordinance adopting a fee schedule is adopted or amended.



Section 4. This ordinance adopting the Code of Ordinances shall be a
sufficient publication of any ordinance included in it and not previously
published in the City's official newspaper. The Clerk of the City shall cause
a substantial quantity of the Code of Ordinances to be printed for general
distribution to the public at actual cost and shall furnish a copy of the
Code of Ordinances to the County Law Library or its designated depository.
The official copy of this Code of Ordinances shall marked and be kept in the
office of the City Clerk.



Section 5. The Code of Ordinances is declared to be prima facie evidence of
the law of the City and shall be received in evidence as provided by
Minnesota Statutes by the Courts of the State of Minnesota.



Section 6. This ordinance adopting the Code of Ordinances, and the Code of
Ordinances itself, shall take effect upon publication of this ordinance in
the City's official newspaper.



The foregoing ordinance was introduced and moved for adoption by Council
Member Chmiel and seconded by Council Member Gravich.



   Voting for the Ordinance:  Ardner, Chmiel, Gravich, Hallin & Johnson



   Voting Against the Ordinance:  none



   Abstained from Voting:  none



   Absent:  none



Motion carried and ordinance adopted this 17th day of July, 2007.



                                    Greg
Ardner            /s/ 



                                    Greg
Ardner



                                    Mayor



 



ATTEST:



Mason Hjelle      /s/ 



Mason Hjelle



City Clerk



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Rules of interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Severability



   10.07   Reference to other sections



   10.08   Reference to offices



   10.09   Errors and omissions



   10.10   Official time



   10.11   Reasonable time



   10.12   Ordinances repealed



   10.13   Ordinances unaffected



   10.14   Effective date of ordinances



   10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities



   10.18   Copies of code



   10.19   Adoption of statutes and rules by reference



   10.20   Enforcement



   10.21   Consecutive numbering to continue



   10.98   Supplemental administrative penalties



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city,
as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“city code,” for which designation “code of ordinances,” “codified
ordinances” or “code” may be substituted.  Code title, chapter and
section headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the
code.



   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to
the components of the code unless otherwise specified.  Any component code
may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the “traffic code.” 
Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by
the number, such as “§ 10.01.”  Headings and captions used in this code
other than the title, chapter and section numbers are employed for reference
purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.02  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   Generally.  Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or
implication required, the same rules of construction, definition and
application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing
the interpretation of state law.



   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation.  The construction of all
ordinances of this city shall be by the following rules, unless that
construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of
the context of the same ordinance:



      (1)   AND or OR.  Either conjunction shall include the other
as if written “and/or,” whenever the context requires.



      (2)   Acts by assistants.  When a statute, code provisions or
ordinance requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as
well may do as the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the
performance of the act by an authorized agent or deputy.



      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.  Words denoting
the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter
genders; words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the
plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense
shall include the future, if applicable.



      (4)   General term.  A general term following specific
enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless
expressly so limited.



   (C)   Liberal construction. All general provisions, terms, phrases
and expressions contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order
that the true intent and meaning of the provisions may be fully carried out.



(1969 Code, § 3.120)



   (D)   Substantive changes not intended.  This municipal code is
intended as a codification of existing law and shall be construed in
accordance with that intent.



(1969 Code, § 3.130)



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule.  Words and phrases shall be taken in their
plain, or ordinary and usual sense.  However, technical words and phrases
having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood
according to their technical import.



   (B)   Other definitions. 



      (1)   Chapter definitions.  Certain chapters of this code
contain other definitions applicable particularly to those chapters.  In
case of any conflict between the definitions in this chapter and those other
definitions, the other definitions shall prevail in the chapters where
applicable.



(1969 Code, § 5.100)



      (2)   Statutory definitions. Unless clearly in conflict with
definitions or other provisions of this  code or otherwise clearly
inapplicable, definitions established for the State of Minnesota by statutes
or case law shall apply to this code.



(1969 Code, § 5.110)



   (C)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CITY. 



         (a)   The City of Mora, Kanabec County, Minnesota. 



(1969 Code, § 5.080)



         (b)   The area within the corporate boundaries of the
city as presently established or as amended by ordinance, annexation or other
legal actions at a future time.  The term CITY when used in this code may
also be used to refer to the City Council and its authorized representatives.



      CITY ADMINISTRATOR.  The person duly appointed to the position
as established in § 31.01 of the city code with responsibility for duties
set forth therein and other duties as assigned by the City Council or Public
Utilities Commission from time to time; or the person(s) responsible for the
duties in the absence of the City Administrator; or the City
Administrator’s designee.



      CITY CLERK-TREASURER.  The person duly appointed to the position
as authorized by M.S. § 412.02, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to
time, and § 31.02 of the city code with responsibility for the duties set
forth therein and other duties as assigned by the City Council or Public
Utilities Commission from time to time; or the person(s) responsible for the
duties in the absence of the City Clerk-Treasurer; or the City
Clerk-Treasurer’s designee.



      CITY COUNCIL.  The City Council of the City of Mora.



(1969 Code, § 5.090)



      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This city code as
modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.



      COUNTY.  Kanabec County, Minnesota.



      FILING AND THE LIKE AT CITY OFFICES. Whenever this code requires
filing with, payment to or notification of any certain city official or
department, the requirement shall be satisfied by filing, payment or
notification at the regular office hours of that city official or department
during business hours on any business day.



(1969 Code, § 3.080)



      JOINT AUTHORITY.  Words importing joint authority to three (3)
or more persons shall be construed as authority to a majority of the persons.



(1969 Code, § 3.050)



      MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



      MONTH.  A calendar month.



      OATH.  An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words
SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.  All
terms shall mean a pledge taken by the person and administered by an
individual authorized by state law.



      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT.  An
officer, office, employee, commission or department of this city unless the
context clearly requires otherwise.



      PERSON.  Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons,
firm, corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver.  Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or
WHOEVER as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or
members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents
thereof.



      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before or next after, respectively.



      PROPERTY. Tangible or intangible, real, personal or mixed
property.



(1969 Code, § 5.040)



      PUBLIC PLACE.  Streets, alleys and sidewalks dedicated to public
use, and also those parts of buildings and other premises, whether publicly
or privately owned, which are used by the general public or to which the
general public is invited commercially for a fee, or otherwise, or in or on
which the general public is permitted without specific invitation.



(Ord. 298, passed 11-6-2001)



      PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR.  The person duly appointed to the
position with responsibility for streets, storm water drainage, parks,
cemetery, and other duties as assigned by the City Council from time to time;
or the person(s) responsible for the duties in the absence of the Public
Works Director; or the Director’s designee.



      SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



      SIDEWALK.  That portion of the street between the curbline and
the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians.



(1969 Code, § 5.050)



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person
cannot write.



      STATE.  The State of Minnesota.



      STREET. Any public way, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, alley
or other public thoroughfare.  Each of these words shall include the others
and, if the context permits, shall also include sidewalks.



(1969 Code, § 5.070)



      SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by
a heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of
the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter
of the heading.  Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.



      WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters or figures,
whether by printing or otherwise.



      YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



§ 10.06  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 10.07  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
that reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.09  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published.  No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.10  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all city
business.



§ 10.11  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last.  If the last day is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.12  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.14  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless
otherwise expressly provided.



§ 10.15  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is
required to give effect to it, unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



§ 10.16  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter
or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this
indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or
title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.



§ 10.17  PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.



   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date
of this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those
laws.  This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued,
penalties incurred or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this
code.  The liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued; punishments,
penalties or forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had
not been enacted.  In particular, any agreement granting permission to
utilize highway rights-of-way, contracts entered into or franchises granted,
the acceptance, establishment or vacation of any highway, and the election of
corporate officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had
not been enacted.



§ 10.18  COPIES OF CODE.



   The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City
Clerk-Treasurer for public inspection.  The Clerk-Treasurer shall provide a
copy for sale for a reasonable charge.



§ 10.19  ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES BY REFERENCE.



   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this code,
all future amendments to any state or federal rules and statutes adopted by
reference in this code or referenced in this code are hereby adopted by
reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this
code was adopted, unless there is clear intention expressed in the code to
the contrary.



§ 10.20  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Any licensed peace officer shall have the authority to enforce
any provision of this code.



   (B)   As permitted by M.S. § 626.862, as it may be amended from
time to time, the City Clerk- Treasurer shall have the authority to
administer and enforce this code.  In addition, under that statutory
authority, certain individuals designated within the code or by the
Clerk-Treasurer or City Council shall have the authority to administer and
enforce the provisions specified.  All and any person or persons designated
may issue a citation in lieu of arrest or continued detention to enforce any
provision of the code.



   (C)   The City Clerk-Treasurer and any city official or employee
designated by this code who has the responsibility to perform a duty under
this code may, with the permission of a licensee of a business or owner of
any property or resident of a dwelling, or other person in control of any
premises, inspect or otherwise enter any property to enforce compliance with
this code.



   (D)   If the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of
a premises objects to the inspection of or entrance to the property, the City
Clerk-Treasurer, peace officer or any employee or official charged with the
duty of enforcing the provisions of this code may, upon a showing that
probable cause exists for the issuance of a valid search warrant from a court
of competent jurisdiction, petition and obtain a search warrant before
conducting the inspection or otherwise entering the property.  This warrant
shall be only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the people are being complied with
and to enforce these provisions only, and no criminal charges shall be made
as a result of the warrant.  No warrant shall be issued unless there be
probable cause to issue the warrant.  Probable cause occurs if the search is
reasonable.  Probable cause does not depend on specific knowledge of the
condition of a particular property.



   (E)   Every licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of
property within the city shall permit at reasonable times inspections of or
entrance to the property by the City Clerk-Treasurer or any other authorized
city officer or employee only to determine whether the provisions of this
code enacted to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people are
being complied with and to enforce these provisions.  Unreasonable refusal
to permit the inspection of or entrance to the property shall be grounds for
termination of any and all permits, licenses or city service to the
property.  Mailed notice shall be given to the licensee, owner, resident or
other person in control of the property, stating the grounds for the
termination, and the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of
the property shall be given an opportunity to appear before the City
Clerk-Treasurer to object to the termination before it occurs, subject to
appeal of the Clerk-Treasurer’s decision to the City Council at a regularly
scheduled or special meeting.



   (F)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the
authority of the city to enter private property in urgent emergency
situations where there is an imminent danger in order to protect the public
health, safety and welfare.



§ 10.21  CONSECUTIVE NUMBERING TO CONTINUE.



   Regardless of inclusion of some but not all subsequent ordinances in
this code, the consecutive chronological numbering of all ordinances as
passed shall continue.



(1969 Code, § 1.060)



§ 10.98  SUPPLEMENTAL ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.



   (A)   In addition to those administrative penalties established in
this code and the enforcement powers granted in § 10.20, the City Council is
authorized to create by resolution, adopted by a majority of the members of
the Council, supplemental administrative penalties.



   (B)   These administrative penalty procedures in this section are
intended to provide the public and the city with an informal, cost-effective
and expeditious alternative to traditional criminal charges for violations of
certain provisions of this code.  The procedures are intended to be
voluntary on the part of those who have been charged with those offenses.



   (C)   Administrative penalties for violations of various provisions
of the code, other than those penalties established in the code or in
statutes that are adopted by reference, may be established from time to time
by resolution of a majority of the members of the City Council.  In order to
be effective, an administrative penalty for a particular violation must be
established before the violation occurred.



   (D)   In the discretion of the peace officer, City Clerk-Treasurer
or other person giving notice of an alleged violation of a provision of this
code, in a written notice of an alleged violation, sent by first class mail
to the person who is alleged to have violated the code, the person giving
notice may request the payment of a voluntary administrative penalty for the
violation directly to the City Treasurer within fourteen (14) days of the
notice of the violation.  In the sole discretion of the person giving the
notice of the alleged violation, the time for payment may be extended an
additional fourteen (14) days, whether or not requested by the person to whom
the notice has been given.  In addition to the administrative penalty, the
person giving notice may request in the notice to the alleged violator to
adopt a compliance plan to correct the situation resulting in the alleged
violation and may provide that if the alleged violator corrects the situation
resulting in the alleged violation within the time specified in the notice,
that the payment of the administrative penalty will be waived.



   (E)   At any time before the payment of the administrative penalty
is due, the person who has been given notice of an alleged violation may
request to appear before the City Council to contest the request for payment
of the penalty.  After a hearing before the Council, the Council may
determine to withdraw the request for payment or to renew the request for
payment.  Because the payment of the administrative penalty is voluntary,
there shall be no appeal from the decision of the Council.



   (F)   At any time after the date the payment of the administrative
penalty is due, if the administrative penalty remains unpaid or the situation
creating the alleged violation remains uncorrected, the city, through its
Attorney, may bring criminal charges in accordance with state law and this
code.  Likewise, the city, in its discretion, may bring criminal charges in
the first instance, rather than requesting the payment of an administrative
penalty, even if a penalty for the particular violation has been established
by Council resolution.  If the administrative penalty is paid, or if any
requested correction of the situation resulting in the violation is
completed, no criminal charges shall be initiated by the city for the alleged
violation.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor.  The penalty which may be imposed
for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more
than ninety (90) days or a fine of not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000), or both.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference,
which is designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be
guilty of a petty misdemeanor.  The penalty which may be imposed for any
petty offense which is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of
not more than three hundred dollars ($300).



   (C)   In either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor,
the costs of prosecution may be added.  A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.



   (D)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform
any official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or
employee to the penalty imposed for a violation.



   (E)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section or
in § 10.98, if any person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any
provision of this code, the Council or any city official designated by it,
may institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain,
correct or abate the violation.



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   CITY COUNCIL



      31.   ADMINISTRATION



      32.   BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



      33.   FINANCES



      34.   CITY POLICIES



CHAPTER 30:  CITY COUNCIL



Section



   30.01   Municipal elections



   30.02   Compensation of Mayor and Council Members



§ 30.01  MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS.



   (A)   Date of election.  The municipal general election shall be
held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November in even numbered
years.



   (B)   Term of office.  The Mayor and all Council Members shall
serve a term of office four (4) years.  The term shall commence on the first
business day in the year after the election and shall expire when the
incumbent’s successor qualified for office.



(Ord. 275, passed 1-6-1998)



§ 30.02  COMPENSATION OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS.



   (A)   Salary. Pursuant to M.S. § 415.11, the City Council
establishes the compensation of the Mayor and City Council as follows:



      (1)   Mayor: five thousand dollars ($5,000) per year.



      (2)   City Council Members:  four thousand dollars ($4,000)
per year.



   (B)   Additional compensation. There shall be no additional
compensation for attendance at special council meetings, workshops, seminars,
or other city related business functions. This section does not preclude
reimbursement for out of pocket expenses of the Mayor and City Council
members pursuant to established city policy.



(Ord. 57, passed 10-1-1957; Am. Ord. 96, passed 12-29-1970; Am. Ord. 146,
passed 10-4-1977; Am. Ord. 205, passed 1-6-1987; Am. Ord. 268, passed
7-2-1996; Am. Ord. 311, passed 9-17-2002; Am. Ord. 348, passed 7-18-2006; Am.
Ord. 446, passed 8-2-2016)



CHAPTER 31:  ADMINISTRATION



Section



   31.01   City Administrator



   31.02   Clerk-Treasurer



§ 31.01  CITY ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   Established. There is hereby established the position of City
Administrator for the City of Mora, Minnesota.



(1969 Code, § 11.010)



   (B)   Objectives and scope.  Plan and direct the administration of
city functions as delegated by the City Council and Public Utilities
Commission to ensure efficient municipal services in line with Council and
Utilities Commission objectives.  Operates with considerable discretion in
normal administrative functions and in implementing policies of the Council
and Utilities Commission.  Responsible for effective recommendation in areas
where Council and Utilities Commission action is required.



(1969 Code, § 11.020)



   (C)   Relationships. The City Administrator reports to the City
Council and Public Utilities Commission.  The Administrator is responsible
to supervise all department managers and provide coordination with other
appointed officials, agencies and consultants.



(1969 Code, § 11.030)



   (D)   Specific responsibilities.



      (1)   Direct and control all line operations of the
municipality.  Works closely with department managers to plan and coordinate
activities.  Administers performance to ensure effective service to the
public and efficient conduct of all municipal affairs;



      (2)   Supervise all staff functions of the city.  Responsible
for all financial reporting, human services, labor relations and all other
city functions;



      (3)   Direct the efficient generation and purchase of power. 
Negotiates necessary contracts, including purchase of power from outside
suppliers to supply customers most economically.  Ensures effective fuel
consumption planning and economical purchasing to meet future needs;



      (4)   Develop and ensure effective utilization of appropriate
budgeting, administrative planning and control procedures.  Ensures that
proper control reports are developed and used, supervises effective operation
of purchasing procedures.  Recommends changes in these procedures to the
Council and Public Utilities Commission;



      (5)   Ensure the development of an effective municipal
organization.  Includes recommending changes in organization structure as
appropriate, working with department managers to ensure effective job design
and utilization of employees, recommending staffing changes or additions, and
recommending salary treatment and employee development activities.  Follows
up to ensure effective implementation of approved recommendations;



      (6)   Ensure effective management and use of city assets. 
Includes directing efficient use of present equipment and physical assets and
recommending additions or changes to the City Council and Public Utilities
Commission as appropriate;



      (7)   Ensure effective management of financial assets. 
Responsible to the City Council and Public Utilities Commission to ensure
effective investment of available funds and proper accounting practices to
control financial assets and provide for financial planning;



      (8)   Provide administrative support to the City Council and
Public Utilities Commission.  Responsible for agenda preparation, attends
meetings to report on City Council and Utilities Commission affairs and
problems; presents recommendations concerning policies and objectives, as
well as specific actions; participates in discussions as appropriate; and
implements Council and Public Utilities Commission decisions.  Keeps the
Council and Public Utilities Commission fully advised of all significant
matters and effectively presents all items which require Council and
Commission action or approval.  Responsible for city and Public Utilities
Commission records, including minutes, and enforcing city ordinances and
resolutions;



      (9)   Ensure proper public relations.  Follows up with all
departments to make sure that public services are effectively handled. 
Participates in local affairs as appropriate;



      (10)   Cooperate with other governmental units and
municipalities on matters of mutual interest.  Knowledgeable of developments
in public administration and utility fields.  Responsible for all city
planning and development activities and performs other functions as directed
by the City Council and Public Utilities Commission; and



      (11)   Administer the affairs of the city effectively and in
accordance with the Minnesota law.



(1969 Code, § 11.040)



§ 31.02  CLERK-TREASURER.



   Pursuant to the authority granted by M.S. § 412.02, Subd. 3, as it may
be amended from time to time, the offices of Clerk and Treasurer shall be
combined in the Office of the Clerk-Treasurer.



(1969 Code, § 14.010)  (Ord. 75, passed 1-9-1963)



CHAPTER 32:  BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



Section




Public Utilities Commission




   32.01   Established



   32.02   Membership



   32.03   Jurisdiction and power




Parks Board




   32.15   Established



   32.16   Membership



   32.17   Duties



   32.18   Advisory committee



   32.19   Organization and meetings




Airport Board




   32.30   Established



   32.31   Membership



   32.32   Meetings



   32.33   Absence from meetings



   32.34   Duties



   32.35   Administrative control




Planning Commission




   32.65   Established



   32.66   Membership



   32.67   Organization and meetings



   32.68   Adoption of program of work



   32.69   Preparation of comprehensive city plan



   32.70   Procedure for adopting or amending the comprehensive plan



   32.71   Means of effectuating the plan



   32.72   Zoning regulations



   32.73   Official map of street extensions



   32.74   Plats



   32.75   Procedure for changes



   32.76   Capital improvement program



PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION



§ 32.01  ESTABLISHED.



   There is established a Public Utilities Commission pursuant to the
provisions of M.S. §§ 412.321 - 412.391, as amended to the date of adoption
of this code and thereafter and as modified by any provision herein set forth.



(1969 Code, § 10.010)



§ 32.02  MEMBERSHIP.



   The Commission shall consist of 3 members appointed by the Council. 
No more than one (1) member may be chosen from the Council membership.  Each
member shall serve for a term of three (3) years and until his or her
successor is appointed and qualified.  Appointments shall be made effective
as of January 1 of each year.  A vacancy on the Commission shall be filled
by appointment by the Council for the unexpired term.  Each person appointed
to the Commission shall, before entering upon the duties of his or her
office, take and subscribe to an oath that he or she will faithfully and
impartially perform the duties of the office to which he or she is appointed
and shall hold his or her office until his or her successor is elected and
qualified.



(1969 Code, § 10.020)  (Ord. 102, passed 1-4-1972)



§ 32.03  JURISDICTION AND POWER.



   (A)   The following public utilities shall be within the
Commission’s jurisdiction:



      (1)   The city water system;



      (2)   The city electrical power system; and



      (3)   The city sewer system and sewage treatment plant.



   (B)   The jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Public Utilities
Commission shall be those provided by M.S. §§ 412.321 - 412.391, as they
may be amended from time to time.



(1969 Code, § 10.030)  (Ord. 64, passed 11-6-1957; Am. Ord. 83, passed
1-3-1967)



PARKS BOARD



§ 32.15  ESTABLISHED.



   There is hereby established an advisory board known as the Municipal
Park Board of Mora.



(1969 Code, § 19.010)  (Ord. 221, passed 9-5-1989)



§ 32.16  MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   The Board shall be composed of five (5) members appointed by
the City Council, each of whom shall be residents, property owners, or
business owners in the city and each of whom shall be appointed for terms of
three (3) years.  Members of the Board appointed from membership of the City
Council shall serve one (1) year terms expiring December 31 of each year.



   (B)   Every appointed member shall, before entering upon the
discharge of their duties, take an oath of office. All members shall serve
without compensation, unless otherwise authorized by the City Council.



(1969 Code, § 19.020)  (Ord. 221, passed 9-5-1989; Am. Ord. 243, passed
3-3-1992; Am. Ord. 347, passed 6-20-2006; Am. Ord. 403, passed 1-4-2011)



§ 32.17  DUTIES.



   (A)   The Park Board shall have the duty of advising the City
Council concerning the operation, maintenance, control and planning for all
of the lands, properties and facilities now owned or hereafter acquired by
the city for park or recreation purposes.



   (B)   Specific tasks to be accomplished by the Board include the
following:



      (1)   Complete and annually update a comprehensive park and
recreational facilities plan;



      (2)   Create and annually update a ten (10) year park and
recreation operation plan;



      (3)   Develop and annually update a list of options to be
selected and implemented as funding



may become available;



      (4)   Maintain liaison with the Boards of Supervisors of
surrounding townships, with the  Community Education Committee, the Mora
Area Youth Recreation Association, and other organizations which may be
operating park or recreation programs similar to those operated by the city;



      (5)   Advise the Council as to staffing requirements for the
park and recreation programs of the city.  The Board may recommend
full-time, part-time or seasonal employees serving the park and recreation
program exclusively, or alternatively may advise as to any additional duties
as should be performed by city employees of other departments in support of
the park and recreation programs; and



      (6)   Prepare and present to the Council annual budget
recommendations for the support of the park and recreational programs of the
city.



(1969 Code, § 19.030)  (Ord. 221, passed 9-5-1989)



§ 32.18  ADVISORY COMMITTEE.



   The Board may appoint a committee to advise itself, the committee to
consist of up to ten (10) members representing community youth, city
residents, residents of surrounding townships, senior citizens, civic groups
and similar interested segments of the community served by the city park and
recreational programs.



(1969 Code, § 19.040)  (Ord. 221, passed 9-5-1989)



§ 32.19  ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS.



   The Board shall, at its first meeting in each calendar year, elect from
among its members a President, a Vice-President and any other officers as it
may determine.  A Secretary shall be appointed, who may be a member of the
Board or some other person. The Board shall hold at least one (1) regular
meeting each month and shall keep minutes of its meeting, a copy of the
minutes to be furnished to the City Council as soon as reasonably possible
after the date of each meeting.



(1969 Code, § 19.050)  (Ord. 221, passed 9-5-1989)



AIRPORT BOARD



§ 32.30  ESTABLISHED.



   There is established an advisory board known as the Municipal Airport
Board.



(1969 Code, § 12.010)  (Ord. 258, passed 7-18-1995)



§ 32.31  MEMBERSHIP.



   The Board shall consist of five (5) members, who shall represent either
aircraft pilots and owners, aviation businesses, economic development
representatives, commercial/business interests, manufacturing/industry,
residential property owners or financial advisors, with care taken to not
over- represent one (1) segment on the Board.  All members will be appointed
to three (3) year terms and hold office until their successors are
appointed.  Members of the Board appointed from membership of the City
Council shall serve one (1) year terms expiring December 31 of each year.



   (B)   Every appointed member shall, before entering upon the
discharge of their duties, take an oath of office.  All members shall serve
without compensation, unless otherwise authorized by the City Council.



(1969 Code, § 12.020)  (Ord. 258, passed 7-18-1995; Am. Ord. 347, passed
6-20-2006)



§ 32.32  MEETINGS.



   The Board shall hold a regular monthly public meeting.  It shall adopt
rules for its proceedings and elect a Chair, Vice-Chair and Secretary.



(1969 Code, § 12.030)  (Ord. 258, passed 7-18-1995)



§ 32.33  ABSENCE FROM MEETINGS.



   Absence from three (3) consecutive regular meetings without the formal
consent of the Board shall be deemed to constitute a resignation of a member;
and the vacancy thus created shall be filled thereafter by appointment by the
City Council for the remainder of the term of the member so deemed to have
resigned.



(1969 Code, § 12.040)  (Ord. 258, passed 7-18-1995)



§ 32.34  DUTIES.



   (A)   The role of the Board is to advise the City Council regarding
all aspects of land use, airport operations and capital improvements. 



   (B)   In so doing, the Board shall be responsible for the following
tasks:



      (1)   Promote public interest and understanding of the
airport, its zoning, uses and overall development;



      (2)   With the assistance of the city staff prepare and submit
a recommended annual operating and capital budget to the City Council;



      (3)   Prepare and maintain an airport land use and ten (10)
year capital improvement plan in coordination with the City Planning
Commission and other appropriate agencies;



      (4)   Coordinate and assist the city and Joint City/County
Airport Zoning Board in the creation, updating and enforcement of the
municipal airport zoning ordinance;



      (5)   Oversee compliance with federal and state regulations;



      (6)   Oversee the implementation of the annual budget and
recommend budget amendments as appropriate;



      (7)   Recommend agreements with and selections of Airport
Manager/FBO;



      (8)   Review requests for hangar space and recommend changes
to lease terms;



      (9)   Advise on the filing of notices to airmen (NOTAMS);



      (10)   Advise and recommend appropriate applications for state
and federal programs;



      (11)   Review and advise the Council on progress during
improvements, including design, bidding, construction and pay requests; and



      (12)   Recommend general policy regarding the rules and
regulations for use of the airport.



(1969 Code, § 12.050)  (Ord. 258, passed 7-18-1995)



§ 32.35  ADMINISTRATIVE CONTROL.



   Nothing in this subchapter should be construed to confer any direct
policy or bill-paying authority to the Airport Board.  The Board shall be a
recommending advisory body to the City Council.



(1969 Code, § 12.060)  (Ord. 258, passed 7-18-1995)



PLANNING COMMISSION



§ 32.65  ESTABLISHED.



   There shall be a city Planning Commission for the City of Mora,
Minnesota, serving in an advisory capacity to the City Council.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 32.66  MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   The Planning Commission shall consist of five (5) voting
members each of whom shall be residents or property owners of the city. 
Four (4) members of the five (5) members shall be appointed by the City
Council and may be removed by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the City Council.
The City Council shall select one (1) voting member of the Commission from
among its own members.



   (B)   Members of the Commission shall be appointed for terms of
three (3) years. Appointees shall hold their offices until their successors
are appointed and qualified. Members of the Commission appointed from
membership of the City Council shall serve one (1) year terms expiring
December 31 of each year.  Vacancies during the term shall be filled by the
City Council for the unexpired portion of the term. Every appointed member
shall before entering upon the discharge of their duties take an oath of
office.  All members shall serve without compensation, unless otherwise
authorized by the City Council.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997; Am. Ord. 347, passed 6-20-2006)



§ 32.67  ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Commission shall elect a Chairperson from among its
appointed members for term of one (1) year; and the Commission may create and
fill such other offices as it may determine. The City Zoning Administrator or
his or her designate, shall act as Secretary of the Planning Commission, but
he or she shall not be a member unless he or she is appointed by the Council
as a voting member as provided in § 32.66.



   (B)   The Commission shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting
each month. It shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall
keep a record of its resolutions, transactions and finding, which record
shall be a public record. As needed, the Planning Commission will report on
it's activities to the City Council. Expenditures of the Commission shall be
within amounts appropriated for the purpose by the Council.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 32.68  ADOPTION OF PROGRAM OF WORK.



   On an ongoing basis, the Planning Commission will review and revise a
work program to be followed to fulfill the duties of this Board; including
zoning changes and review, monthly citizen requests for action, comp plan
reviews, capitol improvement reviews and other actions as deemed necessary to
carry out the functions of a pro-active Planning Commission.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 32.69  PREPARATION OF COMPREHENSIVE CITY PLAN.



   The Planning Commission shall prepare a comprehensive city plan for the
physical development of the city, including proposed public buildings, street
arrangements and improvements, public utility services, parks, playgrounds
and other similar developments, the use of property, the density of
population, and other matters relating to the physical development of the
city. The plan may be prepared in sections, each of which shall relate to a
major subject of the plan, as outlined in the Commission's program of work.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 32.70  PROCEDURE FOR ADOPTING OR AMENDING THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.



   (A)   Before adopting the comprehensive plan or any section of it or
any substantial amendment thereof, the Commission shall hold at least one (1)
public hearing thereon, notice of the time and place of which shall be given
by publication in the official newspaper of the city at least ten (10) days
before the day of the hearing. The adoption of the comprehensive plan or of
any section or amendment thereof shall be by resolution of the Commission,
approved by the affirmative votes of a majority voting membership. The
Commission may from time to time amend or add to the comprehensive plan or
section thereof as herein provided for the adoption of the original plan
whenever changed conditions for further studies by the Commission indicate
that such amendment or addition is necessary. An attested copy of the plan or
of any section, amendment or addition to the city comprehensive plan adopted
by the Planning Commission shall be certified to the Council.



   (B)   The City Council may by resolution of a majority of its
members adopt and amend the comprehensive plan or portion thereof.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 32.71  MEANS OF EFFECTUATING THE PLAN.



   (A)   Upon adoption of the comprehensive city plan or any section
thereof, it shall be the duty of the Planning Commission to recommend to the
Council reasonable and practicable means for putting into effect such plan or
section thereof in order that the same will serve as a guide for the orderly
physical development of the city and as a basis for the efficient expenditure
of the funds for public improvements.



   (B)   Such means shall consist of zoning, the control of
subdivisions, official mapping, coordination of the normal public
improvements of the city, a long-term program of capital expenditures and
such other methods as will accomplish the purposes of this section.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 32.72  ZONING REGULATIONS.



   The Planning Commission upon its own motion and upon instructions by
the Council, shall prepare proposed zoning regulations or amendments and
additions to existing zoning. Before recommending such amendments or
additions to the Council, the Planning Commission shall hold at least one (1)
public hearing thereon after a notice similar to that required by § 32.70. 
The same procedure shall apply for the preparation of any plan of proposed
rights-of-way for future streets or highways, or the future widening of
existing streets or highways, or for the reservation of lands for other
public purposes.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 32.73  OFFICIAL MAP OF STREET EXTENSIONS.



   (A)   The Planning Commission, with the assistance of the city
staff, upon instruction by the Council, shall prepare an official map of the
platted and unplatted portion of the city and adjoining territory, or
portions thereof, or any map of future platted areas or any revised maps as
may be necessary, indicating upon such map, the proposed future extension or
widening of streets of the city within such existing platted and undeveloped
territory or across such unplatted territory.



   (B)   After such map has been prepared and a hearing on it has been
held as provided in § 32.70, it shall be submitted to the Council, which
shall thereupon consider such map and may adopt it or any part of it with
such amendments as it deems advisable. Before such adoption by the Council, a
public hearing shall be held upon the proposal at least ten (10) days after a
notice thereof has been published in the official newspaper of the city.
After such map has been adopted by the Council and filed with the Register of
Deeds, whenever any existing street or highway is widened or improved, or any
new street is opened, or lands for other public purposes are acquired by
action of the city, it shall not be required in such proceedings to pay for
any building or structure placed without a permit or in violation of
conditions of a permit after the filing of such a map within the limits of
the mapped street, or outside of any building line that may have been
established upon the existing street, or within any area thus reserved for
public purposes.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 32.74  PLATS.



   (A)   Every proposed plat of land within the city shall be submitted
to the Council before being filed and no plat of land shall be filed unless
and until the same shall first have been approved by the Council. Before
acting on such plat, the Council shall submit the same to the Planning
Commission for its recommendations.



   (B)   The Planning Commission, adhering to procedure described in
the Subdivision Code, shall act on the same and shall make its recommendation
with respect thereto. The recommendations may consist of:



      (1)   Recommendation that the Council approve such plat;



      (2)   Recommendation that the Council disapproves such plat,
in which case such recommendation shall include a statement of the specific
reasons for such recommendation; or



      (3)   Recommendation that the Council approve such plat after
specific changes or revisions are made therein, which recommendations may
include the condition that a revised plat, containing such changes or
revisions, be submitted to the Planning Commission, in which case such
revised plat shall be so submitted to the Planning Commission for its further
consideration and recommendations before action thereon by the Council.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 32.75  PROCEDURE FOR CHANGES.



   No change shall be made in the zoning regulations, the official map or
regulations governing the platting of land after such regulations or maps
have been adopted by the Council, until the proposed change has been referred
to the Planning Commission for report thereon and an attested copy of such
report has been filed with the Council; and no ordinance or resolution
establishing any such regulations or map shall be adopted by the Council
until such ordinance or resolution has been referred to the Planning
Commission for a report thereon and an attested copy of such report has been
filed with the Council. Failure of the Planning Commission to so report
within sixty (60) days or such longer period as may be designated by the
Council after such reference shall be deemed approval of the proposed change.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 32.76  CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM.



   Each officer, department, board or commission of or in the city whose
functions include recommending, preparing plans for, or constructing public
works may at least three (3) months before the end of each fiscal year,
submit to the Planning Commission a list of the proposed public works
recommended by such officer, department, board or commission for planning,
initiation or constructing during the ensuing fiscal year. The Planning
Commission may request from the local school district, a similar list of its
proposed public works. The Planning Commission may list and classify all
proposed public works and shall review a coordinated program of proposed
public works for the ensuing fiscal year, based on the comprehensive city
plan. In addition, the Planning Commission may prepare and maintain a capital
improvement list for projects to be completed with in a five (5) year period
and with in a twenty (20) year period. Such program called a Capital
Improvement Program shall be reviewed for compliance with the comprehensive
plan and recommended to the City Council. A copy of such recommended program
of public works shall be included in the annual report of the Plamning
Commission provided for in § 32.67.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



CHAPTER 33:  FINANCES



Section




Fees




   33.01   Fee schedule; imposed



   33.02   Annual audit



   33.03   Disposition of unclaimed personal property




Assessable Current Services




   33.10   Definition



   33.11   Sidewalks clearance



   33.12   Weed elimination



   33.13   Public health and safety hazards



   33.14   Installation and repair of water service lines



   33.15   Repair of sidewalks and alleys



   33.16   Tree care



   33.17   Personal liability



   33.18   Assessment



   33.19   Severability




Special Assessments




   33.45   Partial prepayment of assessments permitted



Deferral of Special Assessments



   33.50   Eligibility



   33.51   Application



   33.52   Termination of right to deferred payment



   Appendix A:   Fee Schedule



FEES



§ 33.01  FEE SCHEDULE; IMPOSED.



   (A)   All fees for licenses and permits and all charges imposed by
the city for services shall be determined by ordinance of the City Council
and recorded on a fee schedule.



   (B)   All fees for licenses and permits and all charges imposed by
the city for services contained in the ordinances of the city shall be in
full force until the time that an ordinance is adopted by the City Council
changing the fee or charge.



(Ord. 321, passed 3-4-2003)



   (C)   The fee schedule is included in Appendix A to this chapter.



§ 33.02  ANNUAL AUDIT.



   There shall be an audit of the city’s financial affairs by the Public
Examiner or a public accountant in accordance with minimum standard auditing
practice and procedures as prescribed by the Public Examiner.



(1969 Code, § 18.010)  (Ord. 75, passed 1-9-1963)



§ 33.03  DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED PERSONAL PROPERTY.



   (A)   Any item of personal property that shall come into the
possession of the city, in the course of municipal operations, and shall
remain unclaimed by its owner for at least ninety (90) days, shall be sold by
the city as hereinafter provided.



(1969 Code, § 176.010)



   (B)   (1)   This sale shall be open to the general public and
shall be held only after there has been at least 10 days published and posted
notice of the sale.  The notice shall specify the time and place of the sale
and shall, in general terms, list the articles to be offered for sale.  The
notice shall specify a time prior to the sale when the articles may be viewed
by prospective purchasers.  The sale shall be under the management and
direction of the City Clerk-Treasurer.



      (2)   The sale shall be by auction or by accepting sealed
written bids.  The method to be used



shall be in the discretion of the City Clerk-Treasurer. 



      (3)   The published notice shall indicate if the sale shall be
by auction or receipt of written bids.



(1969 Code, § 176.020)



   (C)   If no bids shall be received for any articles, the City
Clerk-Treasurer shall furnish a list of the items to the Council with an
estimate of their value.  The City Council may then direct the disposition
in any manner it deems to be reasonable.



(1969 Code, § 176.030)



   (D)   The funds received from any such sales shall be paid into the
General Fund of the city.  The funds shall be held by the city for six (6)
months from the date of the sale, subject to the right of the former owner to
payment of the sale price from the fund if the owner can give satisfactory
proof of ownership.



(1969 Code, § 176.040)



(Ord. 161, passed 4-15-1980)



ASSESSABLE CURRENT SERVICES



§ 33.10  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CURRENT SERVICE.  One (1) or more of the following: snow, ice, or
rubbish removal from sidewalks; weed elimination from street grass plots
adjacent to sidewalks or from private property; removal or elimination of
public health or safety hazards from private property, excluding any
hazardous building included in M.S. §§ 463.15 through 463.26, as they may
be amended from time to time; installation or repair of water service lines;
street sprinkling, street flushing, light street oiling, or other dust
treatment of streets, repair of sidewalks and alleys; trimming and care of
trees and removal of unsound and insect-infected trees from the public
streets or private property and the operation of a street lighting system.



§ 33.11  SIDEWALKS CLEARANCE.



   Whenever the city performs any work to remove snow, ice, dirt and
rubbish remaining on a public sidewalk pursuant to §§ 54.54 through 54.56
of this code, the Public Works Director shall keep a record showing the cost
of such removal adjacent to each separate parcel and shall deliver such
information to the City Clerk annually by October 1 as to each parcel of
property on which the cost has not been paid.



§ 33.12  WEED ELIMINATION.



   Whenever the city performs any work to remove any weeds, whether
noxious, as defined by law or not, growing upon any lot or parcel of land
outside the traveled portion of any street or alley in the city pursuant to
§§ 131.47 through 131.48 of this code, the Public Works Director shall keep
a record showing the total cost of such work attributable to each separate
parcel and deliver such information to the City Clerk annually by October 1
as to each parcel of property on which the cost has not been paid.



§ 33.13  PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY HAZARDS.



   Whenever the city performs any work to remove or eliminate a public
health or safety hazards from private property pursuant to §§ 131.07
through 131.08 of this code, the administrative officer responsible for doing
the work shall keep a record of the cost of such removal or elimination
against each parcel of property affected and annually deliver such
information to the City Clerk annually by October 1 as to each parcel of
property on which the cost has not been paid. This section does not apply to
hazardous buildings under the hazardous building law, M.S. §§ 463.15
through 463.26, as they may be amended from time to time.



§ 33.14  INSTALLATION AND REPAIR OF WATER SERVICE LINES.



   Whenever the city installs or repairs water service lines serving
private property, the Public Works Director shall keep a record of the total
cost of the installation or repair against the property and deliver such
information to the City Clerk annually by October 1 as to each parcel of
property on which the cost has not been paid.



§ 33.15  REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS AND ALLEYS.



   Whenever the city performs any work to repair a sidewalk or alley
abutting private property pursuant to § 54.52 of this code, the Public Works
Director shall keep a record of the total cost of the repair attributable to
each parcel of property and annually deliver such information to the City
Clerk- Treasurer annually by October 1 as to each parcel of property on which
the cost has not been paid.



§ 33.16  TREE CARE.



   Whenever the city performs work on trees from any street or on any
insect infested or diseased trees on private property pursuant to §§ 91.03
and 91.04 of this code; or § 91.17 of this code, the Public Works Director
shall keep a record of the total cost of the work attributable to each parcel
of property and annually deliver such information to the City Clerk-Treasurer
annually by October 1 as to each parcel of property on which the cost has not
been paid.



§ 33.17  PERSONAL LIABILITY.



   The owner of property on which or adjacent to which a current service
has been performed, shall be personally liable for the cost of such service
plus administrative costs. As soon as the service has been completed and the
cost determined, the City Clerk-Treasurer, or other designated official,
shall prepare a bill and mail it to the owner and thereupon the amount shall
be immediately due and payable at the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer.



§ 33.18  ASSESSMENT.



   On or before November 1 of each year, the Clerk-Treasurer shall list
the total unpaid charges for each type of current service against each
separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this subchapter.
After notice and hearing as provided in M.S. § 429.061, as it may be amended
from time to time, the Council may then spread the charges against property
benefited as a special assessment under M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended
from time to time,  and other pertinent statutes for certification to the
County Auditor and collection along with current taxes the following year or
in annual installments, not exceeding ten (10), as the Council may determine
in each case.



§ 33.19  SEVERABILITY.



   In case any section of this subchapter is held invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the invalidity shall extend only to the section
affected and other sections of the ordinance shall continue in full force and
effect.



SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS



§ 33.45  PARTIAL PREPAYMENT OF ASSESSMENTS.



   Property owners assessed for improvements under M.S. Chapter 429, as it
may be amended from time to time, shall have the option to partially prepay
any portion of their special assessment as adopted by the City Council
subject to the terms of the resolution so adopting the assessment.



DEFERRAL OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS



§ 33.50  ELIGIBILITY.



   (A)   The following criteria must be considered by the City Council
in determining whether an applicant for the deferment of payment of special
assessments is to be approved or denied:



      (1)   The applicant is:



         (a)   Sixty-five (65) years of age or older; or



         (b)   Retired by virtue of a permanent and total
disability; or



         (c)   A member of the Minnesota National Guard or other
military reserves who is ordered into active military service.



      (2)   The property is the homestead of applicant.



      (3)   A hardship would be created by making payments.



      (4)   The assessment is over one thousand dollars ($1,000).



      (5)   The assessment is not for delinquent utilities or other
assessable current services.



   (B)   A hardship is considered to exist if the applicant's household
income from all sources does not exceed the Very Low Income category for
Section 8 Income Limits for Kanabec County, Minnesota as published by the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development for the year the
assessment roll is adopted.



   (C)   Nothing herein shall prohibit the City Council from
determining a hardship exits for other reasons on a case-by-case basis;
provided, that such determination shall be made on a non-discriminating basis.



(Ord. 432, passed 5-5-2015)



§ 33.51  APPLICATION.



   (A)   Applications for deferment of assessments are made on forms
prescribed by the City Clerk. The applicant must furnish the proofs and
documents in support of the application required by the application forms.



   (B)   Application must be made by November 1 in the year that the
assessment roll is adopted or within thirty (30) days after the adoption of
the assessment roll, whichever is later.



(Ord. 432, passed 5-5-2015)



§ 33.52  TERMINATION OF RIGHT TO DEFERRED PAYMENT.



   The option to defer the payment of special assessments shall terminate,
and all amounts accumulated plus applicable interest shall become due upon
the occurrence of any of the following events:



   (A)   The death of the owner, provided that the spouse is otherwise
not eligible for the benefits hereunder;



   (B)   The sale, transfer, or subdivision of the property or any part
thereof;



   (C)   If the property should for any reason lose its homestead
status; or



   (D)   If for any reason the city shall determine that there would be
no hardship to require immediate or partial payment.



(Ord. 432, passed 5-5-2015)



APPENDIX A:  FEE SCHEDULE



   (A)   City fee schedule.



      (1)   General fees.  The following fees apply to all
departments and operations.



 


Fee Name

 

Authority

 

Amount





Notary fee
 
general
 
no charge


NSF check fee
 
M.S. § 604.113(2)(a)
 
$30.00


Penalties (not including storm water utility)


   Monthly
 
general
 
1.50%


   Certify to taxes
 
general
 
10.00%


Permits not otherwise described
 
general
 
$25.00


Photocopies, per page
 
M.S. § 13.03(3)(c)
 
$0.25


Fax, in or out, per page
 
general
 
$1.00




 



      (2)   Administration.



 


Fee Name

 

Authority

 

Amount





Assessment search
 
general
 
$25.00


Private non-profit conduit financing fee
 
general
 
1.0% face value of bonds


Election filing fee
 
M.S. § 205.13(3)(c)
 
$15.00


Pawn Shop Licenses
 
 
 
 


   Annual license
 
§ 111.05
 
$2,000.00


   Investigation fee
 
§ 111.05(A)
 
$500.00


Alcoholic Beverages Licenses



   3.2 Beer on-sale

 
§ 112.22(A);

§ 112.23
 
$125.00



   3.2 Beer off-sale

 
§ 112.22(B);

§ 112.23
 
$125.00



   Temporary 3.2 Beer on-sale, each

 
§ 112.22(C);

§ 112.23
 
$75.00



   Temporary 3.2 Beer on-sale, per day

 
§ 112.22(C);

§ 112.23
 
$15.00



   Liquor on-sale

 
§ 112.22(D);

§ 112.23
 
$2,200.00



   Liquor on-sale club, <200 members

 
§ 112.22(D);

§ 112.23
 
$300.00



   Liquor on-sale club, 201-500 members

 
§ 112.22(D);

§ 112.23
 
$500.00



   Liquor on-sale club, 501-1,000 members

 
§ 112.22(D);

§ 112.23
 
$650.00



   Liquor on-sale club, >1,000 members

 
§ 112.22(D);

§ 112.23
 
$800.00



   Liquor on-sale, Sunday

 
§ 112.22(E);

§ 112.23
 
$200.00



   Temporary liquor on-sale, each

 
§ 112.22(F);

§ 112.23
 
$75.00



   Temporary liquor on-sale, per day

 
§ 112.22(F);

§ 112.23
 
$15.00



   Wine on-sale

 
§ 112.22(G);

§ 112.23
 
$375.00



   Temporary consumption and display, each

 
§ 112.22(H);

§ 112.23
 
$75.00



   Temporary consumption and display, per day

 
§ 112.22(H);

§ 112.23
 
$15.00



   Consumption and display

 
§ 112.22(I);

§ 112.23
 
$125.00



   Brew pub (on-sale)

 
§ 112.22(J);


§ 112.23

 

$2,200.00




   Brew pub (off-sale)

 
§ 112.22(K);


§ 112.23

 

$225.00




   Brewer taproom

 
§ 112.22(L);


§ 112.23

 

$500.00




   Small brewer off-sale

 
§ 112.22(M);


§ 112.23

 

$225.00




   Investigation, in-state, maximum

 
§ 112.29(A)
 
$500.00



   Investigation, out-of-state, maximum

 
§ 112.29(A)
 
$10,000.00


Transient Merchants Permits



   First day

 
§ 113.03(D)
 
$75.00



   Each additional day

 
§ 113.03(D)
 
$15.00


   Annual
 
§ 113.03(D)
 
$225.00


Taxi licenses
 
§ 114.06
 
$35.00


Tobacco licenses
 
§ 115.04
 
$125.00


Gambling Permits



   All permits

 
§ 116.09(C)
 
$35.00



   Gambling investigation

 
general
 
$500.00


Solid Waste Licenses



   Mixed municipal solid waste collection

 
§ 117.03(A)(1);

§ 117.03(C)
 
$500.00



   Roll-off service collection

 
§ 117.03(A)(2);

§ 117.03(C)
 
$150.00


Sexually Oriented Business Licenses



   License

 
§ 118.14
 
$5,000.00



   Investigation, in-state, maximum

 
general
 
$500.00



   Investigation, out-of-state, maximum

 
general
 
$10,000.00


Massage Therapist Licenses
 
 
 
 


   License
 
§ 120.07
 
$60.00


   Investigation
 
§ 120.07
 
$50.00


Jaycee’s Ball Field Rental (Organized Groups Only)



   Adult use charge, per team

 

general

 

$150.00




   Youth/mixed use annual registration, per league

 
general
 
$50.00



   Youth/mixed use charge, per week

 
general
 
$10.00


   Daily use
 
general
 
$75.00


Library Meeting Room Rental



   Individuals, business, fund raising

 
 
 
 



      First four hours

 
general
 
$75.00



      Each additional hour

 
general
 
$10.00


Non-Profit, Groups, Clubs, Public Agencies



   Cleaning fee

 
general
 
$35.00



   Kitchen

 
general
 
$35.00


Park shelters
 
general
 
$35.00


Reservation cancellation fee
 
general
 
$8.00


Key deposit (for all facilities)
 
general
 
$50.00




 



      (3)   Planning Department.



 


Fee Name

 

Authority

 

Amount





Variance
 
Chapter 150
 
$250.00


Conditional use permit
 
Chapter 150
 
$250.00


Interim use permit
 
Chapter 150
 
$150.00


Planned Unit Development/C.U.P.



   Concept Review

 

Chapter 150

 

$50.00




   General Development Plan




   Each

 
Chapter 150
 
$400.00



   Per lot

 
Chapter 150
 
$10.00



   Deposit

 
Chapter 150
 
$3,000.00


   PUD Final Development Plan
 
Chapter 150
 
$350.00


Rezoning
 
Chapter 150
 
$300.00


Amendments to codes
 
Chapter 150
 
$200.00


Relocation Permit



   Primary structure

 
Chapter 150
 
$50.00



   Accessory structures

 
Chapter 150
 
$25.00



   Deposit

 
Chapter 150
 
$1,000.00


Minor subdivision
 
Chapter 153
 
$150.00


Plat



   Preliminary

 
Chapter 153
 
$400.00



   Per lot (in addition to above)

 
Chapter 153
 
$10.00



   Final

 
Chapter 153
 
$350.00



   Deposit

 
Chapter 153
 
$3,000.00



   Public use fee

 
Chapter 153
 
$500.00/lot or 5% of land area or combination


Well and septic exemption permit
 
§ 50.12
 
$100.00


Public right-of-way or easement vacation
 
general
 
$200.00


Site plan review
 
general
 
$50.00


Landscaping deposit
 
general
 
$1,200.00


Driveway Paving Deposit



   Residential

 
general
 
$1,000.00



   Other

 
general
 
$2,500.00


Printing and Plotting Fees



   Line Work (Black and White or Color)




      8.5” x 11”

 
general
 
$1.00



      11” x 17”

 
general
 
$2.00



      17” x 22”

 
general
 
$3.00



      22” x 34”

 
general
 
$4.00



      28” x 40”

 
general
 
$5.00



      34” x 44”

 
general
 
$5.00



   Aerial Photography (Color)




      8.5” x 11”

 
general
 
$2.00



      11” x 17”

 
general
 
$4.00



      17 ” x 22”

 
general
 
$6.00



      22” x 34”

 
general
 
$8.00



      28” x 40”

 
general
 
$10.00



      34” x 44”

 
general
 
$10.00



   Zoning Map




      22” x 34”

 
general
 
$5.00



      34” x 44”

 
general
 
$5.00


Ordinance Copies



   Zoning

 
general
 
$20.00



   Subdivision

 
general
 
$5.00



   Shoreland

 
general
 
$5.00



   Flood plain

 
general
 
$5.00


Comprehensive Plan
 
general
 
$25.00


Special Planning Commission meeting
 
general
 
$150.00


Planner



   Regular-time, per hour

 
general
 
$53.00



   Overtime, per hour

 
general
 
$68.00




 



      (4)   Law Enforcement.



 


Fee Name

 

Authority

 

Amount





Parking Tickets



   Initial ticket

 
general
 
$20.00



   Additional after five days

 
general
 
$10.00


Seasonal parking permit
 
§ 71.05(D)
 
$100.00


Golf Cart Permit
 
§ 70.17
 
$35.00


Parade Permit
 
§ 70.31
 
no charge


Dog/Cat Impounding
 
 
 
 


   First offense
 
§ 90.04
 
$15.00


   Second offense
 
§ 90.04
 
$25.00



   Third offense

 

§ 90.04

 

$45.00




   Boarding (per day)

 

§ 90.04

 

$5.00



Dangerous Dog Registration
 
§ 90.51(E)
 
$75.00




 



      (5)   Fire Department.



 


Fee Name

 

Authority

 

Amount



Fire Calls (All Calls)



   First hour

 
§ 40.01(D)(1)
 
$500.00



   Each additional hour

 

§ 40.01(D)(1)

 

$350.00




   Burn permit

 
general
 
$10.00



 



      (6)   Building Department.



 


Fee Name

 

Authority

 

Amount





Building Permit Fee (subject to state surcharge)



   $1.00 to $500.00 construction value

 
§ 154.02
 
$30.00



   $501.00 to $2,000.00 construction value

 
§ 154.02
 
$30.00 for the first $500.00 plus $2.75 for each additional $100.00, or
fraction thereof, to and including $2,000.00



   $2,001.00 to $25,000.00 construction value

 
§ 154.02
 
$71.25 for the first $2,000.00 plus $12.50 for each additional $1,000.00, or
fraction thereof, to and including $25,000.00



   $25,001.00 to $50,000.00 construction value

 
§ 154.02
 
$358.75 for the first $25,000.00 plus $9.00 for each additional $1,000.00, or
fraction thereof, to and including $50,000.00



   $50,001.00 to $100,000.00 construction value

 
§ 154.02
 
$583.75 for the first $50,000.00 plus $6.25 for each additional $1,000.00 or
fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.00



   $100,000.00 to $500,000.00 construction value

 
§ 154.02
 
$896.25 for the first $100,000.00 plus $5.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or
fraction thereof, to and including $500,000.00



   $500,001.00 to $1,000,000.00 construction value

 
§ 154.02
 
$2,896.25 for the first $500,000.00 plus $4.25 for each additional $1,000.00,
or fraction thereof, to and including $1,000,000.00



   $1,000,001.00 and up construction value

 
§ 154.02
 
$5,021.25 for the first $1,000,000.00 plus $2.75 for each additional
$1,000.00 or fraction thereof


Plan Review Fee



   One- and two-family dwellings, apartments, town homes, condominiums,
non-profit structures, and all of their accessory buildings

 
§ 154.02
 
50% of the building permit fee



   For all others

 
§ 154.02
 
65% of the building permit fee


Other Inspections and Fees (Per Hour, Regular-Time/Over-Time)



   Inspection outside normal business hours

 
§ 154.02
 
$53.00/$68.00



   Re-inspection fees

 
§ 154.02
 
$53.00/$68.00



   Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated

 
§ 154.02
 
$53.00/$68.00



   Additional review required by changes, additions, or revisions

 
§ 154.02
 
$53.00/$68.00



   For use of outside consultants for plan checking, inspections, or both

 
§ 154.02
 
actual costs



   Special investigation fee

 
§ 154.02
 
equal to the amount of the permit fee


Plumbing Permits (subject to state surcharge)



   Permit

 
§ 154.02
 
$50.00



   Per fixture

 
§ 154.02
 
$5.00


Mechanical Permits (subject to state surcharge)



   Permit

 
§ 154.02
 
$50.00


Maintenance Permits (subject to state surcharge)



   For one- and two-family dwellings, apartments, town homes,
condominiums, non-profit structures, and all of their accessory buildings

 
§ 154.02
 
$50.00



   All others

 
§ 154.02
 
$60.00


Deck Permits (subject to state surcharge)



   Less than or equal to 30” above grade

 
§ 154.02
 
$40.00



   Over 30” above grade

 
§ 154.02
 
$60.00


Sign Permits (Subject to State Surcharge)



   Temporary signs

 
§ 154.02
 
$10.00



   Permanent signs

 
§ 154.02
 
$25.00


Manufactured Home Set-up Permit (subject to state surcharge)



   All permits

 
§ 154.02
 
$60.00


Manufactured Home Safety Disclosure (subject to state surcharge)


   All
 
 
 
$30.00


Septic System Permits (subject to state surcharge)



   In-ground

 
§ 154.02
 
$100.00



   Mound

 
§ 154.02
 
$150.00



   Drainfield only

 
§ 154.02
 
$50.00



   Septic tank only

 
§ 154.02
 
$50.00



   Compliance inspection

 
§ 154.02
 
$100.00


Demolition Permits (subject to state surcharge)



   Permit

 
§ 154.02
 
$50.00



   Deposit

 
§ 154.02
 
$1,000.00




 



      (7)   Public Works Department.



 


Fee Name

 

Authority

 

Amount





Labor Rate


   Regular-time, per hour
 
general
 
$45.00


   Overtime, per hour
 
general
 
$55.00


Equipment rates, per hour plus operator


   Loader
 
general
 
$62.00


   Motor grader
 
general
 
$57.00


   Backhoe
 
general
 
$50.00


   Skidsteer
 
general
 
$45.00


   Dump truck
 
general
 
$42.00


   Tractor mower
 
general
 
$40.00


   Riding mower
 
general
 
$25.00


   All other equipment
 
general
 
$35.00


Materials, cost plus
 
general
 
10%


   Winter Sand/Salt Mix (cubic yard)
 
general
 
$85.00


Street opening permit
 
§ 54.12
 
$100.00


Right-of-Way Permit


   Excavation permit
 
§ 54.12
 
$80.00


   Additional paved excavation
 
§ 54.12
 
$55.00


   Additional unpaved excavation
 
§ 54.12
 
$25.00


   Directional boring, per 100'
 
§ 54.12
 
$12.50


   Open trenching, per 100'
 
§ 54.12
 
$10.00


Obstruction permit
 
§ 54.12
 
no charge


Property owner maintenance permit
 
§ 54.12
 
no charge




 



      (8)   Oakwood Cemetery.



 


Fee Name

 

Authority

 

Amount





Lot Sales


   Lot price, per grave space
 
general
 
$875.00


   County family services discount
 
general
 
-$50.00


   Lot buy back price
 
general
 
$125.00


   Lot transfer fee
 
general
 
$30.00


Interments


   Summer Rates


      Adult
 
general
 
$875.00


      Infant
 
general
 
$500.00


      Cremation
 
general
 
$500.00


   Winter Rates


      Adult
 
general
 
$1,025.00


      Infant
 
general
 
$775.00


      Cremation
 
general
 
$775.00


   Disinterment (summer only)


      Adult
 
general
 
$875.00


      Infant
 
general
 
$500.00


      Cremation
 
general
 
$500.00


Other Fees


   Weekends and holidays


      Additional charge
 
general
 
$250.00


         After 3:00 p.m. weekdays


      Additional charge
 
general
 
$125.00


Stone Location/Setting Fee
 
general
 
$45.00




 



      (9)   Storm water utility.



 


Fee Name

 

Authority

 

Amount





Monthly Fee, Per Parcel


   Single-family residential
 
§ 51.06
 
$2.20


   Commercial/Industrial/Other (based on impervious area)


   1 upper limit of 10,000 sq. ft.
 
§ 51.06
 
$9.35


   2 upper limit of 20,000 sq. ft.
 
§ 51.06
 
$10.45


   3 upper limit of 30,000 sq. ft.
 
§ 51.06
 
$11.55


   4 upper limit of 40,000 sq. ft.
 
§ 51.06
 
$12.65


   5 upper limit of 50,000 sq. ft.
 
§ 51.06
 
$13.75


   6 upper limit of 60,000 sq. ft.
 
§ 51.06
 
$14.85


   7 upper limit of 70,000 sq. ft.
 
§ 51.06
 
$15.95


   8 upper limit of 80,000 sq. ft.
 
§ 51.06
 
$17.05


   9 upper limit of 90,000 sq. ft.
 
§ 51.06
 
$18.15


   10 upper limit of 100,000 sq. ft.
 
§ 51.06
 
$19.25


   11 upper limit of 200,000 sq. ft.
 
§ 51.06
 
$30.25


   12 upper limit of 300,000 sq. ft.
 
§ 51.06
 
$41.25


   13 upper limit of 400,000 sq. ft.
 
§ 51.06
 
$52.25


   14 upper limit of 500,000 sq. ft.
 
§ 51.06
 
$63.25


   15 upper limit of 600,000 sq. ft.
 
§ 51.06
 
$74.25


Delinquent account penalty
 
§ 51.08
 
10% per month on unpaid balance




 



      (10)   Mora Aquatic Center.



 


Fee Name

 

Authority

 

Amount





Lessons


   Preschool swim lessons
 
general
 
$80.00


   Children swim lessons
 
general
 
$80.00


   Water safety instructor aid
 
general
 
$80.00


   Guard start
 
general
 
$80.00


   Lifeguard training
 
general
 
$160.00


   Session/class transfer/refund fee
 
general
 
$10.00


Admissions


   Unlimited daily pass
 
general
 
$8.00


   Limited daily pass
 
general
 
$6.00


   Funtastic Fridays
 
general
 
$4.00


   One sheet of 20 bonus tickets
 
general
 
$80.00


Private Rental


   Unlimited facility use/2 hours
 
general
 
$250.00




 



   (B)  Public Utility Fee Schedule.



      (1)   General fees.  The following fees apply to all
departments and operations.



 


Fee Name

 

Authority

 

Amount





Application fee
 
general
 
$10.00


Credit reference letter
 
general
 
$5.00


NSF check fee
 
M.S. § 604.113(2)(a)
 
$30.00


Key deposit
 
general
 
$50.00


Photocopies
 
M.S. § 13.03(3)(c)
 
$0.25


Disconnect/Reconnect Charges


   Customer request
 
general
 
$25.00


      After hours
 
general
 
$125.00


   For non-payment
 
general
 
$75.00


      After hours
 
general
 
$175.00


Meter tampering fee
 
§ 52.15
 
$100.00


Meter testing fee
 
§ 52.15
 
$100.00


Delinquent account penalties
 
§ 50.24
 
10% per month on unpaid balance


Customer Deposits


   Delinquency risk less than 10%
 
 
 
$100.00


   Delinquency risk greater than 10% and less than 25%
 
 
 
$200.00


   Delinquency risk greater than 25%
 
 
 
$300.00


   Deposit interest rate
 
 
 
1.60%


Availability charges


   Water availability charges (WAC)
 
general
 
$1,500.00


   Sewer availability charges (SAC)
 
general
 
$2,400.00


Labor Rates, Per Hour


   Water/sewer, per hour
 
general
 
$48.00


      Overtime, per hour
 
general
 
$59.00


   Electric, per hour
 
general
 
$49.00


      Overtime, per hour
 
general
 
$61.00


Equipment Rates, Per Hour Plus Operator


   550 service truck
 
general
 
$60.00


   Jetter
 
general
 
$65.00


   Televising trailer
 
general
 
$125.00


   Bucket truck
 
general
 
$60.00


   Digger/derrick truck
 
general
 
$65.00


   Vactor truck
 
general
 
$125.00


   All other equipment
 
general
 
$25.00


Materials, cost plus
 
general
 
10%




 



      (2)   Water utility.



 


Fee Name

 

Authority

 

Amount





General Water Service


   Monthly customer charge
 
 
 
 


      5/8" x ¾" meter service
 
§ 50.24
 
$18.20


      1" meter service
 
§ 50.24
 
$18.72


      1-½” meter service
 
§ 50.24
 
$19.54


      2" meter service
 
§ 50.24
 
$20.99


      3" meter service
 
§ 50.24
 
$27.45


      4" meter service
 
§ 50.24
 
$27.91


      6" meter service
 
§ 50.24
 
$29.28


   Usage charge, per 1,000 gallons
 
§ 50.24
 
$4.30


Bulk water, per 1,000 gallons
 
§ 50.24
 
$33.30


Fire suppression sprinkler connection
 
§ 50.24;

§ 52.08(C)(1)
 
$2.55


Outdoor water use meter fee
 
general
 
$358.00


Temporary water service fee
 
general
 
$100.00




 



      (3)   Wastewater utility.



 


Fee Name

 

Authority

 

Amount





General Sanitary Sewer Service


   Monthly customer charge
 
§ 50.24
 
$20.85


   Usage charge, per 1,000 gallons
 
§ 50.24
 
$7.35


Special Sanitary Sewer Service Charge 112%


   Monthly customer charge
 
§ 50.24
 
$20.85


   Usage charge, per 1,000 gallons
 
§ 50.24
 
$8.23


Special Sanitary Sewer Service Charge 50%


   Monthly customer charge
 
§ 50.24
 
$20.85


   Usage charge, per 1,000 gallons
 
§ 50.24
 
$3.70


Unmetered sewer usage
 
§ 50.24
 
$94.35


Bulk sewer service, per 1,000

gallons
 
§ 50.24
 
$63.00




 



      (4)   Electric utility.



 


Rate Name

 

Monthly Service Charge

 

Per Unit Charge

 

Units





Residential electric service
 
$12.70
 
$0.0909
 
KWh


Rural residential electric service
 
$12.70
 
$0.0960
 
KWh


Small general electric service-single phase
 
$12.70
 
$0.0979
 
KWh


Small general electric service-three phase
 
$21.30
 
$0.0979
 
KWh


Medium general service
 
$12.70
 
$0.0631
 
KWh


Medium general service demand
 
 
 
$10.45
 
KW


Large general service
 
$12.70
 
$0.0557
 
KWh


Large general service demand
 
 
 
$10.45
 
KW


Street lighting service, utility-owned equipment
 
$12.70
 
$0.0979
 
KWh


Street lighting service, customer-owned equipment
 
$12.70
 
$0.0979
 
KWh


Security lights 100 HPS
 
$11.25
 
 
 
each


Security lights 200 HPS
 
$13.75
 
 
 
each


Security lights 250 HPS
 
$16.80
 
 
 
each


Security lights 400 HPS
 
$19.90
 
 
 
each


Security lights 1500 quartz
 
$52.80
 
 
 
each


Traffic signal service
 
$12.70
 
$0.0783
 
KWh


Outdoor warning siren service
 
$1.00
 
 
 
each


Municipal Government Service


   Small general electric service-single phase
 
$12.70
 
$0.0783
 
KWh


   Small general electric service-three phase
 
$21.30
 
$0.0783
 
KWh


   Medium general electric service
 
$12.70
 
$0.0600
 
KWh


   Medium general service demand
 
 
 
$10.45
 
KW


   Large general electric service   
 
$12.70
 
$0.0557
 
KWh


   Large general service demand
 
 
 
$10.45
 
KW


Temporary electric service fee
 
$100.00
 
 
 
each




 



   (C)   Economic Development Fee Schedule.



 


Fee Name

 

Authority

 

Amount





NSF check fee
 
M.S. § 604.113(2)(a)
 
$30.00


Photocopies
 
M.S. § 13.03(3)(c)
 
$0.25


Late payment fee
 
general
 
5.0%


Tax Increment Financing


   Application fee
 
general
 
$7,500.00


   Plan completion fee
 
general
 
$7,500.00


   Certificate of occupancy rebate
 
general
 
$7,500.00


Tax abatement application
 
general
 
$250.00


Industrial park land purchase deposit
 
general
 
$1,000.00


Other financial assistance deposit
 
general
 
$1,000.00


Planner


   Regular-time, per hour
 
general
 
$53.00


   Overtime, per hour
 
general
 
$68.00




 



(Ord. 402, passed 12-21-2010; Am. Ord. 412, passed 1-17-2012; Am. Ord. 416,
passed 1-2-2013; Am. Ord. 420, passed 1-21-2014; Am. Ord. 427, passed
11-18-2014; Am. Ord. 429, passed 1-20-2015; Am. Ord. 438, passed 8-4-2015;
Am. Ord. 443, passed 1-19-2016; Am. Ord. 455, passed 1-2-2018)



Cross-reference:



   Other fees, see § 110.09



CHAPTER 34: CITY POLICIES



Section



   34.01   Criminal history background investigations



§ 34.01  CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND INVESTIGATIONS.



   (A)   Authorized.  The law enforcement agency for the City of Mora
is authorized to do criminal history background investigations for the
following purposes:



      (1)   On finalists for employment with the city and any of its
departments or agencies; whether paid or otherwise;



      (2)   On applicants for any of the following licenses:



         (a)   Pawn shops;



         (b)   Alcoholic beverages;



         (c)   Transient merchants, peddlers, and solicitors;



         (d)   Taxicabs;



         (e)   Sexually oriented businesses; and



         (f)   Massage therapists.



   (B)   Procedure.



      (1)   In conducting the criminal history background
investigation in order to screen applicants, the city’s law enforcement
agency is authorized to access data maintained in the Minnesota Bureau of
Criminal Apprehension’s Computerized Criminal History in accordance with
the Bureau of Criminal Apprehension policy. Any data that is accessed and
acquired shall be maintained at the Sheriff’s Office under the care and
custody of the chief law enforcement official or his or her designee. A
summary of the results of the Computerized Criminal History data may be
released by the chief law enforcement officer to the following persons:



         (a)   The hiring authority to include the City Council
and the City Administrator;



         (b)   The licensing authority to include the City
Council and the City Clerk-Treasurer; and



         (c)   Other city staff as appropriate.



      (2)   Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant
must authorize the city’s law enforcement agency by written consent to
undertake the investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the
provisions of M.S. Chapter 13, as it may be amended from time to time,
regarding the collection, maintenance, and use of the information.



      (3)   Except for the positions set forth in M.S. § 364.09, as
it may be amended from time to time, the city will not reject an applicant on
the basis of the applicant’s prior conviction unless the crime is directly
related to the activity sought and the conviction is for a felony, gross
misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If the city rejects the
applicant’s request on this basis, the city shall notify the applicant in
writing of the following:



         (a)   The grounds and reasons for the denial;



         (b)   The applicant complaint and grievance procedure
set forth in M.S. § 364.06, as it may be amended from time to time;



         (c)   The earliest date the applicant may reapply; and



         (d)   That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will
be considered upon re-application.



(Ord. 371, passed 7-15-2008; Am. Ord. 391, passed 3-2-2010; Am. Ord. 401,
passed 12-21-2010)



TITLE IV:  PUBLIC SAFETY



   Chapter



      40.   FIRE DEPARTMENT



CHAPTER 40:  FIRE DEPARTMENT



Section



   40.01   Fees for emergency protection fire services



§ 40.01  FEES FOR EMERGENCY PROTECTION FIRE SERVICES.



   (A)   Purposes and intent. This section is adopted for the purpose
of authorizing the city to charge for fire service as authorized by M.S. §§
366.011, 366.012 and 415.01, as they may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      FIRE PROTECTION CONTRACT.  A contract between the city and a
town or other city for the city to provide fire service.



      FIRE SERVICE. Any deployment of firefighting personnel and/or
equipment to extinguish a fire or perform any preventative measure in an
effort to protect equipment, life or property in an area threatened by
fire.  It also includes the deployment of firefighting personnel and/or
equipment to provide fire suppression, rescue, extrication and any other
services related to fire and rescue as may occasionally occur.



      FIRE SERVICE CHARGE.  The charge imposed by the city for
receiving fire service.



      MOTOR VEHICLE.  Any self-propelled vehicle designed and
originally manufactured to operate primarily upon public roads and highways,
and not operated exclusively upon railroad  tracks. It includes
semi-trailers.  It does not include snowmobiles, manufactured homes,
all-terrain vehicles or park trailers.



      MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT.  An agreement between the city and a town
or other city for the city’s Fire Department to provide assistance to the
fire department of a town or other city.



   (C)   Parties affected.



      (1)   Owners of property within the city who receive fire
service;



      (2)   Anyone who receives fire service as a result of a motor
vehicle accident or fire; and



      (3)   Owners of property in towns or cities to which the city
provides fire service pursuant to a fire protection contract.



   (D)   Rates.  Fees for services under this section shall be
established in a fee schedule in amounts set by the City Council from time to
time.



   (E)   Billing and collection.



      (1)   Parties requesting and receiving fire services will be
billed directly by the city.  Additionally, if the party receiving fire
services did not request services but a fire or other situation existed
which, at the discretion of the Fire Department personnel in charge, required
fire service, the party will be charged and billed.  All parties will be
billed whether or not the fire service is covered by insurance.  Any
billable amount of the fire charge not covered by a party’s insurance
remains a debt of the party receiving the fire service.



      (2)   The city will use all practical and reasonable legal
means to collect the fire service charge.  The party receiving fire service
shall be liable for all collection costs incurred by the city, including but
not limited to reasonable attorney fees and court costs.



      (3)   The City Council may also, on or before November 30 of
each year, certify the unpaid fire service charges of persons owning property
within the city to the County Auditor for collection with property taxes. 
The city must give the property owner notice of its intent to certify the
unpaid fire service charge by November 1.



      (4)   If property owners outside of the city receive fire
service as a result of a fire protection contract and do not pay their fire
service charge for thirty (30) days is sent, the city may bill the town or
other city with which it contracts to provide fire protection services as
specified in the fire protection contract.



      (5)   If vehicle owners do not pay their fire service charge
for thirty (30) days, the city shall not charge the jurisdiction where the
service was rendered, but shall revert to (E)(2) of this section to collect
the fire service charge.



      (6)   False alarms will be billed as a fire call.



   (F)   Mutual aid agreement.  When the City Fire Department provides
fire service to another fire department pursuant to a mutual aid agreement,
the billing will be determined by the mutual aid agreement.



   (G)   Application of collections to budget. All collected fire
charges will be city funds and used to offset the expenses of the City Fire
Department in providing fire services.



(Ord. 335, passed 7-5-2005 ; Am. Ord. 364, passed 1-2-2008 )



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   UTILITIES IN GENERAL



      51.   STORM WATER UTILITY



      52.   WATER UTILITY REGULATIONS



      53.   SANITARY SEWER UTILITY REGULATIONS



      54.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



      55.   PARKS, TRAILS AND OPEN SPACE



CHAPTER 50:  UTILITIES IN GENERAL



Section




Generally




   50.01   Service beyond corporate boundary




Private Water and Sewer Systems Prohibited




   50.10   Private water systems prohibited



   50.11   Private sewer systems prohibited



   50.12   Exemptions



   50.13   Appeals




Payment and Collection of Utility Bills




   50.20   Definitions



   50.21   Accounts



   50.22   Billing



   50.23   Utility rate schedule



   50.24   Delinquent accounts



GENERALLY



§ 50.01  SERVICE BEYOND CORPORATE BOUNDARY.



   (A)   Generally, water, sanitary sewer, storm water or any other
municipal utility shall not be extended beyond the corporate boundary, nor
shall property beyond the corporate boundary be served by these utilities. 



   (B)   Service may be provided beyond the corporate boundary under
the following circumstances:



      (1)   Under an agreement with another unit of government to
provide service to a portion of their jurisdiction, the closest part of which
is at least two (2) miles distant from the city limits at the time of the
agreement; or



      (2)   Under an agreement with another unit of government to
provide service within an orderly annexation designated area where annexation
will occur within a specified time period.



   (C)   This section does not apply to the municipal electric utility,
which shall not extend service beyond its present service territory nor seek
to extend its service territory without City Council approval.



(1969 Code, § 95.130)  (Am. Ord. 336, passed 7-5-2005)



PRIVATE WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS PROHIBITED



§ 50.10  PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS PROHIBITED.



   The construction, operation, maintenance and/or use of water wells or
other private on-site water systems within the city is prohibited except as
provided in this subchapter.



(Ord. 363, passed 12-18-2007)



§ 50.11  PRIVATE SEWER SYSTEMS PROHIBITED.



   The construction, operation, maintenance, and/or use of private
individual sewerage treatment systems or other private on-site sewage
treatment and/or disposal systems within the city is prohibited except as
provided in this subchapter.



(Ord. 363, passed 12-18-2007)



§ 50.12  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   A property owner may request an exemption from the
prohibitions of §§ 50.10 and 50.11 if a hardship exists that makes it
unfeasible to obtain public water and/or sanitary sewer service.



   (B)   A hardship shall be defined as one (1) or more of the
following situations:



      (1)   The public water system and/or sanitary sewer system is
not within a reasonable distance of the subject property.



      (2)   The public water system is not able to provide adequate
volume or pressure to the subject parcel.



   (C)   The written application for an exemption shall be received,
reviewed and approved or denied by the Building Official for the city. If the
application is approved the Building Official shall issue an exemption permit
to the property owner for the construction of a private water and/or sanitary
sewer. Construction shall be completed within one (1) year or the permit
shall become invalid.  If the application is denied the Building Official
shall issue a letter stating the reasons for the denial and the appeal
process. Copies of the exemption permit or denial letter shall be provided to
the applicant within sixty (60) days of application with a copy placed in the
property file maintained by the Building Official.



   (D)   Properties exempt from the prohibitions of §§ 50.10 and
50.11 shall be required to connect to public water and/or sanitary sewer when
those systems become available to the subject property.  When said systems
become available the Building Official shall notify by letter the property
owners whose property is not connected and connections to the available
systems shall be made pursuant to the following rules:



      (1)   Connection must occur within two (2) years of notice of
availability of service to the property owner.



      (2)   Connection is not required if the exemption permit
provides for a time period permitting private water and/or sanitary sewer
systems that has not yet expired. Connection shall be made upon the
expiration of said time period.



      (3)   Notwithstanding division (D)(1) and (2) of this section,
if the well and/or individual sewerage treatment systems serving the subject
property fail or require major repairs then connection to the public water
and/or sanitary sewer system shall be required immediately. Failure or major
repairs shall include, but not be limited to, such items as:



         (a)   Structural or mechanical failure of the well, the
pump, or other components of the private water supply system;



         (b)   Structural or mechanical failure of the septic
tank, drain field, mound, pumps or other components of the private individual
sewage treatment system;



         (c)   Contamination of a private water supply; or



         (d)   Failure of a private individual sewage treatment
system to work properly.



   (E)   Property owners who are required to connect under division (D)
of this section may request an extension in writing from the City Council. 
The City Council may grant an extension for a specific period of time or
order the immediate connection based on its findings.  The City Council may
also add special conditions to the extension as may protect the health,
safety, and welfare of the city.



(Ord. 363, passed 12-18-2007)



§ 50.13  APPEALS.



   (A)   A property owner who wishes to appeal the determination of the
Building Official under § 50.12 may appeal in writing to the City Council
for review and final determination on the application for an exempt permit.
The City Council may add special conditions to the exemption permit as may
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the city.



   (B)   If the Council approves an exemption permit upon appeal the
Building Official shall issue said permit, with special conditions, if any,
in the same manner as provided for in § 50.12(C).



(Ord. 363, passed 12-18-2007)



PAYMENT AND COLLECTION OF UTILITY BILLS



§ 50.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCOUNT. A record of utility services used by each property and the
periodic costs for those utility services.



   CITY UTILITY SYSTEM. Facilities used for providing public utility
service owned or operated by the city or agency thereof, including electric,
sanitary sewer, storm water, and water service.



   OWNER. The person owning the property receiving utility service.



   TENANT. A person, other than the property owner, occupying and
receiving utility service.



   UTILITY RATE SCHEDULE. A schedule of all utility rates and charges set
by the Public Utilities Commission.



(Ord. 346, passed 6-6-2006)



§ 50.21  ACCOUNTS.



   (A)    Water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer services shall be
carried in the name of the owner who personally, or by his or her authorized
agent, applied for such service. The owner shall be liable for water,
sanitary sewer, and storm water services supplied to the property, whether he
or she is occupying the property or not, and any unpaid charges (including
taxes, fees and penalties) shall be a lien upon the property.



   (B)   Electric service may be carried in the name of the owner or
tenant.



      (1)   If carried in the name of the owner, the deposit for
establishing service shall be waived. If carried in the name of the owner,
the owner shall be liable for electric services supplied to the property,
whether he or she is occupying the property or not, and any unpaid charges
shall be a lien upon the property.



      (2)   If carried in the name of the tenant a deposit to
establish service shall be required. If carried in the name of the tenant the
owner shall not be liable for any unpaid electric charges.



(Ord. 346, passed 6-6-2006)



§ 50.22  BILLING.



   Water, sanitary sewer, storm water and electric charges shall be billed
on one (1)bill as applicable to each account. All charges for water, sanitary
sewer, storm water and electric service shall be due on the tenth (10th) day
of the month and considered delinquent after the tenth (10th) day of the
month. All bills shall contain the address and telephone number of the
utility office. Bills shall be mailed to the customers on or before the last
day of each month and specify the water and electricity consumed and all
utility charges in accordance with the current fee schedule set by the Public
Utilities Commission.



(Ord. 346, passed 6-6-2006)



§ 50.23  UTILITY RATE SCHEDULE.



   (A)   The utility rate schedule shall be adopted by ordinance of the
City Council.



   (B)   Each year, the Public Utilities Commission shall establish one
(1) or more certification cutoff dates. All city utility accounts, unless
exempt for other legal reason, which have been billed a delinquent bill and
remain unpaid as of the certification cut-off date shall have the balance on
the account included in a preliminary certification list.



(Ord. 346, passed 6-6-2006)



§ 50.24  DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS.



   (A)   Penalties.  A late payment penalty shall be assessed on the
full balance of all accounts with a past due balance in an amount set forth
by the City Council from time to time.



   (B)   Shut-off for nonpayment. Water or electric service shall not
be shut-off until notice and an opportunity for a hearing before an employee
designated by the public utility commission has been provided to the occupant
and owner of the premises involved.



      (1)   If any bill is not paid by the due date listed on the
bill, a second bill will be mailed by first class mail and shall state that
if payment is not made within ten (10) days of the mailing of the second
bill, water or electric service to the premises will be shut off for
nonpayment.



      (2)   The second bill and shut-off notice shall contain the
title, address and telephone number of the official in charge of billing; the
title, address and phone number shall be clearly visible and easily readable.



      (3)   The notice shall also state that any occupant or owner
has the right to a hearing before the water or electric service is shut off.
The owner or occupant may be represented in person and by counsel or any
other person of his or her choosing. The owner or occupant may present orally
or in writing his or her complaint to the city official in charge of utility
billing. This official shall be authorized to order continuation of the
customer's service and shall have the authority to adjust the customer's bill
or enter into a mutually agreeable payment plan.



      (4)   If an occupant or owner requests a hearing, the water or
electric service shall not be shut off until the hearing process is complete.



      (5)   If a customer fails to pay and fails to request a
hearing under this part, service will be shut off at the time specified in
the notice.



   (C)   Certification for collection with taxes. Unpaid charges on
utility accounts shall not be certified to the County Auditor until notice
and an opportunity for a hearing have been provided to the owner of the
premises involved. The notice shall be sent by first class mail and shall
state that if payment is not made before the date for certification, the
entire amount unpaid plus penalties will be certified to the County Auditor
for collection as other taxes are collected. The notice shall also state that
the occupant may, before such certification date, attend or schedule a
hearing on the matter to object to certification of unpaid utility charges.



   (D)   A hearing shall be held on the matter by the Public Utility
Commission. Property owners with unpaid utility charges shall have the
opportunity to object to the certification of unpaid charges to be collected
as taxes are collected. If, after the hearing, the City Council finds that
the amounts claimed as delinquent are actually due and unpaid and that there
is no legal reason why the unpaid charges should not be certified for
collection with taxes in accordance with this subchapter, the city may
certify the unpaid charges to the county auditor for collection as other
taxes are collected.



   (E)   For each certification sustained, the property owner shall
have the following options after the hearing:



      (1)   To pay the certified delinquent amount after the hearing
date, but before the certification deadline.



      (2)   To pay the certified charges as billed to them by the
county on their property tax statement with a collection term of one (1) year.



   (F)   Fifteen (15) days after the hearing, the certified roll, minus
any payments, shall be delivered to the County Auditor.



(Ord. 346, passed 6-6-2006; Am. Ord. 376, passed 1-20-2009)



CHAPTER 51:  STORM WATER UTILITY



Section



   51.01   Establishment



   51.02   Finding and determination



   51.03   Storm Water Utility Fund



   51.04   Definitions



   51.05   Storm water utility factors



   51.06   Payment of fee



   51.07   Appeal



   51.08   Late payment; penalty



   51.09   Tax lien establishment



§ 51.01  ESTABLISHMENT.



   Pursuant to M.S. § 444.075, as it may be amended from time to time,
the city establishes a storm water utility, and authorizes the imposition of
just and reasonable charges for the use and availability of storm drainage
facilities.  The storm water utility operations shall be a part of the
Public Works Department.



(1969 Code, Ch. 97 Subd. 1)  (Ord. 333, passed 1-18-2005)



§ 51.02  FINDING AND DETERMINATION.



   In the exercise of its government authority and in order to promote the
public health, safety, convenience and general welfare, the city has
constructed, operated and maintained a storm water drainage system.  This
chapter is adopted in the further exercise of that authority and for the same
purposes.  The system, as constructed heretofore, has been financed and paid
for through the imposition of special assessments and ad valorem taxes.  It
is necessary and desirable to provide an additional method of recovering some
or all of the future costs of improving, establishing, enlarging, replacing,
repairing, maintaining and operating the system through the imposition of
charges as provided in this chapter.  In imposing charges, it is necessary
to establish a methodology that undertakes to make charges just and
equitable.  Taking into account the status of completion of the system, past
methods of recovering system costs, the topography of the city and other
relevant factors, it is determined to be just and equitable to assign
responsibility for some or all of the future costs of improving,
establishing, enlarging, replacing, repairing, maintaining and operating the
system on the basis of the expected storm water runoff from the various
parcels of land within the city during a standard rainfall event.



(1969 Code, Ch. 97 Subd. 2)  (Ord. 333, passed 1-18-2005)



§ 51.03  STORM WATER UTILITY FUND.



   There is hereby created a Storm Water Utility Fund into which all
charges, when collected, and all monies received from the sale of any related
facilities or equipment or any byproducts shall be placed. These monies shall
be used first to pay the normal, reasonable and current costs of operating
and maintaining the facilities.



(1969 Code, Ch. 97 Subd. 2)  (Ord. 333, passed 1-18-2005)



§ 51.04  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MONTHLY UTILITY REVENUE.  The estimated monthly expenditures for
planning and inventories, capital expenditures, personnel and equipment and
operation of the storm water utility, in accordance with the established city
policy.



   STORM WATER UTILITY FEE. The annual charge developed for each parcel of
land.



(1969 Code, Ch. 97 Subd. 4)  (Ord. 333, passed 1-18-2005)



§ 51.05  STORM WATER UTILITY FACTORS.



   The land use for a given parcel shall be the tax classification for
that parcel on file with the County Assessor’s Office.



(1969 Code, Ch. 97 Subd. 5)  (Ord. 333, passed 1-18-2005)



§ 51.06  PAYMENT OF FEE.



   Storm water utility fees shall be billed with utility bills.  The fee
shall be due and payable on the same terms as utility bills.  Any prepayment
or overpayment of charges shall be retained by the city and applied against
subsequent fees.



(1969 Code, Ch. 97 Subd. 9)  (Ord. 333, passed 1-18-2005)



§ 51.07  APPEAL.



   If a property owner or person responsible for paying the storm water
utility fee believes that a particular assigned fee is incorrect, the person
may request that the fee be recomputed.



(1969 Code, Ch. 97 Subd. 10)  (Ord. 333, passed 1-18-2005)



§ 51.08  LATE PAYMENT; PENALTY.



   Each billing for storm water utility fees not paid when due shall incur
a penalty, the same as other utility services generally.



(1969 Code, Ch. 97 Subd. 11)  (Ord. 333, passed 1-18-2005)



§ 51.09  TAX LIEN ESTABLISHMENT.



   Any past due storm water drainage charges will be certified to the
County Auditor for collection with real estate taxes against the property
served by the utility established in this chapter for collection as other
taxes are collected in the following year pursuant to M.S. § 444.075, Subd.
3, as it may be amended from time to time, and § 33.18 of this code.  In
addition, the city may have the right to bring civil action or take other
legal remedies to collect unpaid charges.



(1969 Code, Ch. 97 Subd. 12)  (Ord. 333, passed 1-18-2005)



CHAPTER 52:  WATER UTILITY REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   52.01   Establishment



   52.02   Definitions



   52.03   Applications, permits and fee



   52.04   Implied consent to rules, regulations and rates



   52.05   City not liable



   52.06   Right to enter land



   52.07   Licensed plumbers and certified pipe layers



   52.08   Water charges



Regulations



   52.15   Water meter regulations



   52.16   Meter readings



   52.17   Interruption of service



   52.18   Liability for repairs



   52.19   Deficiency of water



   52.20   Leaks in service line



   52.21   Installation of connections



   52.22   Cross connections prohibited



   52.23   Connection to water system required



   52.24   Individual connections to water system



 



   52.99   Violation and penalties



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 52.01  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is established for the city a public water utility which shall be
under the supervision of the Director.  The public water supply system as it
is now constituted, enlarged, or extended shall be operated and maintained
under the provisions of this chapter, subject to the authority of the
Commission and Council.  The water utility shall have responsibility for the
management, maintenance, care, and operation of the public water supply
system of the city.



(Ord. 397, passed 9-7-2010)



§ 52.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICANT. The owner or the owner’s agent.



   ACCOUNT. A record of service used by each property and the periodic
costs for those services.



   COMMISSION.  The Public Utilities Commission of the City of Mora
established pursuant to the provisions of M.S. §§ 412.321 - 412.391 and
Mora City Code §§ 32.01 through 32.03.



   COUNCIL.  The City Council of the City of Mora, Kanabec County,
Minnesota.



   CUSTOMER.  The person, firm, corporation or other entity receiving
service.  May be the owner or a tenant.



   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Department of Public Works, or his or her
designee.



   EMERGENCY. A situation where the expected demand for water exceeds the
water system’s supply.



   GENERAL MANAGER.  The General Manager of the Mora Municipal Utilities.



   MAINS.  The trunk distribution portion of the water system consisting
of pipes providing access to service lines.



   OWNER.  The person, firm or corporation owning the property receiving
service as shown on the records of Kanabec County.



   SERVICE.  The provision of water to a building or other facility via
the water system.



   SERVICE CONNECTION.  The act of connecting a building or other
facility to the water system via a service line.



   SERVICE LINE. Pipes serving as a connection from the mains to the
customer’s facilities.



   TENANT.  A person, firm or corporation, other than the owner,
occupying the property and receiving service.



   UTILITY.  Mora Municipal Utilities.



   WATER SYSTEM. The municipal public water supply system including all of
its components.



(Ord. 397, passed 9-7-2010)



§ 52.03  APPLICATIONS, PERMITS AND FEES.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall make any type of
connection to the water system, except upon making an application on a form
provided by the Utility and receiving a permit issued by the Utility for each
purpose.  The application shall include the address of the property to be
served, the uses for which the connection is requested, the size of the
service line to be used, full name and address of the owner, and shall show
all other particulars necessary to the full understanding of the work to be
performed.  At the time of making such application there shall be paid to
the Utility certain fees which shall be set by the Commission and Council
from time to time by ordinance for the following purposes.



   (B)   No connection shall be made to the water system for service to
any property of any person or occupants of the land, parcel or premises
affected that have not paid or provided for the payment of the full and
proportionate share of the water system which share shall be payable as
follows:



      (1)   No connection shall be made to the water system until
the applicant pays a water access charge (WAC) as established by Commission
and Council from time to time. The WAC shall be in addition to any fees or
charges required under this chapter;



      (2)   For service to property to which service lines have not
been previously run from the mains to the property line, the applicant shall
pay to the Utility the amount of which shall not be less than the Utility’s
cost of making the necessary connections, taps and installation of pipe and
appurtenances to provide service to the property and the necessary street
repairs; provided, however, with the approval of the Utility, the owner or
the owner’s agent shall have the right to contract directly with a licensed
plumber or a certified pipe layer for the installation and connection of the
service line;



      (3)   The Commission and Council may establish water districts
and establish area charges, connection charges and lateral charges for each
district by joint resolution.



   (C)   Permits shall be obtained as follows:



      (1)   Before proceeding with the construction, enlargement,
alteration, or repair of any service lines connecting the water system to any
facility, the applicant shall first obtain a permit for such purposes from
the Utility.



      (2)   The applicant shall pay to the Utility, a permit fee,
the amount of which shall be established from time to time by ordinance.



      (3)   The Director shall examine all applications before
construction is begun, and after the construction, enlargement, alteration,
or repair is complete, the Utility inspector shall be notified.  It shall be
unlawful to cover any connecting line until an inspection has been made and
such connection and the work incident thereto has been approved by the
Utility as a proper and suitable connection.



(Ord. 397, passed 9-7-2010)



§ 52.04  IMPLIED CONSENT TO RULES, REGULATIONS AND RATES.



   Every person applying for water service, every owner of property for
which any such application is made, every person accepting water service, and
every owner of property where such service is accepted subsequent to the
passage of this chapter shall be deemed upon making such application or
accepting such service to consent to all rules, regulations and rates as
established by this chapter and as may hereafter be set forth and adopted by
the Commission and Council.



(Ord. 397, passed 9-7-2010)



§ 52.05  CITY NOT LIABLE.



   The Utility and/or the city shall not be held liable at any time for
any deficiency or failure in the supply of water to the customer, whether the
same be caused by shutting off the water for repairs or connections or for
any cause whatsoever.



(Ord. 397, passed 9-7-2010)



§ 52.06  RIGHT TO ENTER LAND.



   (A)   The Utility, by any authorized employee or agent, shall have
the right to enter and be admitted to any lands and property in the city
between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. for the purpose of inspection of materials,
plumbing work and fixtures of all kinds used by or connected to the water
system.



   (B)   If the owner, tenant, or other person in control of a premises
objects to the inspection of or entrance to the property, the Director, an
officer of the law, or any employee or official charged with the duty of
enforcing the provisions of this code may, upon showing that probable cause
exists for the issuance of a valid search warrant from a court of competent
jurisdiction, petition and obtain a search warrant before conducting the
inspection or otherwise entering the property. This warrant shall be only to
determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to protect the health,
safety, and welfare of the people are being complied with and to enforce
these provisions only and no criminal charges shall be made as a result of
the warrant.  No warrant shall be issued unless there is probable cause to
issue the warrant.  Probable cause occurs if the search is reasonable. 
Probable cause does not depend on specific knowledge of the condition of a
particular property.



   (C)   Every owner, tenant or other person in control of property
within the city shall permit at reasonable times inspections of or entrance
to the property by the Director or any other authorized Utility officer or
employee only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the people are being complied with
and to enforce these provisions.  Unreasonable refusal to permit the
inspection of or entrance to the property shall be grounds for termination of
any and all permits, licenses, or service to the property.  Written notice
shall be given to the owner, tenant or other person in control of the
property, stating the grounds for the termination, and the owner, tenant or
other person in control of the property shall be given an opportunity to
appear before the General Manager to object to the termination before it
occurs, subject to appeal of the General Manager’s decision to the
Commission at a regularly scheduled or special meeting.



   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the
authority of the Utility to enter private property in urgent emergency
situations where there is an imminent danger in order to protect the public
health, safety and welfare.



(Ord. 397, passed 9-7-2010)



§ 52.07  LICENSED PLUMBERS AND CERTIFIED PIPE LAYERS.



   (A)   Any person desiring a permit to make a service connection to
the water system shall be a licensed plumber or certified pipe layer, and
shall provide evidence of a license and bond as required by Minnesota
Statutes and Rules.



   (B)   The Director may suspend or revoke any permit issued under
this section for any of the following causes:



      (1)   Giving false information in connection with the
application for a license;



      (2)   Incompetence of the licensee;



      (3)   Willful violation of any provisions of this chapter or
any rule or regulation pertaining to the making of service connections.



(Ord. 397, passed 9-7-2010)



§ 52.08  WATER CHARGES.



   Fees for water service will be set from time to time by the Commission
and Council by ordinance.  Fees shall include a basic service charge and a
charge based on volume of water used.



   (A)   Basic service charges.  The Commission and Council shall
establish a monthly basic service charge structure for all customer classes
in a manner that is in the best interest if the Utility and its customers.



   (B)   Volume charge.  The Commission and Council shall establish a
volume charge structure for all customer classes that promotes conservation
and the wise use of the resource.



   (C)   Unmetered accounts.  Unmetered accounts are generally
prohibited, but in circumstances where they are allowed their rates shall be
determined as follows:



      (1)   Fire suppression sprinkler connections.  Accounts with
unmetered fire suppression connections shall pay a fixed monthly rate as
established by the Commission and Council.



      (2)   Other unmetered connections.  Other accounts with
permitted unmetered connections shall have a monthly fee determined by the
Commission and Council on a case by case basis.



(Ord. 397, passed 9-7-2010)



REGULATIONS



§ 52.15  WATER METER REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Before any water conveyed through the water system shall be
used or utilized on the land or premises of any person, firm or corporation,
there shall first be installed a water meter that will accurately measure the
water consumed on the premises, except and unless such installation shall be
exempted by the Utility.  The meter shall be installed in a location
approved by the Utility. Water meters are the property of the Utility.



   (B)   All applications for the installation, maintenance, and repair
of water meters shall be made to the Director, who shall proceed to comply
with such application within a reasonable time thereafter.  All meters
installed shall be supplied by the Utility. 



   (C)   For all new services the water meter shall be installed by a
licensed plumber.  The plumber shall install the meter and all necessary
fittings in accordance with the requirements of the Utility.  The Utility
shall install remote reading devices and accessories.



   (D)   No person, firm or corporation other than the Utility, Utility
approved designee, or licensed plumber shall install, maintain, or repair any
water meter. Every water meter connected to the water system shall be sealed
by or under the direction of the Utility. No person, firm or corporation
shall break or remove such seal; provided that a licensed plumber may break
such seal or remove such meter and said plumber shall notify the Utility
within twenty-four (24) hours after the seal is broken or the meter is
removed.  Whenever any seal attached to a water meter is found broken, the
broken condition of such seal shall be sufficient evidence that such seal was
broken contrary to the terms and provisions in violation of this chapter.



   (E)   Water meters shall be repaired or replaced from time to time
as is necessary to insure accurate measuring of the flow of water.  The cost
of the repair or replacement shall be borne by the Utility, except that
whenever a meter has been damaged due to negligence or willful action on the
part of persons other than the employees of the Utility, the owner of the
premises or such other person desiring the use of the water shall reimburse
the Utility for the expense of repairing or replacing any such meter.  Upon
failure to reimburse the Utility within a reasonable time and upon demand
therefore, the water service and supply to said premises may be shut off or
discontinued as determined to be in the best interest of the Utility.



   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person to break any seal, tamper
with, alter, bypass or in any manner whatsoever interfere with the proper use
and functioning of any water meter.



   (G)   Whenever a customer questions the accuracy of the meter and
desires that the meter be tested, the customer shall pay a fee, the amount of
which shall be established from time to time by ordinance.  If the meter
tests accurate within a range of minus 3% to plus 1½% the meter shall be
reinstalled and the fee forfeit.  If the meter is not accurate within this
range, the fee for testing shall be refunded, an accurate meter installed,
and an adjustment on the water bill will be made for the period of time that
the meter is assumed to be inaccurate, not to exceed two (2) billing periods.



(Ord. 397, passed 9-7-2010)



§ 52.16  METER READINGS.



   The Commission may provide a system of water meter reading by meter
person or any other method deemed suitable to the purpose of the Utility. 
The Commission may also establish billing districts and provide for the
reading of meters and billing charges by calendar quarters or monthly or such
periodic intervals as the Commission shall determine suitable and necessary
from time to time.



(Ord. 397, passed 9-7-2010)



§ 52.17  INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE.



   (A)   The Utility reserves the right to discontinue service to any
customer of the water system without notice when necessary for repairs,
additional connection or reconnection.



   (B)   The Utility reserves the right to discontinue service to any
customer of water system with notice as provided in § 50.24 of this code for
nonpayment of charges or for disregard of any rules or regulations in
connection with the use or operation of said water system pursuant to state
law.



   (C)   Whenever any service has been discontinued for nonpayment of
charges, or for disregard of any rules or regulations, it shall not be
assumed that water service shall be restored upon payment of the charges with
interest and penalty thereon, or compliance with the rules and regulations
previously violated and payment of a reconnection fee.



(Ord. 397, passed 9-7-2010)



§ 52.18  LIABILITY FOR REPAIRS.



   After the initial connection has been made to the curb stop, the owner
of the premises shall be liable for all repairs required to the service line
from the premises to the curb stop.  The Utility shall be liable for all
repairs from the curb stop to the main including any repairs necessary to the
curb stop box and any necessary street repairs.  It shall be the
responsibility of the owner to maintain the stop box at such height as will
insure that it remains at the finished grade of the land or property.  For
leaks at the connection between the owner’s service line and the curb stop
box the Utility shall make the repair; however the cost will be jointly
shared between the owner and Utility.  This section shall not preclude the
Utility from billing the owner of the premises or some other person for
damage to the curb stop or other portion of the service line under the
responsibility of the Utility for damage caused by willful or negligent
action or neglect.



(Ord. 397, passed 9-7-2010; Am. Ord. 400, passed 11-16-2010)



§ 52.19  DEFICIENCY OF WATER.



   (A)   General requirements. The Utility shall not be liable for any
deficiency or failure in the supply of water to customers, whether occasioned
by shutting water off for the purpose of making repairs or connections or
from any other cause whatsoever.  In case of fire, or alarm of fire, or in
making repairs or construction of new works, water may be shut off at such
time and kept off as long as necessary.  In addition, the Commission or
Director shall have the right to impose reasonable restrictions on the use of
the water system in emergency situations.



   (B)   Irrigation and sprinkling restrictions. The following
irrigation and sprinkling restrictions shall apply to the use of the water
system.  This does not apply to those persons who are irrigating and
sprinkling from a private well.



      (1)   Waste of water prohibited.



         (a)   Customers shall maintain taps, faucets, valves and
other water facilities so that water waste is eliminated from seeps, dripping
faucets, etc.



         (b)   No person shall waste water by deliberately
allowing irrigation or sprinkling water to run off onto the street or into
the drains.



      (2)   Odd-even day sprinkling.  Sprinkling may be curtailed
or restricted from May 1 through September 30th by the Utility.  An even and
odd numbered address system may be used.



      (3)   Prohibited hours.  There shall be no sprinkling by
either even or odd numbered addresses, from the water system, between the
hours of 12:00 noon and 6:00 p.m.



      (4)   Exemptions.



         (a)   Newly sodded or seeded yards will be exempt from
the watering restriction for a period of six (6) weeks only.  Over seeding
or spot patching of existing established yards can be watered every day with
a hand controlled hose.  No watering will be allowed between 12:00 noon and
6:00 p.m.



         (b)   Filling of children’s swimming pools and
children playing with a hose operated sprinkler or water toy are exempt from
these restrictions.



      (5)   Additional restrictions.



         (a)   Additional restrictions on the use of water during
periods of dry weather may be enacted by order of the Commission or Director
by publication in the official newspaper of the city.  When restricted, no
person shall water for the purpose of watering lawns, shrubs, trees, washing
cars or structures.  All unnecessary use of water is prohibited for the
duration of the imposed restriction.



         (b)   If more drastic restrictions are necessary, orders
may be issued by the Commission or Director to take necessary action to
protect the water system so that ample water may be available for health,
sanitation, and fire protection.



      (6)   Penalty.  Violations of this section carry a fine per
each day of violation in an amount adopted in the fee schedule, which shall
be collected on the customer’s water bill.  Unpaid fines may be collected
as an assessment to the customer's property taxes, in accordance with
Minnesota Statutes.



      (7)   Permission to use hydrant.  No person shall open,
close, or tamper with any fire hydrant except under the authorization of the
Utility or, in case of fire or emergency, authorization of the Mora Area Fire
Department.



(Ord. 397, passed 9-7-2010)



§ 52.20  LEAKS IN SERVICE LINE.



   Any customer who shall discover a leak in a service line to the
premises shall notify the Utility office within twenty-four (24) hours.  If
the leak is in that portion of the service line under control of the owner,
said owner shall take any and all action necessary to eliminate the leak. 
Failure to do so in a reasonable time period may be cause to discontinue
water service to the property.



(Ord. 397, passed 9-7-2010)



§ 52.21  INSTALLATION OF CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   General.  All connections to the water system shall be
performed by a plumber licensed to do plumbing or certified pipe layers with
a bond filed with the Department of Labor and Industry, except that nothing
in this chapter shall be construed as to prohibit an owner from doing
plumbing work on premises owned and actually occupied by said owner, provided
that the construction is conducted in accordance with the regulations of this
chapter, all other city ordinances, and requirements of the Director or
Building Inspector as well as in accordance with Minnesota Statutes and Rules.



   (B)   Pipe requirements. Water service pipe material shall be as
allowed in the Minnesota State Plumbing Code.



   (C)   Pressure and connections.  All water service pipe material
shall be tested in accordance with the Minnesota State Plumbing Code.  No
person, except someone employed or authorized by the Utility, shall tap a
distributing main or pipe of the water system or insert stop-cock or
corporation cocks therein.



   (D)   Excavation permits required.  No person shall excavate in a
public street to service a water main, unless applying for and receiving a
street opening permit.



   (E)   Curb stops. There shall be a curb stop in every service line
that is connected to the water system.  The stop shall be placed as near as
possible to the property line, if on a street, or within one (1) foot of an
alley property line if the main is located in the alley.  There shall be one
or more stops attached to every supply pipe at a point between the curb stop
and the meter so that the water can be shut off and the meter and the house
plumbing can be entirely drained.



   (F)   Backflow prevention required.  Backflow prevention shall be
required as provided for in the Minnesota State Plumbing Code.



   (G)   Check valves required.  There shall be check valves on all
connections to steam boilers and any other equipment as deemed necessary by
the Director.



   (H)   Trenching and backfilling.  No excavations in public ground
shall be kept open longer than is absolutely necessary to make the
connections required and, while open, shall be protected with suitable
barriers, guards, and lights.  Backfilling shall be thoroughly compacted and
left in a condition satisfactory to the Director or Utility representative. 
Where excavations are unsatisfactorily filled, the Director shall place them
in a satisfactory condition and the cost thereof shall be charged to the
owner.  The permit shall be suspended and no service provided to the subject
property until the sum is paid.



(Ord. 397, passed 9-7-2010)



§ 52.22  CROSS CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall construct, cause to be constructed, or operate
any device which provides a cross connection between the water system and a
private well water supply, the sanitary sewer system, or an on-site sewage
disposal system.



   (B)   Whenever any premises are connected to the water system there
shall be maintained a complete physical separation between the water system
and the private water supply system, the sanitary sewer system, or an on-site
sewage disposal system so that it is impossible to intentionally or
unintentionally allow any water produced by a private system from these
systems to be introduced in the supply line from of the system.



(Ord. 397, passed 9-7-2010)



§ 52.23  CONNECTION TO WATER SYSTEM REQUIRED.



   (A)   Where a parcel of property has connected to the Water System,
no person shall:



      (1)   Construct any private water supply or well on the
property; or



      (2)   Make use of any existing private water supply or well on
the property for human consumption or commercial purposes.



      (3)   Disconnect the parcels from the water system.



   (B)   Where a parcel of property is using any private water supply
or well and where the water system is available to a parcel of property
existing on the effective date of this chapter, the parcel of property shall
be required to connect to the water system at such time as the private water
supply or well is abandoned or is in need of replacement.  The private water
supply or well shall not connect, either directly or indirectly, to the water
system.



   (C)   All new residential, commercial, or industrial construction on
a parcel of property within the city where the water system is available to a
parcel of property shall be required to connect to the water system.



(Ord. 397, passed 9-7-2010; Am. Ord. 400, passed 11-16-2010)



§ 52.24  INDIVIDUAL CONNECTIONS TO WATER SYSTEM.



   (A)   Definition.  For the purposes of this section, the term
COMBINED CONNECTION means a single connection to the water system that serves:



      (1)   Two or more residential units; or



      (2)   Two or more commercial or industrial lots or separate
parcels of record.



   (B)   Combined connection after effective date.  Unless permitted
for a hardship situation in accordance with division (E) of this section, no
combined connection may be made after the effective date of this section.



   (C)   Combined connections discontinued.  Unless permitted to
continue for a hardship situation in accordance with division (E) of this
section, combined connections in existence on the effective date of this
section shall be discontinued and replaced with individual connections in
accordance with this section.



      (1)   Owners of properties using a combined connection must
replace such connection with an individual connection within three (3) years
of the date of notice from the Utility that replacement is required.



      (2)   Owners of the properties using a combined connection may
use those parts of the connection lying within their property or in the
public right-of-way between their property and the public water pipe but must
otherwise disconnect from the common connection and construct a new
individual connection.



   (D)   Exceptions.  The requirements of division (C) of this section
do not apply to:



      (1)   Multi-family residential rental properties where all
units served by a combined connection are under the same ownership and
located on the same parcel; or



      (2)   Multiple industrial or commercial lots or parcels of
land that are adjacent, under the same ownership, and used for a single,
unified business enterprise; or



      (3)   Combined connections where there is not an individual
service from the main to the edge of the right-of-way available for each
property using the combined connection.



   (E)   Variances.  The Commission may grant variances from the
requirements of division (C) of this section upon a finding that there are
unique or unusual physical constraints on constructing an individual
connection that make such connection impractical from an engineering
perspective.



   (F)   Notice.  Notice to owners provided for in this section shall
be by personal delivery or certified mail to the owner(s) of the property
according to the records of Kanabec County.



(Ord. 397, passed 9-7-2010)



Cross-reference:



   Individual water connections, see §§ 50.10 through 50.13



§ 52.99  VIOLATION AND PENALTIES.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. Violation of this chapter is also grounds for termination of
water service.



(Ord. 397, passed 9-7-2010)



CHAPTER 53:  SANITARY SEWER UTILITY REGULATIONS



General Provisions



   53.001   Establishment



   53.002   Definitions



   53.003   Control by the Public Works Director



General Regulations



   53.015   Implied consent to rules, regulations and rates



   53.016   Sanitary sewer charges



   53.017   Prohibited discharges



   53.018   Tampering with wastewater facilities



Private Wastewater Disposal



   53.030   Connection required



   53.031   Permit required



   53.032   Inspection



   53.033   Compliance with standards



   53.034   Sanitary manner of operation required



   53.035   Conflict with additional requirements



   53.036   Connection to public sanitary sewer



Service Connections



   53.050   New connections prohibited; exceptions



   53.051   Individual connections required



   53.052   Existing service connections



   53.053   Applications, permits and fees



   53.054   Licensed plumbers and certified pipe layers



   53.055   Expenses to be paid by owner



   53.056   Installation of service connections



   53.057   Performance of work



   53.058   Compliance with standards



   53.059   Elevation of service connection



   53.060   Connection and inspection



   53.061   Prohibited connections



   53.062   Suspension or revocation of permit



   53.063   Liability for repairs



   53.064   Repair to service connections



   53.065   Cost of repairs, etc.



Use of Public Sanitary Sewers



   53.080   Prohibited discharges



   53.081   Limited discharges



   53.082   Compliance



   53.083   Pretreatment facilities



   53.084   Grease, oil and sand interceptors



   53.085   Sampling and measurement



   53.086   Accidental discharges



   53.087   Special agreements



Administration and Enforcement



   53.100   Right to enter land



   53.101   Right to obtain information



   53.102   Appeal to the Public Utilities Commission



   53.103   City not liable



 



   53.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 53.001  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is established for the City of Mora a public sanitary sewer
utility which shall be under the supervision of the Director. The public
sanitary sewer system as it is now constituted, enlarged, or extended shall
be operated and maintained under the provisions of this chapter, subject to
the authority of the Commission and Council. The sewer utility shall have
responsibility for the management, maintenance, care, and operation of the
public sanitary sewer system of the city.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)



§ 53.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply,
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT.  The Clean Water Act.



   ACCOUNT. A record of service used by each property and the periodic
costs for those services.



   APPLICANT.  The owner or the owner’s agent.



   ASTM.  American Society for Testing Materials.



   BOD5.  Biological oxygen demand.  The amount of dissolved oxygen
consumed in five (5) days by biological processes breaking down organic
matter.



   BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning at least one (1) foot outside the building wall.



   BUILDING SEWER.  That part of the drainage system which extends from
the end on the building drain and conveys wastewater to the public sanitary
sewer, private sewer, individual swage-disposal system, or other point of
disposal.  (Sometimes referred to as a Service Connection).



   CITY.  The area within the corporate boundaries of the City of Mora as
presently established or as amended by ordinance or other legal actions at a
future time.  The term CITY when used herein may also be used to refer to
the Public Utilities Commission and its authorized representative.



   COMBINED CONNECTION.  A single connection to the municipal public
sanitary sewer that serves two (2) or more residential, commercial, or
industrial lots or separate parcels of record.



   COMMISSION.  The Public Utilities Commission of the City of Mora
established pursuant to the provisions of M.S. §§ 412.321 through 412.391
and Mora City Code §§ 32.01 through 32.03.



   COUNCIL.  The City Council of the City of Mora, Kanabec County,
Minnesota.



   CUSTOMER. The person, firm, corporation, or other entity receiving
service.  May be the owner or a tenant.



   DIRECTOR.  The Director of the Department of Public Works, or his or
her designee.



   FECAL COLIFORM.  Any number of organisms common to the intestinal
tract of human and animals whose presence in wastewater is an indicator of
pollution.



   FLOATABLE OIL.  Oil, fat, or grease in physical states such that it
will separate by gravity from wastewater.



   GARBAGE.  Animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and serving of food.



   GENERAL MANAGER. The General Manager of the Mora Municipal Utilities.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. This means liquid or waterborne waste from industrial
or commercial processes except domestic wastewater.



   INFILTRATION.  Water that enters the sewer system (including building
drains and building sewers) from the ground through such means as defective
pipes, pipe joints, connections, and manhole walls.



   INFILTRATION AND INFLOW (I AND I).  The total quantity of water from
both infiltration and inflow.



   INFLOW. Water other than wastewater that enters a sewer system
(including building drains and building sewers) from sources such as, but not
limited to roof leaders, cellar drains, yard and area drains, foundation
drains, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers,
cross-connections from storm sewers, catch basins, surface runoff, street
wash waters or drainage.



   INTERFERENCE. The inhibition or disruption of the city’s wastewater
disposal system processes or operations which causes or significantly
contributes to a violation of any requirement of the city’s NPDES and/or
SDS permit. The term includes sludge use or disposal by the city in
accordance with published regulations providing guidelines under Section 405
of the Act or any regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal
Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or more stringent
state criteria applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the
city.



   MPCA. Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT. A
permit issued by the MPCA, setting limits on pollutants that a permittee may
discharge into navigable waters of the United States pursuant to Sections 402
and 405 of the Act.



   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewers,
which overflow into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface
water or groundwater.



   NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTE.  Wastewater that is primarily
introduced by residential users with a BOD5 concentration not greater than
250 mg/l and suspended solids concentration not greater than 250 mg/l.



   OWNER. The person, firm, or corporation owning the property receiving
service as shown on the records of Kanabec County.



   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE.  The wastes from the preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sanitary sewers with no particle greater than one-half
inch (½") in any dimension.



   SERVICE.  The provision of sanitary sewer service to a building or
other facility via the sanitary sewer system.



   SERVICE CONNECTION.  See “Building Sewer”



   SEWAGE.  See “Wastewater.”



   SEWER. A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.



      (1)   FORCE MAIN.  A pipe in which wastewater is carried
under pressure.



      (2)   PRIVATE SEWER.  A sewer which is not owned, maintained,
or controlled by a public authority.



      (3)   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer owned, maintained, and controlled
by a public authority.



      (4)   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer intended to carry only liquid
and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial
plants, and institutions, together with minor quantities of ground, storm,
and surface waters which are not admitted intentionally.



      (5)   STORM DRAIN.  A drain or sewer intended to carry storm
waters, surface runoff, groundwater, sub-surface water, street wash water,
drainage, and unpolluted water from any source.



   SEWER SYSTEM. The municipal public sanitary sewer system including all
of its components.



   SHALL; MAY. The term “shall” is mandatory; the term “may” is
permissive.



   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.  Any industrial user of the wastewater
treatment facility which has a discharge flow:



      (1)   In excess of 25,000 gallons per average work day;



      (2)   Exceeding 5% of the total flow received at the treatment
facility; and



      (3)   Whose waste contains a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts
pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act; or



      (4)   Whose discharge has a significant effect, either singly
or in combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater
disposal system, the quality of sludge, the system’s effluent quality, or
emissions generated by the treatment system.



   SLUG.  Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of
any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of
duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the
average twenty-four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal operation
and shall adversely affect the collection and/or performance of the
wastewater treatment facility.



   STATE DISPOSAL SYSTEM (SDS) PERMIT.  Any permit (including any terms,
conditions and requirements thereof) issued by the MPCA pursuant to M.S. §
115.07, as it may be amended from time to time, for a disposal system as
defined by M.S. § 115.01, Subd.  8, as it may be amended from time to time.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) OR TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS).  The total
suspended matter that either floats on the surface of or is in suspension in
water, wastewater or other liquids and is removable by laboratory filtering
as prescribed in “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater,” latest edition and referred to as non-filterable residue.



   TENANT. A person, firm, or corporation, other than the owner, occupying
the property and receiving service.



   USER. Any person who discharges or causes or permits the discharge of
wastewater into the city’s wastewater disposal system.



   UTILITY.  Mora Municipal Utilities.



   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community sometimes referred to as
sewage.  From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the
liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings,
industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface
water, and storm water that may be present.



   WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITY.  An arrangement of any devices,
facilities, structures, equipment or processes owned or used by the city for
the purpose of the transmission, storage, treatment, recycling and
reclamation of municipal wastewater, domestic wastewater or industrial
wastewater, or structures necessary to recycle or reuse water, including
interceptor sewers, outfall sewers, collection sewers, pumping, power and
other equipment and their appurtenances; extensions, improvements,
remodeling, additions and alterations thereof; elements essential to provide
a reliable recycled water supply such as standby treatment units and clear
well facilities; and any works including land which is an integral part of
the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting
from such treatment.



   WPCF.  Water Pollution Control Federation.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)



§ 53.003  CONTROL BY THE PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR.



   The Director shall have control and general supervision of all public
sanitary sewers and service connections in the city and shall be responsible
for administering the provisions of this chapter to the end that a proper and
efficient public sanitary sewer is maintained.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)



GENERAL REGULATIONS



§ 53.015  IMPLIED CONSENT TO RULES, REGULATIONS AND RATES.



   Every person applying for sanitary sewer service, every owner of
property for which any such application is made, every person accepting
sanitary sewer service, and every owner of property where such service is
accepted subsequent to the passage of this chapter shall be deemed upon
making such application or accepting such service to consent to all rules,
regulations and rates as established by this chapter and as may hereafter be
set forth and adopted by the Commission and Council.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)



§ 53.016  SANITARY SEWER CHARGES.



   Fees for sanitary sewer service will be set from time to time by the
Commission and Council by ordinance.  Fees shall include a basic service
charge and a charge based on volume of water used.



   (A)   Basic service charges.  The Commission and Council shall
establish a monthly basic service charge structure for all customer classes
in a manner that is in the best interest of the Utility and its customers.



   (B)   Volume charge.  The Commission and Council shall establish a
volume charge structure for all customer classes that promotes conservation
and the wise use of the resource. 



      (1)   Measurement.  The volume charge shall be determined by
the amount of water used as measured by a water meter on the source of water
for the premises; either the public water supply or a private well. 
Sanitary sewer charges shall not be made on water consumed that does not
enter the sanitary sewer system as evidenced by a separate meter for that
purpose.



      (2)   Unmetered accounts.  Unmetered accounts are generally
prohibited, but in circumstances where they are allowed their rates shall be
determined by the Commission and Council on a case by case basis.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)



§ 53.017  PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.



   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet any wastewater
or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the city’s NPDES/SDS
permit.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.018  TAMPERING WITH WASTEWATER FACILITIES.



   No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment which is part of the wastewater facilities. 



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)  Penalty, see § 53.999



PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL



§ 53.030  CONNECTION REQUIRED.



   Where an exemption from connecting to the public sanitary sewer under
§ 50.12 has been granted, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage treatment system complying with the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.031  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Prior to commencement of construction of a private sewage treatment
system, the owner(s) shall first obtain a permit signed by the city.  The
application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city,
which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other
information as deemed necessary by the city.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.032  INSPECTION.



   The city or its representative shall be allowed to inspect the work at
any stage of construction, and, in any event, the applicant for the permit
shall notify the city when work is ready for final inspection and before any
underground portions are covered.  Notification and inspection shall be
during normal business hours.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)



§ 53.033  COMPLIANCE WITH STANDARDS.



   The type, capacities, design, location, and layout of a private sewage
treatment system shall comply with all requirements of Minnesota Rules
Chapter 7080, as it may be amended from time to time, entitled, “Individual
Sewage Treatment Rules.”  No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to
discharge to any natural outlet.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.034  SANITARY MANNER OF OPERATION REQUIRED.



   The owner(s) shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.035  CONFLICT WITH ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.



   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed to
interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the MPCA or
the Minnesota Department of Health.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)



§ 53.036  CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER.



   At such time as a public sanitary sewer becomes available to a property
serviced by a private sewage treatment system, a direct connection shall be
made to the public sanitary sewer as required in § 50.12 (D) of the city’s
code of ordinances. Within thirty (30) days of connection, abandonment
procedures shall be followed as required by Minnesota Rules Chapter 7080, as
it may be amended from time to time, entitled, “Individual Sewage Treatment
Rules.” 



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011) Penalty, see § 53.999



SERVICE CONNECTIONS



§ 53.050  NEW CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.



   Any new connection(s) to the public sanitary sewer shall be prohibited
unless sufficient capacity is available in all downstream facilities,
including but not limited to capacity for flow, BOD5 and suspended solids, as
determined by the Director. 



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.051  INDIVIDUAL CONNECTIONS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Combined connection after effective date.  Unless permitted
for a hardship situation in accordance with division (D), no combined
connection may be made after the effective date of this section.



   (B)   Combined connections discontinued.  Unless permitted to
continue for a hardship situation in accordance with division (D), combined
connections in existence on the effective date of this section shall be
discontinued and replaced with individual connections in accordance with this
section.



      (1)   Owners of properties using a combined connection must
replace such connection with an individual connection within two (2) years of
the date of notice from the city that replacement is required. 



      (2)   Properties using combined connections will not be
allowed to expand until separated.



      (3)   Owners of the properties using a combined connection may
use those parts of the connection lying within their property or in the
public right-of-way between their property and the public sanitary sewer, but
must otherwise disconnect from the common connection and construct a new
individual connection.



   (C)   Exceptions.  The requirements of division (B) do not apply to:



      (1)   Multi-family residential rental properties where all
units served by a combined connection are under the same ownership; or



      (2)   Multiple industrial or commercial lots or parcels of
land that are adjacent, under the same ownership, and used for a single,
unified business enterprise.



   (D)   Variances.  The Commission may grant variances from the
requirements of division (B) upon a finding that there are unique or unusual
physical constraints on constructing an individual connection that make such
connection impractical from an engineering perspective.



   (E)   Notice.  Notice to owners provided for in this section shall
be by certified mail to the person or persons whom tax statements are to be
sent according to the records of Kanabec County.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.052  EXISTING SERVICE CONNECTIONS.



   Old service connections may be used in connection with new buildings
only when they are found, on examination and test by the Director or his or
her representative, to meet all requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.053  APPLICATIONS, PERMITS AND FEES.



   (A)   No person, firm, or corporation shall make any type of
connection to the sanitary sewer system, except upon making an application on
a form provided by the Utility and receiving a permit issued by the Utility
for each purpose.  The application shall include the address of the property
to be served, the uses for which the connection is requested, the size of the
service line to be used, full name and address of the owner, and shall show
all other particulars necessary to the full understanding of the work to be
performed.  At the time of making such application there shall be paid to
the Utility certain fees which shall be set by the Commission and Council
from time to time by ordinance for the following purposes.



   (B)   No connection shall be made to the sanitary sewer system for
service to any property of any person or occupants of the land, parcel or
premises affected that have not paid or provided for the payment of the full
and proportionate share of the sanitary sewer system which share shall be
payable as follows:



      (1)   No connection shall be made to the sanitary sewer system
until the applicant pays a sewer access charge (SAC) as established by
Commission and Council from time to time.  The SAC shall be in addition to
any fees or charges required under this chapter;



      (2)   For service to property to which service lines have not
been previously run from the mains to the property line, the applicant shall
pay to the Utility the amount of which shall not be less than the Utility’s
cost of making the necessary connections, taps and installation of pipe and
appurtenances to provide service to the property and the necessary street
repairs; provided, however, with the approval of the Utility, the owner or
the owner’s agent shall have the right to contract directly with a licensed
plumber or a certified pipe layer for the installation and connection of the
service line;



      (3)   The Commission and Council may establish sanitary sewer
districts and establish area charges, connection charges and lateral charges
for each district by joint resolution.



   (C)   Permits shall be obtained as follows:



      (1)   Before proceeding with the construction, enlargement,
alteration, or repair of any service lines connecting the sanitary sewer
system to any facility, the applicant shall first obtain a permit for such
purposes from the Utility;



      (2)   The applicant shall pay to the Utility, a permit fee,
the amount of which shall be established from time to time by ordinance;



      (3)   The Director shall examine all applications before
construction is begun, and after the construction, enlargement, alteration,
or repair is complete, the Utility inspector shall be notified.  It shall be
unlawful to cover any connecting line until an inspection has been made and
such connection and the work incident thereto has been approved by the
Utility as a proper and suitable connection.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.054  LICENSED PLUMBERS AND CERTIFIED PIPE LAYERS.



   (A)   Any person desiring a permit to make a service connection to
the sanitary sewer system shall be a licensed plumber or certified pipe
layer, and shall provide evidence of a license and bond as required by
Minnesota Statutes and Rules.



   (B)   The Director may suspend or revoke any permit issued under
this section for any of the following causes:



      (1)   Giving false information in connection with the
application for a license;



      (2)   Incompetence of the licensee;



      (3)   Willful violation of any provisions of this chapter or
any rule or regulation pertaining to the making of service connections.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.055  EXPENSES TO BE PAID BY OWNER.



   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of
the service connection shall be borne by the owner.  The owner shall
indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may be directly or indirectly
occasioned by the installation of the service connection.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)



§ 53.056  INSTALLATION OF SERVICE CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   General.  All connections to the sanitary sewer system shall
be performed by a plumber licensed to do plumbing or certified pipe layers
with a bond filed with the Department of Labor and Industry, except that
nothing in this chapter shall be construed as to prohibit an owner from doing
plumbing work on premises owned and actually occupied by said owner, provided
that the construction is conducted in accordance with the regulations of this
chapter, all other city ordinances, and requirements of the Director or
Building Inspector as well as in accordance with Minnesota Statutes and Rules.



   (B)   Pipe requirements.  Service connection pipe material shall be
as allowed in the Minnesota State Plumbing Code.



   (C)   Pressure and connections.  All sanitary sewer service pipe
material shall be tested in accordance with the Minnesota State Plumbing
Code.  No person, except someone employed or authorized by the Utility,
shall tap a public sewer pipe of the sanitary sewer system.



   (D)   Excavation permits required. No person shall excavate in a
public street to service a public sewer pipe, unless applying for and
receiving a street opening permit.



   (E)   Trenching and backfilling.  No excavations in public ground
shall be kept open longer than is absolutely necessary to make the
connections required and, while open, shall be protected with suitable
barriers, guards, and lights.  Backfilling shall be thoroughly compacted and
left in a condition satisfactory to the Director or Utility representative. 
Where excavations are unsatisfactorily filled, the Director shall place them
in a satisfactory condition and the cost thereof shall be charged to the
owner.  The permit shall be suspended and no service provided to the subject
property until the sum is paid.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.057  PERFORMANCE OF WORK.



   (A)   All excavations for service connection work shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public
from hazard as determined by the Director. 



   (B)   Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the city.



   (C)   The city shall be held harmless from all law suits, accidents
and damage that may arise by reason of any opening in any street, alley, or
public ground by the person performing the work. 



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.058  COMPLIANCE WITH STANDARDS.



   The connection of the service connection into the public sanitary sewer
shall conform to the requirements of the State of Minnesota Building and
Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city or the
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF
Manual of Practice No. 9.  All such connections shall be made gastight and
watertight and verified by proper testing to prevent the inclusion of
infiltration/inflow.  Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the city prior to installation.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.059  ELEVATION OF SERVICE CONNECTION.



   Whenever possible, the service connection shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor.  In all buildings in
which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public
sanitary sewer, wastewater carried by the building drain shall be lifted by
an approved means and discharged to the service connection.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.060  CONNECTION AND INSPECTION.



   The applicant for the service connection permit shall notify the city
when the service connection is ready for inspection and connection to the
public sanitary sewer. The connection and inspection shall be made under the
supervision of the Director or authorized representative thereof and shall be
during normal business hours.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.061  PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS.



   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains,
areaway drains, sump pumps or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater
to a service connection or indirectly to the public sanitary sewer.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.062  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   The Director may suspend or revoke any permit issued under this
subchapter for any of the following causes:



   (A)   Giving false information in connection with the application
for a permit;



   (B)   Incompetence of the permittee; or



   (C)   Willful violation of any provisions of this subchapter or any
rule or regulation pertaining to the making of service connections.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.063  LIABILITY FOR REPAIRS.



   The owner shall be responsible for the service connection from the
building to the public sanitary sewer. This responsibility shall include the
connection or joint where the service connection joins the public sewer. This
responsibility shall include the installation, maintenance, and repair of the
service connection.  The owner shall be responsible for the cost of
installation maintenance, repair and replacement of the service connection.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.064  REPAIR TO SERVICE CONNECTIONS.



   Whenever any service connection becomes clogged, obstructed, broken or
out of order, detrimental to the use of the public sanitary sewer or unfit
for the purpose of drainage, the owner shall repair or cause such work to be
done as the Director may direct.  Each day after three (3) days that a
person neglects or fails to so act shall constitute a separate violation of
this section, and the Director may then cause the work to be done and recover
from the owner or agent the expense thereof by an action in the name of the
Utility.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.065  COST OF REPAIRS, ETC.



   In addition to any penalties that may be imposed for violation of any
provision of this chapter, the city may assess against any person the cost of
repairing or restoring service connections or associated facilities damaged
as a result of the discharge of prohibited wastes by such person or other
actions detrimental to the public sanitary sewer and may collect such
assessment as an additional charge for the use of the public sanitary sewer
or in any other manner deemed appropriate by the city.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)



USE OF PUBLIC SANITARY SEWERS



§ 53.080  PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.



   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
unpolluted water such as storm water, groundwater, roof runoff, surface
drainage or non-contact cooling water to any public sanitary sewer.



   (B)   Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to such sewers as are specifically designed as storm sewers or to
a natural outlet approved by the city and other regulatory agencies. 
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged to a
storm sewer or natural outlet on approval of the city and upon approval and
the issuance of a discharge permit by the MPCA.



   (C)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sanitary sewers:



      (1)   Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their
nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction
with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other
way to the wastewater disposal system or to the operation of the system. 
Prohibited materials include but are not limited to gasoline, kerosene,
naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes,
peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides;



      (2)   Solid or viscous substances which will cause obstruction
to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the
wastewater treatment facilities, such as, but not limited to grease, garbage
with particles greater than one half inch (½”) in any dimension, animal
guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails,
whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble
dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains,
spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastic, asphalt residues, residues from
refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or
polishing wastes;



      (3)   Any wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 or greater
than 9.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater disposal
system; and



      (4)   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient
quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to inhibit
or disrupt any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals or create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the wastewater
disposal system.  A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to any
pollutant identified pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.081  LIMITED DISCHARGES.



   (A)   The following described substances, materials, water or wastes
shall be limited in discharges to city systems to concentrations or
quantities which will not harm either the sewers, the wastewater treatment
facility treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on
the receiving stream and/or soil, vegetation and groundwater or will not
otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. The
Director may set limitations lower than limitations established in the
regulations below if, in his or her opinion, such more severe limitations are
necessary to meet the above objectives.  In forming his or her opinion as to
the acceptability of wastes, the Director will give consideration to such
factors as the quantity of subject waste in reaction to flows and velocities
in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the
wastewater treatment process, the city’s NPDES and/or SDS Permit, capacity
of the wastewater treatment facility, degree of treatability of wastes in the
wastewater treatment facility and other pertinent factors. The limitations or
restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters
discharged to the public sanitary sewer which stall not be violated without
approval of the Director are as follows:



      (1)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F
(65.6°C) or causing, individually or in combination with other wastewater,
the influent at the wastewater treatment facility to have a temperature
exceeding 104°F (40°C) or having heat in amounts which will inhibit
biological activity in the wastewater treatment works resulting in
interference therein;



      (2)   Any wastewater containing fats, wax, grease or oils,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F
(O°C and 65.6°C) and any wastewater containing oil and grease
concentrations of mineral origin of greater than 100 mg/l, whether emulsified
or not;



      (3)   Any quantities of flow, concentrations or both which
constitute a “slug” as defined in § 53.002;



      (4)   Any garbage not properly shredded, as defined in
§53.002. Garbage grinders may be connected to public sanitary sewers from
homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments
or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food on
the premises or when served by caterers;



      (5)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which
either singly or by interaction with other wastes are capable of creating a
public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the
sewers for their maintenance and repair;



      (6)   Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in
the treatment process, such as but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions;



      (7)   Non-contact cooling water or unpolluted storm water,
storm drainage or groundwater;



      (8)   Wastewater containing inert suspended solids (such as
but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate) in such quantities that would cause disruption with the wastewater
disposal system;



      (9)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Director in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations;



      (10)   Any waters or wastes containing the following
substances to such degree that any such material received in the composite
wastewater at the wastewater treatment facility in excess of limitations set
by the Director for such materials: arsenic; cadmium; copper; cyanide; lead;
mercury; nickel; silver; total chromium; zinc; and phenolic compounds which
cannot be removed by city’s wastewater treatment facility;



      (11)   Any wastewater which creates conditions at or near the
wastewater treatment facility which violates any statute, rule, regulation or
ordinance of any regulatory agency or state or federal regulatory body;



      (12)   Any waters or wastes containing BOD5 or suspended
solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is
required to handle such materials at the wastewater treatment facility,
except as may be permitted by specific written agreement subject to the
provisions of § 53.087.



   (B)   (1)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are
proposed to be discharged to the public sanitary sewers which contain
substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in division (A) of this
section and/or which in the judgment of the Director may have a deleterious
effect upon the wastewater treatment facilities, processes or equipment,
receiving waters and/or soil, vegetation and groundwater or which otherwise
create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may:



         (a)   Reject the wastes;



         (b)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition
for discharge to the public sanitary sewers, pursuant to Section 307(b) of
the Act and all addendums thereof;



         (c)   Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge; and/or



         (d)   Require payment to cover the added costs of
handling, treating and disposing of wastes not covered by existing taxes or
sewer service charges.



      (2)   If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of
waste flows, the design, installation, and maintenance of the facilities and
equipment shall be made at the owner’s expense and shall be subject to the
review and approval of the city pursuant to the requirements of the MPCA.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.082  COMPLIANCE.



   No user shall increase the use of process water or in any manner
attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in §
53.080 and § 53.081 or contained in the National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or any state requirements.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.083  PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.



   Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or
required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation at the expense of the owner(s).



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.084  GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.



   (A)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in
the opinion of the Director, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing any flammable wastes; floatable grease in excessive
amounts, sand, or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors
shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. 



   (B)   All interceptors shall be of the type to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection.  In the maintaining of these
interceptors, the owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper removal and
disposal of the captured materials by appropriate means and shall maintain a
record of dates and means of disposal which are subject to review by the
Director.  Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed
by the owner’s personnel must be performed by a licensed waste disposal
firm.



   (C)   Within thirty (30) days after receipt of written notice from
the city, the owner shall install a suitable and sufficient catch basin or
waste trap or, if one already exists, shall clean out, repair or alter the
same and perform such other work as the Director may deem necessary. Upon the
owner’s refusal or neglect to install a catch basin or waste trap or to
clean out, repair or alter the same after the period of sixty (60) days, the
Director may cause such work to be completed at the expense of the owner or
representative thereof.



   (D)   The owner or operator of any motor vehicle washing or
servicing facility shall provide and maintain in serviceable condition at all
times a catch basin or waste trap in the building drain system to prevent
fuel, grease, oil, dirt or any mineral deposit from entering the public
sanitary sewer.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.085  SAMPLING AND MEASUREMENT.



   (A)   Where required by the city, the owner of any property serviced
by a service connection carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
structure or control manhole with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the service connection to facilitate observation, sampling,
and measurement of wastes.  The structure shall be accessible and safely
located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
city. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense and
shall be maintained by the owner to be safe and accessible at all times.



   (B)   The owner of any property connected to the public sanitary
sewer discharging industrial wastes may, at the discretion of the city, be
required to provide laboratory measurements, tests, or analyses of waters or
wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and any special condition
for discharge established by the city or regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction over the discharge. The number, type, frequency of sampling and
laboratory analyses to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by
the city. The industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of
the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with federal, state and
local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of
measurements and laboratory analyses to the city at such times and in such
manner as prescribed by the city. The owner shall bear the expense of all
measurements, analyses and reporting required by the city. At such times as
deemed necessary, the city reserves the right to take measurements and
samples for analysis by an independent laboratory.



   (C)   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics
of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association. Sampling methods, location, times, duration, and frequencies are
to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the Director.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.086  ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES.



   Where required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a
public sanitary sewer shall provide protection from an accidental discharge
of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this chapter. Where
necessary, facilities to prevent accidental discharges of prohibited
materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner’s expense. Detailed
plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection
shall be submitted to the Director for review and approval prior to
construction of the facility. Review and approval of such plans and operating
procedures shall not relieve any user from the responsibility to modify the
user’s facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter.
Users shall notify the Director immediately upon having a slug or accidental
discharge of substances or wastewater in violation of this chapter to enable
countermeasures to be taken by the Director to minimize damage to the
wastewater treatment facility. The notification will not relieve any user of
any liability for any expense, loss or damage to the wastewater treatment
system or treatment process or for any fines imposed on the city on account
thereof under any state and federal law. Employers shall insure that all
employees who may cause or discover such a discharge are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.087  SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.



   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment
therefore by the industrial concern, providing that National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards and the city’s NPDES and/or State Disposal System
Permit limitations are not violated.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)  Penalty, see § 53.999



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 53.100  RIGHT TO ENTER LAND.



   (A)   The Utility, by any authorized employee or agent, shall have
the right to enter and be admitted to any lands and property in the city
between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. for the purpose of inspection of materials,
plumbing work and fixtures of all kinds used by or connected to the sanitary
sewer system.



   (B)   If the owner, tenant or other person in control of a premises
objects to the inspection of or entrance to the property, the Director, an
officer of the law or any employee or official charged with the duty of
enforcing the provisions of this code may, upon showing that probable cause
exists for the issuance of a valid search warrant from a court of competent
jurisdiction, petition and obtain a search warrant before conducting the
inspection or otherwise entering the property. This warrant shall be only to
determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the people are being complied with and to enforce these
provisions only and no criminal charges shall be made as a result of the
warrant. No warrant shall be issued unless there is probable cause to issue
the warrant. Probable cause occurs if the search is reasonable. Probable
cause does not depend on specific knowledge of the condition of a particular
property.



   (C)   Every owner, tenant or other person in control of property
within the city shall permit at reasonable times inspections of or entrance
to the property by the Director or any other authorized Utility officer or
employee only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the people are being complied with
and to enforce these provisions.  Unreasonable refusal to permit the
inspection of or entrance to the property shall be grounds for termination of
any and all permits, licenses or service to the property. Written notice
shall be given to the owner, tenant or other person in control of the
property, stating the grounds for the termination, and the owner, tenant or
other person in control of the property shall be given an opportunity to
appear before the general manager to object to the termination before it
occurs, subject to appeal of the general manager’s decision to the
Commission at a regularly scheduled or special meeting.



   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the
authority of the Utility to enter private property in urgent emergency
situations where there is an imminent danger in order to protect the public
health, safety and welfare.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.101  RIGHT TO OBTAIN INFORMATION.



   The Director or other duly authorized employees are authorized to
obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct
bearing on the type and source of discharge to the public sanitary sewer. An
industry may withhold information considered confidential; however, the
industry must establish that the revelation to the public of the information
in question might result in an advantage to competitors.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)



§ 53.102  APPEAL TO THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION.



   (A)   Any interested party shall have the right to request in
writing an interpretation or ruling on any matter covered by this chapter and
shall be entitled to a written reply from the Commission.



   (B)   Any decision of the Director in the enforcement of this
chapter may be appealed to the Commission by filing a written petition with
the general manager within thirty (30) days of the Director’s ruling. The
petition shall specify in detail the matter or matters involved and every
ground or basis on which objections are made. The petition shall show the
names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all objectors and their attorney
at law or spokesman. The filing of a petition in accordance with the
requirements herein shall stay all proceedings unless the Director shall
file, within seventy-two (72) hours after the filing of a petition, a letter
stating that a stay would be hazardous to the public health, safety, and
welfare.



   (C)   The Commission shall fix a reasonable time for hearing of the
petition or appeal and give due notice of the time and place of the hearing
to parties named in the petition as attorney or spokesman.  The hearing
shall be open to the public. Petitioners shall be given full opportunity to
present evidence in support of their petition after which the Director may
present evidence in support of his or her decision. The Commission shall
decide the appeal within a reasonable time and notify the attorney or
spokesman. The minutes of the Commission shall constitute the official record
of the petition, hearing, and decision. Any party desiring a transcript of
the proceedings shall furnish a qualified court reporter at their own expense.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)



§ 53.103  CITY NOT LIABLE.



   While performing necessary work on private properties, the Director or
duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall
be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees, and the city
shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city
employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or
property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging
and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure
of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in this chapter.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)



§ 53.999  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. Violation of this chapter is also grounds for termination of
water service.



(Ord. 409, passed 6-21-2011)



CHAPTER 54:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section




Right-of-Way Management




   54.01   Findings, purpose and intent



   54.02   Election to manage the public rights-of-way



   54.03   Definitions



   54.04   Administration



   54.05   Utility coordination committee



   54.06   Registration and right-of-way occupancy



   54.07   Registration information



   54.08   Reporting obligations



   54.09   Permit requirement



   54.10   Permit applications



   54.11   Issuance of permit; conditions



   54.12   Permit fees



   54.13   Right-of-way patching and restoration



   54.14   Joint applications



   54.15   Supplementary applications



   54.16   Other obligations



   54.17   Denial of permit



   54.18   Installation requirements



   54.19   Inspection



   54.20   Work done without a permit



   54.21   Supplementary notification



   54.22   Revocation of permits



   54.23   Mapping data



   54.24   Location and relocation of facilities



   54.25   Pre-excavation facilities location



   54.26   Damage to other facilities



   54.27   Right-of-way vacation



   54.28   Indemnification and liability



   54.29   Abandoned and unusable facilities



   54.30   Appeal




Sidewalks




   54.50   Sidewalk system plan



   54.51   Sidewalk system plan implementation



   54.52   Cost sharing



   54.53   Duty of owner



   54.54   Inspection of sidewalks



   54.55   Repair by city



   54.56   Supervision of repairs



   54.57   Snow, ice and rubbish removal



   54.58   Removal of snow and the like by the city



   54.59   Personal liability



   54.60   Assessment



   54.61   Sidewalk construction requirements




Generally




   54.70   Unloading on street or sidewalk



   54.71   Street and sidewalk obstruction



   54.72   Materials on street or sidewalk



Cross-reference:



   Offenses regarding streets, see Chapters 130 and 131 of this code of
ordinances



RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT



§ 54.01  FINDINGS, PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   To provide for the health, safety and welfare of its citizens,
and to ensure the integrity of its streets and the appropriate use of the
rights-of-way, the city strives to keep its rights-of-way in a state of good
repair and free from unnecessary encumbrances.



   (B)   Accordingly, the city hereby enacts this new chapter of this
code relating to right-of-way permits and administration. This chapter
imposes reasonable regulation on the placement and maintenance of facilities
and equipment currently within its rights-of-way or to be placed therein at
some future time. It is intended to complement the regulatory roles of state
and federal agencies. Under this chapter, persons excavating and obstructing
the rights-of-way will bear financial responsibility for their work. Finally,
this chapter provides for recovery of out-of-pocket and projected costs from
persons using the public rights-of-way.



   (C)   This chapter shall be interpreted consistently with 1997
Session Laws, Chapter 123, substantially codified in M.S. §§ 237.16,
237.162, 237.163, 237.79, 237.81, and 238.086, as they may be amended from
time to time, (the “Act”) and the other laws governing applicable rights
of the city and users of the right-of-way. This chapter shall also be
interpreted consistent with Minnesota Rules 7819.0050 - 7819.9950 where
possible. To the extent any provision of this chapter cannot be interpreted
consistently with the Minnesota Rules, that interpretation most consistent
with the Act and other applicable statutory and case law is intended. This
chapter shall not be interpreted to limit the regulatory and police powers of
the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to protect the
health, safety, and welfare of the public.



§ 54.02  ELECTION TO MANAGE THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under state and federal
statutory, administrative and common law, the city hereby elects, pursuant
M.S. § 237.163 Subd. 2(b), as it may be amended from time to time, to manage
rights-of-way within its jurisdiction.



§ 54.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED FACILITY.  A facility no longer in service or physically
disconnected from a portion of the operating facility, or from any other
facility, that is in use or still carries service. A facility is not
abandoned unless declared so by the right-of-way user.



   APPLICANT.  Any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a
right-of-way.



   COMMISSION.  The State Public Utilities Commission.



   CONGESTED RIGHT-OF-WAY.  A crowded condition in the subsurface of the
public right-of-way that occurs when the maximum lateral spacing between
existing underground facilities does not allow for construction of new
underground facilities without using hand digging to expose the existing
lateral facilities in conformance with M.S. § 216D.04. Subd. 3, as it may be
amended from time to time, over a continuous length in excess of 500 feet.



   CONSTRUCTION PERFORMANCE BOND.  Any of the following forms of security
provided at permittee's option:



      (1)   Individual project bond;



      (2)   Cash deposit;



      (3)   Security of a form listed or approved under M.S. §
15.73, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time;



      (4)   Letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the city;



      (5)   Self-insurance, in a form acceptable to the city;



      (6)   A blanket bond for projects within the city, or other
form of construction bond, for a time specified and in a form acceptable to
the city.



   DEGRADATION.  A decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused
by excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to
reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the
excavation or disturbance did not occur.



   DEGRADATION COST.  Subject to Minnesota Rules 7819.1100, the cost to
achieve a level of restoration, as determined by the city at the time the
permit is issued, not to exceed the maximum restoration shown in plates one
(1) to thirteen (13), set forth in Minnesota Rules parts 7819.9900 to
7819.9950.



   DEGRADATION FEE.  The estimated fee established at the time of
permitting by the city to recover costs associated with the decrease in the
useful life of the right-of-way caused by the excavation, and which equals
the degradation cost.



   DEPARTMENT.  The Department of Public Works of the city.



   DEPARTMENT INSPECTOR.  Any person authorized by the city to carry out
inspections related to the provisions of this chapter.



   DIRECTOR.  The Director of the Department of Public Works of the city,
or her or his designee.



   DELAY PENALTY.  The penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays
in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration as
established by permit.



   EMERGENCY.  A condition that:



      (1)   Poses a danger to life or health or of a significant
loss of property; or



      (2)   Requires immediate repair or replacement of facilities
in order to restore service to a customer.



   EQUIPMENT.  Any tangible asset used to install, repair, or maintain
facilities in any right-of-way.



   EXCAVATE.  To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or
penetrate any part of a right-of-way.



   EXCAVATION PERMIT.  The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must
be obtained before a person may excavate in a right-of-way. An EXCAVATION
PERMIT allows the holder to excavate that part of the right-of-way described
in such permit.



   EXCAVATION PERMIT FEE.  Money paid to the city by an applicant to
cover the costs as provided in § 54.12.



   FACILITY or FACILITIES.  Any tangible asset in the right-of-way
required to provide utility service.



   FIVE (5) YEAR PROJECT PLAN.  Shows projects adopted by the city for
construction within the next five (5) years.



   HIGH DENSITY CORRIDOR.  A designated portion of the public
right-of-way within which telecommunications right-of-way users having
multiple and competing facilities may be required to build and install
facilities in a common conduit system or other common structure.



   HOLE.  An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a
length less than the width of the pavement.



   LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE.  A local person or persons, or designee of such
person or persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make
decisions for that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this
chapter.



   MANAGEMENT COSTS.  The actual costs the city incurs in managing its
rights-of-way, including such costs, if incurred, as those associated with
registering applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way
permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration projects;
maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving user facilities during
right-of-way work; determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration;
restoring work inadequately performed after providing notice and the
opportunity to correct the work; and revoking right-of-way permits.
MANAGEMENT COSTS do not include payment by a telecommunications right-of-way
user for the use of the right-of-way, the fees and cost of litigation
relating to the interpretation of Minnesota Session Laws 1997, Chapter 123;
M.S. §§ 237.162 or 237.163, as they may be amended from time to time; or
any ordinance enacted under those sections, or the city fees and costs
related to appeals taken pursuant to § 54.30 of this chapter.



   OBSTRUCT.  To place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to
hinder free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.



   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT.  The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must
be obtained before a person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the holder
to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of that
right-of-way, for the duration specified therein.



   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE.  Money paid to the city by a permittee to
cover the costs as provided in § 54.12



   PATCH or PATCHING.  A method of pavement replacement that is temporary
in nature. A patch consists of:



      (1)   The compaction of the subbase and aggregate base; and



      (2)   The replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement for a
minimum of two (2) feet beyond the edges of the excavation in all directions.
A patch is considered full restoration only when the pavement is included in
the city's five (5) year project plan.



   PAVEMENT.  Any type of improved surface that is within the public
right-of-way and that is paved or otherwise constructed with bituminous,
concrete, aggregate, or gravel. “Permit” has the meaning given
“right-of-way permit” in M.S. § 237.162, as it may be amended from time
to time.



   PERMITTEE.  Any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a
right-of-way has been granted by the city under this chapter.



   PROBATION.  The status of a person that has not complied with the
conditions of this chapter.



   PROBATIONARY PERIOD.  One (1) year from the date that a person has
been notified in writing that they have been put on probation.



   PROPERTY OWNER MAINTENANCE PERMIT.  The permit which, pursuant to this
chapter, must be obtained by a non-registrant before a person may perform
certain work in the right-of-way.



   PROPERTY OWNER MAINTENANCE PERMIT FEE.  Money paid to the city by an
applicant to cover the costs as provided in § 54.12.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The area on, below, or above a public roadway,
highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane or public sidewalk in which the city
has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel purposes
and utility easements of the city. A right-of-way does not include the
airwaves above a right-of-way with regard to cellular or other nonwire
telecommunications or broadcast service.



   REGISTRANT.  Any person who:



      (1)   Has or seeks to have its equipment or facilities located
in any right-of-way; or



      (2)   In any way occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or use,
the right-of-way or place its facilities or equipment in the right-of-way.



   RESTORE or RESTORATION.  The process by which an excavated
right-of-way and surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is
returned to the same condition and life expectancy that existed before
excavation.



   RESTORATION COST.  The amount of money paid to the city by a permittee
to achieve the level of restoration according to plates one (1) to thirteen
(13) of Minnesota Public Utilities Commission rules.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT.  Either the excavation permit or the obstruction
permit, or both, depending on the context, required by this chapter.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY USER.



      (1)   A telecommunications right-of-way user as defined by
M.S. § 237.162, Subd. 4, as it may be amended from time to time; or



      (2)   A person owning or controlling a facility in the
right-of-way that is used or intended to be used for providing utility
service, and who has a right under law, franchise, or ordinance to use the
public right-of-way.



   SERVICE or UTILITY SERVICE.



      (1)   Those services provided by a public utility as defined
in M.S. § 216B.02, Subds. 4 and 6, as it may be amended from time to time;



      (2)   Services of a telecommunications right-of-way user,
including transporting of voice or data information;



      (3)   Services of a cable communications systems as defined in
M.S. Chapter 238, as it may be amended from time to time;



      (4)   Natural gas or electric energy or telecommunications
services provided by the city;



      (5)   Services provided by a cooperative electric association
organized under M.S. Chapter 308A, as it may be amended from time to time; and



      (6)   Water, and sewer, including service laterals, steam,
cooling or heating services.



   SERVICE LATERAL.  An underground facility that is used to transmit,
distribute, or furnish gas, electricity, communications, or water from a
common source to an end-use customer. A SERVICE LATERAL is also an
underground facility that is used in the removal of wastewater from a
customer's premises.



   SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION.  An application made to excavate or
obstruct more of the right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend, a permit
that had already been issued.



   TEMPORARY SURFACE.  The compaction of subbase and aggregate base and
replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement only to the edges of the
excavation. It is temporary in nature except when the replacement is of
pavement included in the city's two (2) year plan, in which case it is
considered full restoration.



   TRENCH.  An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a
length equal to or greater than the width of the pavement.



   TELECOMMUNICATION RIGHT-OF-WAY USER.  A person owning or controlling a
facility in the right-of-way, or seeking to own or control a facility in the
right-of-way, that is used or is intended to be used for transporting
telecommunication or other voice or data information. For purposes of this
chapter, a cable communication system defined and regulated under M.S.
Chapter 238, as it may be amended from time to time, and telecommunication
activities related to providing natural gas or electric energy services
whether provided by a public utility as defined in M.S. § 216B.02, as it may
be amended from time to time, a municipality, a municipal gas or power agency
organized under M.S. Chapters 453 and 453A, as they may be amended from time
to time, or a cooperative electric association organized under M.S. Chapter
308A, as it may be amended from time to time, are not telecommunications
right-of-way users for purposes of this chapter.



   TWO (2) YEAR PROJECT PLAN.  Projects adopted by the city for
construction within the next two (2) years.



§ 54.04  ADMINISTRATION.



   The Director is the principal city official responsible for the
administration of the rights-of-way, right-of-way permits, and the ordinances
related thereto. The Director may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder.



§ 54.05  UTILITY COORDINATION COMMITTEE.



   The city may create an advisory utility coordination committee.
Participation on the committee is voluntary. It will be composed of any
registrants that wish to assist the city in obtaining information and, by
making recommendations regarding use of the right-of-way, and to improve the
process of performing construction work therein. The city may determine the
size of such committee and shall appoint members from a list of registrants
that have expressed a desire to assist the city.



§ 54.06  REGISTRATION AND RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   Registration. Each person who occupies or uses, or seeks to
occupy or use, the right-of-way or place any equipment or facilities in or on
the right-of-way, including persons with installation and maintenance
responsibilities by lease, sublease or assignment, must register with the
city. Registration will consist of providing application information and
paying a registration fee.



   (B)   Registration prior to work. No person may construct, install,
repair, remove, relocate, or perform any other work on, or use any facilities
or any part thereof, in any right-of-way without first being registered with
the city.



   (C)   Exceptions. Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or
amend the provisions of a city ordinance permitting persons to plant or
maintain boulevard plantings or gardens in the area of the right-of-way
between their property and the street curb. Persons planting or maintaining
boulevard plantings or gardens shall not be deemed to use or occupy the
right-of-way, and shall not be required to obtain any permits or satisfy any
other requirements for planting or maintaining such boulevard plantings or
gardens under this chapter. However, nothing herein relieves a person from
complying with the provisions of the M.S. Chapter 216D, Gopher One Call Law,
as it may be amended from time to time.



§ 54.07  REGISTRATION INFORMATION.



   (A)   Information required. The information provided to the city at
the time of registration shall include, but not be limited to:



      (1)   Each registrant's name, Gopher One-Call registration
certificate number, address and email address, if applicable, and telephone
and facsimile numbers.



      (2)   The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and
telephone and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local
representative or designee shall be available at all times. Current
information regarding how to contact the local representative in an emergency
shall be provided at the time of registration.



      (3)   A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:



         (a)   Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued
to the registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the
State of Minnesota, or a form of self-insurance acceptable to the city;



         (b)   Verifying that the registrant is insured against
claims for personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property
damage arising out of the use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the
registrant, its officers, agents, employees and permittees, and placement and
use of facilities and equipment in the right-of-way by the registrant, its
officers, agents, employees and permittees, including, but not limited to,
protection against liability arising from completed operations, damage of
underground facilities and collapse of property;



         (c)   Naming the city as an additional insured as to
whom the coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for whom
defense will be provided as to all such coverages;



         (d)   Requiring that the city be notified thirty (30)
days in advance of cancellation of the policy or material modification of a
coverage term; and



         (e)   Indicating comprehensive liability coverage,
automobile liability coverage, workers compensation and umbrella coverage
established by the city in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the
public and to carry out the purposes and policies of this chapter.



      (4)   The city may require a copy of the actual insurance
policies.



      (5)   If the person is a corporation, a copy of the
certificate is required to be filed under M.S. § 300.06, as it may be
amended from time to time, as recorded and certified to by the Secretary of
State.



      (6)   A copy of the person's order granting a certificate of
authority from the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other applicable
state or federal agency, where the person is lawfully required to have such
certificate from said commission or other state or federal agency.



   (B)   Notice of changes. The registrant shall keep all of the
information listed above current at all times by providing to the city
information as to changes within fifteen (15) days following the date on
which the registrant has knowledge of any change.



§ 54.08  REPORTING OBLIGATIONS.



   (A)   Operations.



      (1)   Each registrant shall, at the time of registration and
by December 1 of each year, file a construction and major maintenance plan
for underground facilities with the city. The plan shall be submitted using a
format designated by the city and shall contain the information determined by
the city to be necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in the
frequency of excavations and obstructions of rights-of-way. The plan shall
include, but not be limited to, the following information:



         (a)   The locations and the estimated beginning and
ending dates of all projects to be commenced during the next calendar year
(in this section, a “next-year project”); and



         (b)   To the extent known, the tentative locations and
estimated beginning and ending dates for all projects contemplated for the
five (5) years following the next calendar year (in this section, a “five
(5) year project”).



      (2)   The term “project” in this section shall include
both next-year projects and five (5) year projects. By January 1 of each
year, the city will have available for inspection in the city's office a
composite list of all projects of which the city has been informed of the
annual plans. All registrants are responsible for keeping themselves informed
of the current status of this list. Thereafter, by February 1, each
registrant may change any project in its list of next-year projects, and must
notify the city and all other registrants of all such changes in said list.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a registrant may at any time join in a
next-year project of another registrant listed by the other registrant.



   (B)   Additional next-year projects. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
the city will not deny an application for a right-of-way permit for failure
to include a project in a plan submitted to the city if the registrant has
used commercially reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan for the project.



§ 54.09  PERMIT REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this code, no
person may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way without first having
obtained the appropriate right-of-way permit from the city to do so.



      (1)   Excavation permit. An excavation permit is required by a
registrant to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit
and to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the
right-of-way by placing facilities described therein, to the extent and for
the duration specified therein.



      (2)   Obstruction permit. An obstruction permit is required by
a registrant to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of
right-of-way by placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to
the extent and for the duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is
not required if a person already possesses a valid excavation permit for the
same project.



      (3)   Property owner maintenance permit. A property owner
maintenance permit is required by a non-registrant for work in the
right-of-way that benefits a single property or a limited number of
properties.



         (a)   A property owner maintenance permit shall be
required for the following activities:



            1.   Sidewalk installation or repair;



            2.   Curb and gutter installation and repair;



            3.   Curb cuts or driveways;



            4.   Water or sanitary sewer service lines;



            5.   Paving;



            6.   Irrigation systems;



            7.   Mailboxes;



            8.   Tree planting;



            9.   Other similar activities that place permanent
improvements in the public right-of-way.



         (b)   Property owner maintenance permit shall not be
required for the following activities:



            1.   Landscaping;



            2.   Snow removal;



            3.   Movable street furnishings (such as, benches,
planters, vending machines);



            4.   Other similar activities that do not place
permanent improvements in the public right-of-way.



   (B)   Permit extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the
right-of-way beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless such
person makes a supplementary application for another right-of-way permit
before the expiration of the initial permit, and a new permit or permit
extension is granted.



   (C)   Delay penalty. In accordance with Minnesota Rule 7819.1000
subpart 3 and notwithstanding division (B) of this section, the city shall
establish and impose a delay penalty for unreasonable delays in right-of-way
excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration. The delay penalty shall be
established from time to time by City Council resolution.



   (D)   Permit display. Permits issued under this chapter shall be
conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated
work site and shall be available for inspection by the city.



§ 54.10  PERMIT APPLICATIONS.



   Application for a permit is made to the city. Right-of-way permit
applications shall contain, and will be considered complete only upon
compliance with, the requirements of the following provisions:



   (A)   Registration with the city pursuant to this chapter;



   (B)   Submission of a completed permit application form, including
all required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area
of the proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed
facilities.



   (C)   Payment of money due the city for:



      (1)   Permit fees, estimated restoration costs and other
management costs;



      (2)   Prior obstructions or excavations;



      (3)   Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the
city because of applicant's prior excavations or obstructions of the
rights-of-way or any emergency actions taken by the city;



      (4)   Franchise fees or other charges, if applicable.



   (D)   Payment of disputed amounts due the city by posting security
or depositing in an escrow account an amount equal to at least one hundred
ten percent (110%) of the amount owing.



   (E)   Posting an additional or larger construction performance bond
for additional facilities when applicant requests an excavation permit to
install additional facilities and the city deems the existing construction
performance bond inadequate under applicable standards.



§ 54.11  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Permit issuance. If the applicant has satisfied the
requirements of this chapter, the city shall issue a permit.



   (B)   Conditions. The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the
issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to
protect the health, safety and welfare or when necessary to protect the
right-of-way and its current use.



§ 54.12  PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   Excavation permit fee. The city shall establish an excavation
permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs:



      (1)   The city management costs;



      (2)   Degradation costs, if applicable.



   (B)   Obstruction permit fee. The city shall establish the
obstruction permit fee and shall be in an amount sufficient to recover the
city management costs.



   (C)   Property owner maintenance permit fee. The city shall
establish the property owner maintenance permit fee in an amount sufficient
to recover the city management costs.



   (D)   Payment of permit fees. No excavation permit or obstruction
permit shall be issued without payment of excavation or obstruction permit
fees. The city may allow applicant to pay such fees within thirty (30) days
of billing.



   (E)   Non-refundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that
the city has revoked for a breach as stated in § 54.22 are not refundable.



   (F)   Application to franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a
franchise, management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to
the franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise.



§ 54.13  RIGHT-OF-WAY PATCHING AND RESTORATION.



   (A)   Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and
the patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days
as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the
permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under §
54.16.



   (B)   Patch and restoration. The permittee shall patch its own work.
The city may choose either to have the permittee restore the right-of-way or
to restore the right-of-way itself.



      (1)   City restoration. If the city restores the right-of-way,
the permittee shall pay the costs thereof within thirty (30) days of billing.
If, following such restoration, the pavement settles due to the permittee's
improper backfilling, the permittee shall pay to the city, within thirty (30)
days of billing, all costs associated with correcting the defective work.



      (2)   Permittee restoration. If the permittee restores the
right-of-way itself, it shall at the time of application for a permit post a
construction performance bond in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota
Rule 7819.3000.



      (3)   Degradation fee in lieu of restoration. In lieu of
right-of-way restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation
fee. However, the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for patching and
the degradation fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these
responsibilities.



   (C)   Standards. The permittee shall perform excavation,
backfilling; patching and restoration according to the standards and with the
materials specified by the city and shall comply with Minnesota Rule
7819.1100.



   (D)   Duty to correct defects. The permittee shall correct defects
in patching or restoration performed by the permittee or its agents. The
permittee, upon notification from the city, shall correct all restoration
work to the extent necessary, using the method required by the city. The work
shall be completed within



five (5) calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the city, not
including days during which work cannot be done because of circumstances
constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonable or
unreasonable under § 54.16.



   (E)   Failure to restore. If the permittee fails to restore the
right-of-way in the manner and to the condition required by the city, or
fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the
city, the city at its option may do such work. In that event the permittee
shall pay to the city, within thirty (30) days of billing, the cost of
restoring the right-of-way. If permittee fails to pay as required, the city
may exercise its rights under the construction performance bond.



§ 54.14  JOINT APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Joint application. Registrants may jointly apply for permits
to excavate or obstruct the right-of-way at the same place and time.



   (B)   Shared fees. Registrants who apply for permits for the same
obstruction or excavation, which the city does not perform, may share in the
payment of the obstruction or excavation permit fee. In order to obtain a
joint permit, registrants must agree among themselves as to the portion each
will pay and indicate the same on their applications.



   (C)   With city projects. Registrants who join in a scheduled
obstruction or excavation performed by the city, whether or not it is a joint
application by two (2) or more registrants or a single application, are not
required to pay the excavation or obstruction and degradation portions of the
permit fee, but a permit would still be required.



§ 54.15  SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Limitation on area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for
the area of the right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any
work outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any
permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in the
permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater
area:



      (1)   Make application for a permit extension and pay any
additional fees required thereby; and



      (2)   Be granted a new permit or permit extension.



   (B)   Limitation on dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for
the dates specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the
permit start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the
end date. If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it
must apply for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the
new permit or an extension of the old permit before working after the end
date of the previous permit. This supplementary application must be submitted
before the permit end date.



§ 54.16  OTHER OBLIGATIONS.



   (A)   Compliance with other laws. Obtaining a right-of-way permit
does not relieve the permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary
permits, licenses, and authority and to pay all fees required by the city or
other applicable rule, law or regulation. A permittee shall comply with all
requirements of local, state, and federal laws, including but not limited to
M.S. §§ 216D.01 - 216D.09, as they may be amended from time to time,
(Gopher One Call Excavation Notice System) and Minnesota Rules Chapter 7560.
A permittee shall perform all work in conformance with all applicable codes
and established rules and regulations, and is responsible for all work done
in the right-of-way pursuant to its permit, regardless of who does the work.



   (B)   Prohibited work. Except in an emergency, and with the approval
of the city, no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be done when
seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work.



   (C)   Interference with right-of-way. A permittee shall not so
obstruct a right-of-way that the natural free and clear passage of water
through the gutters or other waterways shall be interfered with. Private
vehicles of those doing work in the right-of-way may not be parked within or
next to a permit area, unless parked in conformance with city parking
regulations. The loading or unloading of trucks must be done solely within
the defined permit area unless specifically authorized by the permit.



   (D)   Trenchless excavation. As a condition of all applicable
permits, permittees employing trenchless excavation methods, including but
not limited to horizontal directional drilling, shall follow all requirements
set forth in M.S. Chapter 216D, and it may be amended from time to time and
Minnesota Rules Chapter 7560, and shall require potholing or open cutting
over existing underground utilities before excavating, as determined by the
Director.



§ 54.17  DENIAL OF PERMIT.



   The city may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and
conditions of this chapter or if the city determines that the denial is
necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to
protect the right-of-way and its current use.



§ 54.18  INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.



   The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other
work performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with
Minnesota Rules 7819.1100 and 7819.5000 and other applicable local
requirements, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the M.S. §§
237.162 and 237.163, as they may be amended from time to time. Installation
of service laterals shall be performed in accordance with Minnesota Rules
Chapter 7560 and these ordinances. Service lateral installation is further
subject to those requirements and conditions set forth by the city in the
applicable permits and/or agreements referenced in § 54.23(B) of this
chapter.



§ 54.19  INSPECTION.



   (A)   Notice of completion. When the work under any permit hereunder
is completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in
accordance Minnesota Rule 7819.1300.



   (B)   Site inspection. The permittee shall make the work-site
available to the city and to all others as authorized by law for inspection
at all reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the
work.



   (C)   Authority of Director.



      (1)   At the time of inspection, the Director may order the
immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life,
health, safety, or well-being of the public.



      (2)   The Director may issue an order to the permittee for any
work that does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable
standards, conditions, or codes. The order shall state that failure to
correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten
(10) days after issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to
the Director that the violation has been corrected.  If such proof has not
been presented within the required time, the director may revoke the permit
pursuant to § 54.22.



§ 54.20  WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.



   (A)   Emergency situations.



      (1)   Each registrant shall immediately notify the Director of
any event regarding its facilities that it considers to be an emergency. The
registrant may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to
the emergency. Excavators' notification to Gopher State One Call regarding an
emergency situation does not fulfill this requirement.  Within two (2)
business days after the occurrence of the emergency, the registrant shall
apply for the necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith, and
fulfill the rest of the requirements necessary to bring itself into
compliance with this chapter for the actions it took in response to the
emergency.



      (2)   If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding a
registrant's facilities, the city will attempt to contact the local
representative of each registrant affected, or potentially affected, by the
emergency. In any event, the city may take whatever action it deems necessary
to respond to the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the
registrant whose facilities occasioned the emergency.



   (B)   Non-emergency situations. Except in an emergency, any person
who, without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or
excavates a right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit and, as a penalty,
pay double the normal fee for said permit, pay double all the other fees
required by the city code, deposit with the city the fees necessary to
correct any damage to the right-of-way, and comply with all of the
requirements of this chapter.



§ 54.21  SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION.



   If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or
ends sooner than the date given on the permit, permittee shall notify the
city of the accurate information as soon as this information is known.



§ 54.22  REVOCATION OF PERMITS.



   (A)   Substantial breach. The city reserves its right, as provided
herein, to revoke any right-of-way permit without a fee refund, if there is a
substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance,
rule or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial
breach by permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:



      (1)   The violation of any material provision of the
right-of-way permit;



      (2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of
the right-of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any
fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens;



      (3)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the
application for a right-of-way permit;



      (4)   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner,
unless a permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work
is due to reasons beyond the permittee's control; or



      (5)   The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that
does not conform to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to §
54.19.



   (B)   Written notice of breach. If the city determines that the
permittee has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any
statute, ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the permit, the city
shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. The
demand shall state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of
the permit. A substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city, at
its discretion, to place additional or revised conditions on the permit to
mitigate and remedy the breach.



   (C)   Response to notice of breach. Within twenty-four (24) hours of
receiving notification of the breach, the permittee shall provide the city
with a plan, acceptable to the city, that will cure the breach. The
permittee's failure to so contact the city, or the permittee's failure to
timely submit an acceptable plan, or the permittee's failure to reasonably
implement the approved plan, shall be cause for immediate revocation of the
permit. Further, the permittee's failure to so contact the city, or the
permittee's failure to submit an acceptable plan, or the permittee's failure
to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall automatically place the
permittee on probation for one (1) full year.



   (D)   Cause for probation. From time to time, the city may establish
a list of conditions of the permit, which if breached will automatically
place the permittee on probation for one (1) full year, such as, but not
limited to, working out of the allotted time period or working on
right-of-way grossly outside of the permit authorization.



   (E)   Automatic revocation. If a permittee, while on probation,
commits a breach as outlined above, the permittee's permit will automatically
be revoked and the permittee will not be allowed further permits for one (1)
full year, except for emergency repairs.



   (F)   Reimbursement of city costs. If a permit is revoked, the
permittee shall also reimburse the city for the city's reasonable costs,
including restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable
attorneys' fees incurred in connection with such revocation.



§ 54.23  MAPPING DATA.



   (A)   Information required. Each registrant and permittee shall
provide mapping information required by the city in accordance with Minnesota
Rules 7819.4000 and 7819.4100. Within ninety (90) days following completion
of any work pursuant to a permit, the permittee shall provide the Director
accurate maps and drawings certifying the “as-built” location of all
equipment installed, owed, and maintained by the permittee. The maps and
drawings shall include the horizontal and vertical location of all facilities
and equipment and shall be provided consistent with the city's electronic
mapping system, when practical or as a condition imposed by the Director.
Failure to provide maps and drawings pursuant to this division shall be
grounds for revoking the permit holder's registration.



   (B)   Service laterals. All permits issued for the installation or
repair of service laterals, other than minor repairs as defined in Minnesota
Rules 7560.0150 subpart 2, shall require the permittee's use of appropriate
means of establishing the horizontal locations of installed service laterals,
and the service lateral vertical locations in those cases where the Director
reasonably requires it. Permittees or their subcontractors shall submit to
the director evidence satisfactory to the Director of the installed service
lateral locations. Compliance with this division and with applicable Gopher
State One Call law and Minnesota Rules governing service laterals install
after December 31, 2005, shall be a condition of any city approval necessary
for payments to contractors working on a public improvement project including
those under M.S. Chapter 429, as it may be amended from time to time, and
city approval of performance under development agreements, or other
subdivision or site plan approval under M.S. Chapter 462, as it may be
amended from time to time. The Director shall reasonably determine the
appropriate method of providing such information to the city. Failure to
provide prompt and accurate information on the service laterals installed may
result in the revocation of the permit issued for the work or for future
permits to the offending permittee or its subcontractors.



§ 54.24  LOCATION AND RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.



   (A)   Compliance.  Placement, location, and relocation of
facilities must comply with the Act, with other applicable law, and with
Minnesota Rules 7819.3100, 7819.5000 and 7819.5100, to the extent the rules
do not limit authority otherwise available to cities



   (B)   Corridors. The city may assign a specific area within the
right-of-way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each
type of facilities that is or, pursuant to current technology, the city
expects will someday be located within the right-of-way. All excavation,
obstruction, or other permits issued by the city involving the installation
or replacement of facilities shall designate the proper corridor for the
facilities at issue Any registrant who has facilities in the right-of-way in
a position at variance with the corridors established by the city shall, no
later than at the time of the next reconstruction or excavation of the area
where the facilities are located, move the facilities to the assigned
position within the right-of-way, unless this requirement is waived by the
city for good cause shown, upon consideration of such factors as the
remaining economic life of the facilities, public safety, customer service
needs and hardship to the registrant.



   (C)   Nuisance. One (1) year after the passage of this chapter, any
facilities found in a right-of-way that have not been registered shall be
deemed to be a nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has
at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance or
taking possession of the facilities and restoring the right-of-way to a
useable condition.



   (D)   Limitation of space. To protect health, safety, and welfare,
or when necessary, to protect the right-of-way and its current use, the city
shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional
facilities within the right-of-way. In making such decisions, the city shall
strive to the extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users
of the right-of-way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the
public interest, the public's needs for the particular utility service, the
condition of the right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential
utilities, the protection of existing facilities in the right-of-way, and
future city plans for public improvements and development projects which have
been determined to be in the public interest.



§ 54.25  PRE-EXCAVATION FACILITIES LOCATION.



   In addition to complying with the requirements of M.S. §§ 216D.01 -
216D.09, as they may be amended from time to time, (“One Call Excavation
Notice System”) before the start date of any right-of-way excavation, each
registrant who has facilities or equipment in the area to be excavated shall
mark the horizontal and vertical placement of all said facilities. Any
registrant whose facilities are less than twenty (20) inches below a concrete
or asphalt surface shall notify and work closely with the excavation
contractor to establish the exact location of its facilities and the best
procedure for excavation.



§ 54.26  DAMAGE TO OTHER FACILITIES.



   When the city does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to
maintain, support, or move a registrant's facilities to protect it, the city
shall notify the local representative as early as is reasonably possible. The
costs associated therewith will be billed to that registrant and must be paid
within thirty (30) days from the date of billing. Each registrant shall be
responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the right-of-way
which it or its facilities damage. Each registrant shall be responsible for
the cost of repairing any damage to the facilities of another registrant
caused during the city's response to an emergency occasioned by that
registrant's facilities.



§ 54.27  RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION.



   If the city vacates a right-of-way that contains the facilities of a
registrant, the registrant's rights in the vacated right-of-way are governed
by Minnesota Rules 7819.3200.



§ 54.28  INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.



   By registering with the city, or by accepting a permit under this
chapter, a registrant or permittee agrees to defend and indemnify the city in
accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Rule 7819.1250.



§ 54.29  ABANDONED AND UNUSABLE FACILITIES.



   (A)   Discontinued operations. A registrant who has determined to
discontinue all or a portion of its operations in the city must provide
information satisfactory to the city that the registrant's obligations for
its facilities in the right-of-way under this chapter have been lawfully
assumed by another registrant.



   (B)   Removal. Any registrant who has abandoned facilities in any
right-of-way shall remove it from that right-of-way if required in
conjunction with other right-of-way repair, excavation, or construction,
unless this requirement is waived by the city.



§ 54.30  APPEAL.



   A right-of-way user that has been denied registration; has been denied
a permit; has had a permit revoked; believes that the fees imposed are not in
conformity with M.S. § 237.163, Subd. 6, as it may be amended from time to
time; or disputes a determination of the Director regarding § 54.23(B) of
this chapter may have the denial, revocation, fee imposition, or decision
reviewed, upon written request, by the City Council. The City Council shall
act on a timely written request at its next regularly scheduled meeting,
provided the right-of-way user has submitted its appeal with sufficient time
to include the appeal as a regular agenda item. A decision by the City
Council affirming the denial, revocation, or fee imposition will be in
writing and supported by written findings establishing the reasonableness of
the decision.



SIDEWALKS



§ 54.50  SIDEWALK SYSTEM PLAN.



   (A)   The Council shall from time to time review the system of
sidewalks in the city and adopt a plan setting forth additions and deletions
to the system and other matters pertaining to sidewalks in general.



   (B)   Prior to the adoption of the plan the Council shall hold a
public hearing on the proposed plan.  Property owners who may be affected by
an addition of sidewalks or removal of sidewalks adjacent to their property
under the proposed plan shall receive written notice of the public hearing.



(Ord. 405, passed 4-5-2011)



§ 54.51  SIDEWALK SYSTEM PLAN IMPLEMENTATION.



   (A)   Upon adoption of the sidewalk system plan the Public Works
Director shall be responsible for implementing the plan.



   (B)   Property owners who have sidewalks adjacent to their property
that have been removed from the sidewalk system plan may elect to retain the
sidewalk and not have it removed by the city. Property owners who do so shall
still be subject to all requirements to maintain the sidewalk in proper
repair and safe for pedestrians at all times as described in this subchapter.
Those property owners shall be responsible for the entire cost of any
subsequent repair to said sidewalks. If the property owner fails to maintain
the sidewalk as required under § 54.54 the city shall remove the sidewalk
under § 54.52(A)(4) in lieu of repairs.



   (C)   No person shall remove a sidewalk that is included in the
sidewalk system plan. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a property owner
from applying for a permit for the temporary removal of all or part of a
sidewalk.



(Ord. 405, passed 4-5-2011)



§ 54.52  COST SHARING.



   (A)   The city shall share the cost of work under the sidewalk
system plan with property owners based on the type of work being performed.



      (1)   For new installations of sidewalks included in the
sidewalk system plan the city shall pay one hundred percent (100%) of the
cost of installation.



      (2)   For repairs of sidewalks carried out by the property
owner under § 54.54 that are included in the sidewalk system plan the city
shall share equally with the property owner the cost of repairs except for
restoration of any disturbed areas. The city may provide materials for the
restoration, but ultimate responsibility for restoration shall be the
responsibility of the property owner.



      (3)   For repairs of sidewalks carried out by the city under
§ 54.55 included in the sidewalk system plan the city shall pay forty
percent (40%) of the cost and the property owner shall pay sixty percent
(60%) of the cost of repairs except for restoration of any disturbed areas. 
The city may provide materials for the restoration, but ultimate
responsibility for restoration shall be the responsibility of the property
owner.



      (4)   For removals of sidewalks excluded from the sidewalk
system plan the city shall pay one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of
removal except for restoration of any disturbed areas.  The city may provide
materials for the restoration, but ultimate responsibility for same shall be
the responsibility of the property owner.



      (5)   For temporary removal and replacement of sidewalks to
accommodate other work the responsible party for the other work shall be
responsible for the entire cost of removal and replacement of the sidewalks
including restoration of disturbed areas.



   (B)   The city shall not share in the cost of work for any sidewalk
not in the sidewalk system plan regardless of the type of work being
performed.



(Ord. 405, passed 4-5-2011)



§ 54.53  DUTY OF OWNER.



   The owner of any property within the city abutting on a public sidewalk
shall keep the sidewalk in proper repair and safe for pedestrians at all
times.



(Ord. 405, passed 4-5-2011)



§ 54.54  INSPECTION OF SIDEWALKS.



   The Public Works Director or any other official designated by him or
her shall periodically inspect the public sidewalks within the city to
determine that they are kept in proper repair and safe for pedestrians.  If
he or she finds that a sidewalk abutting on private property is unsafe and in
need of repairs, he or she shall cause a notice to be served on the record
owner of the property and the occupant either by registered or certified mail
or by personal service. This notice shall order the owner to have the
sidewalk repaired and made safe within thirty (30) days and shall state that
if the owner fails to do so, the Clerk-Treasurer or other official will do so
on behalf of the city, and the expense thereof, if not paid by the owner,
made a special assessment against the property concerned.



(Ord. 405, passed 4-5-2011)



§ 54.55  REPAIR BY CITY.



   If a sidewalk is not repaired within thirty (30) days after service of
the notice required in § 54.54, the Public Works Director, or his or her
designee, shall arrange for the repair of the sidewalk.  The Public Works
Director shall keep a record of the total cost of the repair attributable to
each lot or parcel of property and report that information to the City
Clerk-Treasurer.



(Ord. 405, passed 4-5-2011)



§ 54.56  SUPERVISION OF REPAIRS.



   The Council shall require inspection and supervision of all work done
whether by order of the Council or pursuant to permits.  All work not done
according to permit specifications shall be corrected or removed at the
owner’s expense and all unsatisfactory work shall be stopped by the
inspector when discovered.



(Ord. 405, passed 4-5-2011)



§ 54.57  SNOW, ICE AND RUBBISH REMOVAL.



   All snow, ice, dirt and rubbish remaining on a public sidewalk more
than twelve (12) hours after its deposit thereon is a public nuisance. The
owner and the occupant of any property adjacent to a public sidewalk shall
use due diligence to keep the walk safe for pedestrians. No owner or occupant
shall allow snow, ice, dirt or rubbish to remain on the sidewalk longer than
twelve (12) hours after its deposit thereon.



(Ord. 405, passed 4-5-2011)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 54.58  REMOVAL OF SNOW AND THE LIKE BY THE CITY.



   The Public Works Director shall cause to be removed from all public
sidewalks all snow, ice, dirt and rubbish beginning twelve (12) hours after
such matter has been deposited thereon or after the snow has ceased to fall.
The Public Works Director shall keep a record showing the cost of the removal
adjacent to each separate lot and parcel and shall report the information to
the City Clerk-Treasurer.



(Ord. 405, passed 4-5-2011)



§ 54.59  PERSONAL LIABILITY.



   The owner of property on which or adjacent to which work has been
performed under this subchapter shall be personally liable for the cost of
the work pursuant to § 33.17 of this code.



(Ord. 405, passed 4-5-2011)



§ 54.60  ASSESSMENT.



   Unpaid charges may be collected pursuant to § 33.18 of this code.



(Ord. 405, passed 4-5-2011)



§ 54.61  SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.



   The Public Works Director will be responsible for approving all
sidewalk construction permits, specifications and plans.



(Ord. 405, passed 4-5-2011)



GENERALLY



§ 54.70  UNLOADING ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.



   No person shall unload any heavy material in the streets of the city by
throwing or letting the material fall upon the pavement of any street, alley,
sidewalk, or other public way, without first placing some sufficient
protection over the pavement.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 54.71  STREET AND SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTION.



   No person shall obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public
way within the city by erecting thereon any fence or building, or permitting
any fence or building to remain thereon. Each day that any fence or building
is permitted to remain upon the public way shall constitute a separate
offense.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 54.72  MATERIALS ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.



   No person shall encumber any street or sidewalk. No owner, occupant, or
person having the care of any building or lot of land, bordering on any
street or sidewalk, shall permit it to be encumbered with barrels, boxes,
cans, articles, or substances of any kind, so as to interfere with the free
and unobstructed use thereof.



Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 55:  PARKS, TRAILS AND OPEN SPACE



Section




City Parks




   55.01   Definitions



   55.02   Regulations



   55.03   Violation



Cross-reference:
   Offenses against public property; nuisance offenses, see Chapters 130
and 131 of this code of ordinances



CITY PARKS



§ 55.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PARKS.  A park, reservation, playground, beach, cemetery or other area
in the city owned, leased or used, wholly or in part, by the city for those
purposes or which is designated by the City Council as a PARK.



(1969 Code, § 177.010)  (Ord. 177, passed 5-18-1982)



§ 55.02  REGULATIONS.



   The following regulations shall apply to all city parks:



   (A)   No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle in any park
except on roads or designated parking areas or such other areas as the Police
Chief shall designate, and no person shall operate a motor vehicle within a
park at a speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour.



   (B)   No person shall park any motor vehicle in any place in public
parks between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and one (1) hour before sunrise. 
During the hours when parking is permitted, the vehicles must be parked only
in designated parking areas.  Any unoccupied or abandoned vehicle found in
violation of park regulations may be removed and impounded by any police
officer at the owner’s expense.



   (C)   No fires shall be lighted or made in any park except in places
provided for those purposes, and except for fires lighted by city employees
engaged in cleaning the area.



   (D)   No person shall discharge any firearm in any park without the
written permission of the Police Chief or discharge any fireworks in any park
without the written permission of the Fire Chief.



   (E)   No person shall scatter about or litter the grounds of any
park with any form of waste material.



   (F)   No person shall commit any nuisance or any offense against
decency or public morals in a public park.



   (G)   No person shall possess, display, consume or use intoxicating
liquors in any park except that malt liquor and wine may be consumed in a
park from non-glass containers.



   (H)   No person shall sell any article whatsoever in any park unless
he or she has a permit, lease or concession granted by the city.



   (I)   No person shall play any game of baseball or football or other
game in any park so close to any playground or picnic area so as to endanger
or otherwise disturb children using any playground or persons using any
picnic area.



   (J)   No dogs shall be allowed in any park except on a leash and
under the control of its owner.



   (K)   All parks shall close at 10:00 p.m. each day, and no person
shall remain in any park after that time, unless written permission shall
have been given by the Police Chief for parties to remain longer therein.



   (L)   No person shall write upon, mark or deface, in any manner, or
use in any improper way any property or thing pertaining to or in the parks.



   (M)   No person shall break, cut, mutilate, injure, remove or carry
away any tree, plant, flower, shrub, rock, soil, sand, fence, bench or any
other property in any park.



(1969 Code, § 177.020)  (Ord. 177, passed 5-18-1982; Am. Ord. 404, passed
4-5-2011 )  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 55.03  VIOLATION.



   Any person violating any provision of this subchapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor.



(1969 Code, § 177.030)  (Ord. 177, passed 5-18-1982)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      71.   PARKING REGULATIONS



      72.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES



      73.   PARKING SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section




General Provisions




   70.01   State Highway Traffic Regulations adopted by reference



   70.02   Exhibition driving prohibited




Motorized Golf Carts




   70.15   Considerations for use on city streets



   70.16   Requirements for use on city streets



   70.17   Requirement for permit



   70.18   Limitation of liability



   70.19   Violation




Parades and Demonstrations




   70.30   Definitions



   70.31   Permit required



   70.32   Application



   70.33   Standards for issuance



   70.34   Reimbursement of costs



   70.35   Notice of rejection



   70.36   Appeal procedure



   70.37   Contents of permit



   70.38   Public conduct during parades



   70.39   Parking restrictions



   70.40   Violation



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 70.01  STATE HIGHWAY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   The Highway Traffic Regulations Act is hereby adopted by
reference.  The regulatory provisions of M.S. Chapter 169, as it may be
amended from time to time, are hereby adopted as a traffic ordinance
regulating the use of highways, streets and alleys within the city and are
hereby incorporated in and made a part of this section as completely as it
set out in full herein.



   (B)   The penalty for violation of the provisions of state statutes
adopted by reference in this section shall be identical with the penalty
provided for in the statutes for the same offense.



§ 70.02  EXHIBITION DRIVING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall turn, accelerate, decelerate or otherwise
operate a motor vehicle within the city in a manner which causes unnecessary
engine noise, exhaust noise or backfire, squealing tires, skidding, sliding,
swaying, throwing of sand or gravel, or in a manner simulating a race. 
Unreasonable squealing or screeching sounds emitted by vehicle tires, the
unreasonable throwing of sand or gravel by vehicle tires, or unreasonably
loud sounds emitted by the engine or exhaust system of the motor vehicle, is
prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.



   (B)   Any person convicted of a violation of this section is guilty
of a petty misdemeanor.



(1969 Code, § 60.010)  (Ord. 171, passed 8-18-1981)  Penalty, see § 10.99



MOTORIZED GOLF CARTS



§ 70.15  CONSIDERATIONS FOR USE ON CITY STREETS.



   (A)   The Minnesota Legislature has authorized the use of motorized
golf carts on city streets;



   (B)   The City Council finds there are persons within the city who
would benefit from this use;



   (C)   The use of such motorized carts is hereby authorized subject
to the conditions set forth in division (D) of this section and § 70.16; and



   (D)   The provisions of M.S. § 169.045, as it may be amended from
time to time, are herewith incorporated by reference.



(Ord. 280, passed 9-15-1998)



§ 70.16  REQUIREMENTS FOR USE ON CITY STREETS.



   (A)   Motorized golf carts shall only be operated on city streets
which the Council shall by resolution designate as cart routes.  A map of
the routes is available through city offices.



   (B)   Only persons who have a valid permit issued by the city under
the conditions in § 70.17.



   (C)   When a person holding a valid permit does not reside on a
designated cart route, the permit holder may use the most direct route
available to reach a designated route from the residence, but shall not
operate the cart on any other street not designated as a cart route.  Where
the permit holder’s destination is not on a designated route, the permit
holder may use the most direct route between the destination and the nearest
designated route.



   (D)   Motorized golf carts may only be operated on designated routes
from sunrise to sunset.  They shall not be operated in inclement weather or
when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog or other conditions, or at
any time when there is insufficient light to clearly see persons in vehicles
on the roadway at a distance of five hundred (500) feet.



   (E)   Motorized golf carts shall display the slow moving vehicle
emblem provided for in M.S. § 169.522, as it may be amended from time to
time, when operated on designated routes.



   (F)   Every person operating a motorized golf cart under permit on
designated routes has all the rights and duties applicable to the driver of
any other vehicle under the provisions of M.S. Chapter 169, as it may be
amended from time to time, except when those provisions cannot reasonably be
applied to motorized golf carts and except as otherwise specifically provided
in M.S. § 169.045, Subd. 7, as it may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 280, passed 9-15-1998)



§ 70.17  REQUIREMENT FOR PERMIT.



   (A)   Each person desiring a permit for the operation of a motorized
golf cart must submit an application provided by the city accompanied by an
application fee in an amount set by City Council from time to time.



   (B)   Each application shall show evidence of the name and address
of the applicant, evidence of insurance which meets the requirements of M.S.
§ 65B.48, Subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to time, and any other
information as the city may require.



   (C)   Each permit must be renewed annually and each renewal must
meet the requirements set forth in this section.



   (D)   A permit may be revoked at any time if it is shown the
permittee cannot safely operate the motorized golf cart on the designated
routes or if the person has had a valid driver’s license revoked for
traffic violations.



(Ord. 280, passed 9-15-1998)



§ 70.18  LIMITATION OF LIABILITY.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as an assumption of
liability by the city for any injuries to persons on property which may
result from the operation of a motorized golf cart by a permit holder or the
failure by the city to revoke the permit.



(Ord. 280, passed 9-15-1998)



§ 70.19  VIOLATION.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this subchapter shall be
guilty of a petty misdemeanor.



(Ord. 280, passed 9-15-1998)  Penalty, see § 10.99



PARADES AND DEMONSTRATIONS



§ 70.30  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY. The City of Mora.



   PARADE.  Any parade, march, demonstration, exhibition or procession of
any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park or other public
place in the city.



   PARADE PERMIT.  A permit required by this subchapter.



   POLICE CHIEF. The Police Chief of the city.



(1969 Code, § 178.010)  (Ord. 226, passed 2-6-1990)



§ 70.31  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any
parade or demonstration unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from
the Police Chief; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to
funeral processions nor to groups of students participating in educational
activities while under the immediate supervision of the proper school
authority.



(1969 Code, § 178.020)  (Ord. 226, passed 2-6-1990)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.32  APPLICATION.



   (A)   A person seeking issuance of a parade or demonstration permit
shall file an application with the Police Chief on forms provided by him or
her.  This application shall be filed not less than twenty (20) days before
the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade or demonstration. 



   (B)   The application shall set forth the following information:



      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the person
seeking to conduct the parade or demonstration;



      (2)   If the parade or demonstration is proposed to be
conducted for, on behalf of or by an organization, the name, address and
telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the
authorized and responsible heads of the organization;



      (3)   The name, address and telephone number of the person who
will be the parade or demonstration chairperson and who will be responsible
for its conduct;



      (4)   The date when the parade or demonstration is to be
conducted;



      (5)   The route to be traveled, the starting point and the
termination point;



      (6)   The approximate number of persons who and animals and
vehicles which will make up parade; the type of animals, and description of
the vehicles;



      (7)   The hours when the parade or demonstration will start
and terminate;



      (8)   A statement as to whether the parade or demonstration
will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be
traversed;



      (9)   The location by streets of any assembly areas for the
parade or demonstration;



      (10)   The time at which units of the parade or demonstration
will begin to assemble at any assembly area or areas;



      (11)   How sanitary facilities are to be provided for
participants;



      (12)   Provisions for cleanup of trash following the parade or
demonstration; and



      (13)   Any additional information which the Police Chief shall
find reasonably necessary



to a fair determination as to whether a permit should issue.



(1969 Code, § 178.030)  (Ord. 226, passed 2-6-1990)



§ 70.33  STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.



   The Police Chief shall issue a permit when, from a consideration of the
application and other information as is available to him or her, he or she
finds as follows:



   (A)   The conduct of the parade or demonstration will not
substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic within
the city contiguous to the parade or demonstration route or interfere with
the movement of firefighting equipment;



   (B)   The conduct of the parade or demonstration will not require
the diversion of so great a number of police officers as to prevent normal
police protection to the city;



   (C)   The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly
points of the parade or demonstration will not unduly interfere with proper
fire and police protection and emergency medical services to areas contiguous
to the assembly areas;



   (D)   The conduct of the parade or demonstration is not reasonably
likely to cause injury to persons or property nor provoke disorderly conduct;



   (E)   The parade or demonstration is scheduled to move from its
point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without
unreasonable delays en route; and



   (F)   The parade or demonstration is not to be held for sole purpose
of advertising any products, and it is not designed to be held purely for
private profit.



(1969 Code, § 178.040)  (Ord. 226, passed 2-6-1990)



§ 70.34  REIMBURSEMENT OF COSTS.



   (A)   Prior to issuance of a permit, the Police Chief shall
calculate the costs which may devolve upon the city as a result of the
conduct of the parade or demonstration.  Issuance of the permit shall be
contingent upon the applicant’s depositing with the city an appropriate
bond or cashier’s check in the amount necessary to defray the costs.  Any
portions of the deposit not used to pay for expenditures incurred shall be
reimbursed to the applicant. 



   (B)   These costs shall include but not be limited to the following:



      (1)   Pay and benefits to be earned by city police officers,
officers made available from other jurisdictions specifically for the conduct
of the event, or other city employees who would be required to work extra
hours in preparation for the event or to ensure the safety of participants or
spectators during the event;



      (2)   The cost of leasing any equipment deemed necessary for
the specific purpose of safeguarding participants or spectators; and



      (3)   Costs of cleaning up debris or trash at the site of, or
along the route of, the parade or demonstration.



(1969 Code, § 178.050)  (Ord. 226, passed 2-6-1990)



§ 70.35  NOTICE OF REJECTION.



   The Police Chief shall act upon the application for a parade permit
within three (3) days after the filing thereof.  If the Police Chief
disapproves the application, he or she shall immediately mail to the
applicant a notice of his or her action stating the reasons for the denial of
the permit.



(1969 Code, § 178.060)  (Ord. 226, passed 2-6-1990)



§ 70.36  APPEAL PROCEDURE.



   Any applicant aggrieved by the denial of a parade permit shall have the
right to appeal to the City Council of the city.  This appeal shall be taken
by written notice addressed to the city and the appeal shall be heard as an
agenda item at the next regular meeting of the City Council.



(1969 Code, § 178.070)  (Ord. 226, passed 2-6-1990)



§ 70.37  CONTENTS OF PERMIT.



   Each parade permit shall state the following information:



   (A)   Starting time;



   (B)   Minimum speed;



   (C)   Maximum speed;



   (D)   Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units
of the parade;



   (E)   The portion of the streets to be traversed that may be
occupied by the parade;



   (F)   The maximum length of the parade; and



   (G)   Other information as the Police Chief shall deem necessary.



(1969 Code, § 178.080)  (Ord. 226, passed 2-6-1990)



§ 70.38  PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING PARADES.



   No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere with
any parade or demonstration or with any person, animal or vehicle
participating therein.  No driver of a motor vehicle shall drive between the
vehicles or persons comprising a parade or a demonstration.



(1969 Code, § 178.090)  (Ord. 226, passed 2-6-1990)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.39  PARKING RESTRICTIONS.



   The Police Chief shall have the authority, when necessary, to prohibit
or restrict vehicle parking along the route or at the site of a parade or
demonstration and shall post necessary no-parking zones accordingly.



(1969 Code, § 179.000)  (Ord. 226, passed 2-6-1990)



§ 70.40  VIOLATION.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this subchapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.



(1969 Code, § 179.010)  (Ord. 226, passed 2-6-1990)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 71:  PARKING REGULATIONS



Section



   71.01   Parallel parking



   71.02   Parking of trucks and trailers



   71.03   No-parking zone



   71.04   Limited parking zones



   71.05   Restricted parking during snow season



   71.06   Parking time limited



§ 71.01  PARALLEL PARKING.



   All vehicles parked upon any street in the city shall be parked
parallel to the curb with the right-hand wheels of the vehicles within twelve
(12) inches of the curb, and in the instance where there is no curb, the
vehicle shall be parked to the right of the main traveled portion of the
roadway and parallel thereto, and in a manner as not to interfere with the
free flow of traffic.



(1969 Code, § 62.010)



§ 71.02  PARKING OF TRUCKS AND TRAILERS.



   (A)   (1)   No delivery truck or bus nominally rated as one (1)
ton (twelve thousand (12,000) pounds Gross Vehicle Weight (GVW) Rating) or
greater shall park at any time at locations specified in Chapter 73, Schedule
I; provided, however, that these vehicles may so park while in the actual
process of loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.  Wherever
possible, trucks or buses shall load and unload at the rear or side of
buildings.  All loading and unloading shall be done in a manner that does
not create a hazard to either vehicular or pedestrian traffic using any
street or sidewalk. 



      (2)   No truck nominally rated as one (1) ton (twelve thousand
(12,000) pounds GVW Rating) or greater shall park on any street for a period
in excess of two (2) hours, except as provided below:



(Am. Ord. 330, passed 6-24-2004)



         (a)   Any delivery truck or moving van may remain parked
for the amount of time required to perform their necessary loading or
unloading task; and



         (b)   If no reasonable alternative is available, the
delivery truck or moving van may park in a manner commonly described as
“double parking” for the duration of time necessary to complete a
delivery.  This division (A)(2)(b) is effective December 1, 1988.



(Am. Ord. 216, passed 11-15-1988)



   (B)   No trailer in excess of eight (8) feet in length and/or six
(6) feet in width, whether attached to a vehicle or not, shall be parked on
any street or alley for a period of longer than two (2) hours; provided,
however, that recreational type trailers, vehicles or combinations thereof
shall not park on any street in excess of twenty-four (24) hours.  Any
trailer in excess of eight (8) feet long and/or six (6) feet wide, while
actively being used for loading and unloading purposes, may park for that
amount of time to perform the necessary loading and unloading.



   (C)   Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be
guilty of a petty misdemeanor and in addition, the owner of the vehicle or
trailer shall pay all towing charges.



(1969 Code, § 62.030)  (Ord. 179, passed 6-15-1982)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.03  NO-PARKING ZONE.



   No motor vehicle may park at any time at the locations specified in
Chapter 73, Schedule II.



(1969 Code, § 62.035)  (Ord. 214, passed 5-3-1987)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.04  LIMITED PARKING ZONES.



   Limitations on parking areas are specified in Chapter 73, Schedule III.



(1969 Code, § 62.040)  (Ord. 40, passed 7-6-1949)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.05  RESTRICTED PARKING DURING SNOW SEASON.



   (A)   In order to facilitate snow removal from the public streets,
from November 1 through March 31 of each year, no vehicles shall be parked on
any public street between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.



(Am. Ord. 341, passed 10-4-2005)



   (B)   If any vehicle is parked, abandoned or left standing in
violation of the provisions hereof, the same may be summarily removed without
notice to the owners at the direction of the city through its officers,
agents and employees.  This summary removal shall be to a place designated
by the city, and the removed vehicles shall be stored at the designated place
until released by the owner or his or her agent upon the following
conditions:  the owner or his or her agent shall first pay all costs and
expenses incident to the removal, towing and storage of the vehicle, the
costs and expenses to be paid to the City Clerk, his or her agent or any
other person or firm authorized by the Council to receive same.  Costs and
expenses as herein stated shall mean expenses as are actually incurred if the
removal, towing and storage is performed by someone for hire, or the
reasonable cost of the work if same is performed by city employees, as
determined from time to time by the City Council.  Amount paid by the owner
under this section for release of a vehicle shall not be deemed to be a
penalty or fine.



   (C)   The presence of a vehicle in or upon any public street, alley
or city-owned parking lot within the city stopped, standing or parked in
violation of this section shall be prima facie evidence that the person, in
whose name the vehicle is registered as owner, committed or authorized the
commission of the violation.



   (D)   Exception:  The City Council may allow off-street parking,
for apartments in a B-1 District, in city owned parking lots or streets, with
the acquisition of a seasonal parking permit. The cost of a seasonal parking
permit shall be in an amount set forth by the City Council from time to time.



   (E)   Violation of this section shall be a petty misdemeanor.



(1969 Code, § 62.050)  (Am. Ord. 157, passed 2-5-1980; Am. Ord. 312, passed
11-5-2002; Am. Ord. 320, passed 2-4-2003; Am. Ord. 376, passed 1-20-2009)  
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.06  PARKING TIME LIMITED.



   (A)   No car, truck or other motor vehicle shall be parked or
allowed to remain on any city street, alley or city-owned parking lot for
longer than forty-eight (48) hours.



   (B)   Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be
guilty of a petty misdemeanor and in addition, the owner of the motor vehicle
shall pay all towing charges.



(1969 Code, § 62.060)  (Ord. 28, passed 3-6-1940; Am. Ord. 40, passed
7-6-1949; Am. Ord. 180, passed 6-1-1982)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 72:  RECREATIONAL VEHICLES



Section



   72.01   Snowmobiles



   72.02   Bicycles, skateboards, in-line skates, roller skates, roller
blades and roller skis in business district



§ 72.01  SNOWMOBILES.



   (A)   All snowmobile operators shall observe all traffic rules and
regulations pertaining to automobiles, but the speed limit for snowmobiles on
city streets shall be ten (10) miles per hour.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to drive and operate a snowmobile within
the city limits of the city between the hours of 12:00 a.m. midnight and
one-half (½) hour before sunrise.



(1969 Code, Ch. 170)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.02  BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS, IN-LINE SKATES, ROLLER SKATES, ROLLER
BLADES AND ROLLER SKIS IN BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to ride, use or operate a
bicycle, skateboard, in-line skates, roller skates, roller blades, roller
skis or other self-propelled wheeled devices, except wheelchairs, upon a
sidewalk in any business district.



   (B)   For the purposes of this section, the business district is
defined as Union Street from Maple Avenue to Hersey Avenue, Maple Avenue on
the south side of the street, from Park Street to Lake Street, Railroad
Avenues, both north and south from Park Street to Lake Street, and Hersey
Avenue from Park Street to Union Street and Park Street from Hersey Avenue to
Maple Avenue.



   (C)   (1)   Any person who violates any provision of this section
shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 



      (2)   In addition, any police officer who observes any person
violate this section is authorized to seize the offender’s bicycle,
skateboard, in-line skates, roller skates, roller blades or roller skis and
hold the same at the Mora Police Department storage facility.  In the event
of such seizure the offender,



if an adult, may secure the return of the article seized after twenty-four
(24) hours have elapsed since the seizure.  In the case of a minor, the
article seized shall be returned only to the parent or guardian of the minor
offender after twenty-four (24) hours have elapsed since the seizure.



(1969 Code, § 180)  (Ord. 256, passed 6-20-1995; Am. Ord. 290, passed
10-3-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 73:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



      I.   Vehicles rated as one (1) ton



      II.   No-parking zones



      III.   Limited parking areas



SCHEDULE I.  VEHICLES RATED AS ONE (1) TON.



   No delivery truck or bus nominally rated as one (1) ton (twelve
thousand (12,000) pounds Gross Vehicle Weight Rating) or greater shall park
at any time at these locations; provided, however, that the vehicles may so
park while in the actual process of loading or unloading merchandise or
passengers:



 


Location

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed



Union Street between its intersections with Forest Avenue and Maple Avenue
 

179

 

6-15-1982




 



(1969 Code, § 62.030)



SCHEDULE II.  NO-PARKING ZONES.



   No motor vehicle shall park at any time at the following locations:



 




Street/Location

 

Side

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed



Clark Street, between Howe Avenue and a point one hundred twenty (120) feet 
north
 
west side
 


 




Clark Street, between Howe Avenue and a point two hundred (200) feet south
 
west side
 


 




Forest Avenue from the center line of Minnesota Trunk Highway 65 to a point
two hundred and thirty (230) feet to the west
 
either
 

449

 

3-21-2017



Howe Avenue, between Clark Street and a point sixty-seven (67) feet
 
north side
 


 




Howe Avenue, between Clark Street and a point one hundred twenty (120) feet
west
 
south side
 


 




Maple Avenue, between Spruce Street and a point three hundred (300) feet east
of Vine Street
 
south
 

408

 

6-21-2011



Northeast Railroad Avenue, between North Spruce Street and North Elm Street
 
north side
 

199;
200

 

9-16-1986;
10-7-1986



Spruce Street, between Forest Avenue East and the south end
 
east side
 


 




The frontage road located west of and adjacent to Trunk Highways 65 and 23,
between the intersection of the frontage road with Union Street and the
intersection of the frontage road with Clark Street
 
east side
west side
 
214
 
5-3-1987


Union Street, one hundred fifty (150) feet either side of the centerline of
Ford Avenue
 
west
 

408

 

6-21-2011





 



(1969 Code, § 62.035)



SCHEDULE III.  LIMITED PARKING AREAS.



   No motor vehicle shall park in the following areas at times specified
as follows:



 


Street

 

Time Restriction

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed



Lake Street South (east side) between its intersection with Forest Avenue and
a point 49 feet south of this intersection
 
for a period longer than 1 hour between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
Monday through Friday
 

228

 

4-3-1990



Lake Street South (west side) between Railroad Avenue Southeast and a point
one hundred (100) feet south
 
for a period longer than thirty (30) minutes between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
 


 




Maple Avenue (north side) between the southeast corner of the city park to a
point fifty-six (56) feet east
 
for a period longer than thirty (30) minutes
 


 




Union Street between Maple Avenue and Forest Avenue
 
for a period longer than 2 hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
on every day except Sunday
 


 




Vine Street (east side) between Maple Avenue East and a point three hundred
(300) feet south
 
for a period no longer than two (2) hours between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
 


 





 



(1969 Code, § 62.040)



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   ANIMALS



      91.   TREES



      92.   ENVIRONMENT



      93.   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES



CHAPTER 90:  ANIMALS



Section




General Provisions




   90.01   Definitions



   90.02   Regulations



   90.03   Impoundment



   90.04   Redemption of impounded animals



   90.05   Dog nuisances



   90.06   Records



   90.07   Pound fees



   90.08   Humane care and treatment



   90.09   Violation




Vaccinations




   90.20   Definitions



   90.21   Vaccination requirements



   90.22   Duties of veterinarian



   90.23   Vaccination identification



   90.24   Vaccination cost



   90.25   Exemption of vaccination requirement




Rabies




   90.35   Impoundment of rabies suspects



   90.36   Handling of dogs and cats bitten by rabid animals



   90.37   Impoundment of dogs or cats without a valid rabies
vaccination tag



   90.38   Reports of bite cases



   90.39   Responsibilities of veterinarians




Dangerous Animals




   90.50   Dangerous animals



   90.51   Dangerous animal requirements



   90.52   Notification of new address



   90.53   Exemptions



Cross-reference:



   Nuisance offenses, see Chapter 130 of this code of ordinances



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 90.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL SHELTER.  Any premises designated by action of the city for the
purposes of impounding and caring for all animals found in violation of this
chapter.



   AT LARGE. 



      (1)   Off the premises of the owner and not under the custody
and control of the owner or other person, either by leash, cord, chain, or
otherwise restrained or confined.



      (2)   A dog or cat shall be termed to be AT LARGE when it is
not under restraint as defined in this chapter.



   CAT.  Any feline animal, male or female, whole or neutered.



   DOG.  Any canine animal, male or female, whole or neutered.



   KENNEL. Any lot or premises or portion thereof, on which more than four
(4) dogs, cats or other household domestic animals over six (6) months old
are kept or on which more than two (2) such animals are boarded for
compensation or kept for sale.



   OWN. To keep, harbor or have control, charge or custody of a dog or cat
for a period of ten (10) days or longer.  This term shall not apply to dogs
or cats owned by others which are temporarily maintained on the premises of a
veterinarian or kennel operator.



   OWNER.  Any person, group of persons or corporation owning, keeping,
harboring or having charge or control of, or permitting any dog or cat to
habitually be or remain on, or be lodged or fed within, the person’s house,
yard or premises for a period of ten (10) days or longer.  This term shall
not apply to veterinarians or kennel operators temporarily maintaining on
their premises dogs or cats owned by others.



   REGULAR BUSINESS DAY.  A day during which the establishment having
custody of an animal is open to the public not less than four (4) consecutive
hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.



   RESTRAINT.  A dog or cat is under RESTRAINT if controlled by a leash
or by a competent person and immediately obedient to that person’s command,
or within a vehicle being driven or parked on the street or within the
property limits of its owner.



   STRAY.  Any dog or cat, the owner of which is unknown, which is at
large within the city.



(1969 Code, § 80.010)  (Ord. 183, passed 12-7-1982; Am. Ord. 421, passed
2-18-2014)



§ 90.02  REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Running at large prohibited.  It shall be unlawful for the
dog or cat of any person who owns, harbors or keeps a dog or cat, to run at
large.  A person, who owns, harbors or keeps a dog or cat which runs at
large shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.  Dogs or cats on a leash and
accompanied by a responsible person or accompanied by and under the control
and direction of a responsible person, so as to be effectively restrained by
command as by leash, shall be permitted in streets or on public land unless
the city has posted an area with signs reading “Dogs or Cats Prohibited.”



   (B)   Feces. Any person having the custody or control of any dog or
other domestic animal shall clean up and dispose of in a sanitary manner any
feces of the animal from any street, public park, school ground, or other
public place or from the private property of another.



   (C)   Number of animals. No person shall keep more than three (3)
dogs, cats, or other household domestic animals over six (6) months old upon
any lot or premises.



(1969 Code, § 80.020)  (Ord. 183, passed 12-7-1982; Am. Ord. 421, passed
2-18-2014)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.03  IMPOUNDMENT.



   (A)   Any dog or cat found in violation of this chapter may be taken
up by any police officer and impounded in the animal shelter and there
confined in a humane manner for a period of five (5) regular business days. 
If not claimed prior thereto by its owner, it shall thereafter become the
property of the city and may be disposed of in a humane manner or placed in
the custody of some other suitable person.



(Am. Ord. 218, passed 12-20-1988)



   (B)   Immediately upon the impounding of a dog or cat wearing a
rabies tag, the police officer impounding it shall make every reasonable
effort to notify the owner of the dog or cat of the impoundment and of the
conditions whereby the owner may regain custody of the dog or cat.  Any
verbal notices shall immediately be confirmed in writing by the police
officer.



   (C)   Notwithstanding anything contained therein to the contrary, if
a critically injured dog or cat is impounded pursuant to this chapter, it may
be destroyed at any time, but only after reasonable efforts have been made to
locate its owner.



(1969 Code, § 80.030)  (Ord. 183, passed 12-7-1982)



§ 90.04  REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.



   (A)   Any dog or cat impounded hereunder not being held for
suspected diseases may be reclaimed by the owner within five (5) regular
business days upon payment by the owner to the city of a pick-up fee together
with a daily boarding fee for the of keeping of the animal during its
impoundment, provided that rabies requirements of this chapter are complied
with. When a dog or cat is impounded more than one (1) time within a one (1)
year period from the time of the first impoundment and all subsequent
impoundments, the owner shall pay an initial surcharge over and above the
pick-up fee in order to reclaim the dog or cat on the second occasion, and
there shall be imposed a second surcharge over and above the pick-up fee and
initial surcharge for each subsequent time within the one (1) year period.
The amount of the pick-up fee, daily boarding fee, and surcharges shall be in
amounts set by the City Council from time to time.



(Am. Ord. 218, passed 12-20-1988)



   (B)   All fees shall be paid to the Police Department before any
impounded dog or cat will be released. When all fees have been paid, the
Police Department will present the owner of the dog or cat a release form to
be given to the animal shelter.  Upon receipt of this form, the dog or cat
will be released, provided all conditions on the release form are complied
with.  All monies collected under any of the terms of this section shall be
deposited with the City Treasurer.



(1969 Code, § 80.040)  (Ord. 183, passed 12-7-1982)



§ 90.05  DOG NUISANCES.



   The owner or custodian of any dog shall prevent the dog from committing
in the city any act which constitutes a nuisance. 



   (A)   It is a nuisance for any dog to do any of the following:



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor a
dog which habitually barks or cries.  The barking must also be audible off
the owner’s or caretaker’s premises;



      (2)   To frequent school grounds, parks or public beaches;



      (3)   To chase vehicles;



      (4)   To molest or annoy any person away from the property of
his or her owner or custodian; or



      (5)   To damage, defile or destroy public or private property
or to disturb or scatter garbage or refuse. 



   (B)   Failure of the owner or custodian of a dog to prevent the dog
from committing such a nuisance is a violation of this section.



(1969 Code, § 80.060)  (Ord. 183, passed 12-7-1982; Am. Ord. 255, passed
4-18-1995)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.06  RECORDS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Police Chief to keep or cause to
be kept accurate and detailed records of the impoundment and disposition of
all animals coming into his or her custody.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Police Chief to keep or cause to
be kept accurate and detailed records of all bite cases reported to him or
her and his or her investigation of the same.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Police Chief to keep or cause to
be kept accurate and detailed records of all monies coming into his or her
hands in the performance of his or her duties and belonging to the city,
which records shall be open to inspection at reasonable times by the persons
responsible for similar records of the city and shall be audited by the city
annually in the same manner as other city records are audited.



(1969 Code, § 80.070)  (Ord. 183, passed 12-7-1982)



§ 90.07  POUND FEES.



    Impoundment fees shall be borne by the owner as outlined in § 90.04.



(1969 Code, § 80.190)  (Ord. 183, passed 12-7-1982)



§ 90.08  HUMANE CARE AND TREATMENT



   No person shall cruelly treat any animal in the city in any way, and a
person who inhumanely beats, underfeeds, overloads or abandons any animal
shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section.



(1969 Code, § 80.200)  (Ord. 183, passed 12-7-1982)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.09  VIOLATION.



   Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor.



(1969 Code, § 80.210)  (Ord. 183, passed 12-7-1982)  Penalty, see § 10.99



VACCINATIONS



§ 90.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the definitions of § 90.01 shall
apply, where consistent, as well as the following definitions.



   CAT.  A feline animal, male or female, whole or neutered, over three
(3) months of age.



   DOG. Any canine animal, male or female, whole or neutered, over three
(3) months of age.



   VACCINATION AGAINST RABIES.  The inoculation of a dog with a rabies
vaccine.  The vaccination must be performed by a veterinarian duly licensed
to practice veterinary medicine.



(1969 Code, § 80.080)  (Ord. 183, passed 12-7-1982)



§ 90.21  VACCINATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Every dog or cat shall be vaccinated against rabies.  Young
dogs or cats under three (3) months of age shall be vaccinated within thirty
(30) days after they reach the age of three (3) months.



   (B)   Unvaccinated dogs or cats acquired or moved into the city must
be vaccinated within thirty (30) days of purchase or arrival, unless under
three (3) months of age as specified in division (A) above.



   (C)   Every dog shall be vaccinated thereafter at not more than
twenty-four (24) month intervals with a modified live rabies vaccine or
twelve (12) month intervals with a killed rabies vaccine.  Every cat shall
be revaccinated thereafter at not more than twelve (12) month intervals,
regardless of the type of vaccine used.



(1969 Code, § 80.090)  (Ord. 183, passed 12-7-1982)



§ 90.22  DUTIES OF VETERINARIAN.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of each veterinarian, at time of
vaccinating any dog or cat, to complete a certificate of rabies vaccination
(in triplicate) which includes the following information:



      (1)   Owner’s name, address and phone number;



      (2)   Description of dog or cat (breed, sex, markings, age,
name);



      (3)   Date of vaccination;



      (4)   Rabies vaccination tag number;



      (5)   Type of rabies vaccine administered;



      (6)   Manufacturer’s serial number of vaccine; and



      (7)   Legal duration date of vaccination.



   (B)   Distribution of copies of the certificate shall be made as
follows:  the first copy to the Police Department, the second copy to the
owner, and the third copy retained by the issuing veterinarian.  The Police
Department, veterinarian and the owner shall retain their copies for the
interval between vaccinations specified in § 90.21.  The owner shall then
obtain a vaccination tag from the veterinarian.



(1969 Code, § 80.100)  (Ord. 183, passed 12-7-1982)



§ 90.23  VACCINATION IDENTIFICATION.



   A metal tag, serially numbered, issued by the veterinarian shall be
securely attached to the collar or harness of the dog or cat.  Whenever the
dog or cat is out-of-doors, whether on or off the owner’s premises, the
collar or harness with tag attached must be worn.



(1969 Code, § 80.110)  (Ord. 183, passed 12-7-1982)



§ 90.24  VACCINATION COST.



   The cost of rabies vaccination shall be borne by the owner of the dog
or cat.



(1969 Code, § 80.120)  (Ord. 183, passed 12-7-1982)



§ 90.25  EXEMPTION OF VACCINATION REQUIREMENT.



   The provisions of this chapter with respect to vaccination shall not
apply to any dog or cat temporarily remaining within the city for less than
thirty (30) days or to any dog or cat brought into the city for field trial
or show purposes.  These dogs or cats shall be kept under strict supervision
of the owner.  However, it shall be unlawful to bring any dog or cat into
the city which does not comply with the animal health laws and import
regulations of the State of Minnesota which are applicable to dogs or cats.



(1969 Code, § 80.130)  (Ord. 183, passed 12-7-1982)  Penalty, see § 10.99



RABIES



§ 90.35  IMPOUNDMENT OF RABIES SUSPECTS.



   Any dog or cat not vaccinated in accordance with § 90.21 which has
bitten any person and caused an abrasion of the skin of the person shall be
seized and impounded under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian for a
period of not less than ten (10) days.  If, after a complete examination by
a veterinarian, the dog or cat has no clinical signs of rabies, it may be
released to the owner or, in the case of a stray, it shall be disposed of in
accordance with applicable laws.



(1969 Code, § 80.140)  (Ord. 183, passed 12-7-1982)



§ 90.36  HANDLING OF DOGS AND CATS BITTEN BY RABID ANIMALS.



   In the case of dogs or cats known to have been bitten by a rabid
animal, the following rules shall apply.  Any skunk, civet cat, raccoon or
fox that bites a dog or cat shall be deemed to be a rabid animal for the
purposes of this section.



   (A)   If the bitten (exposed) dog or cat is not vaccinated, the
following shall apply:



      (1)   In the case of a dog or cat which has not been
vaccinated in accordance with § 90.21 and which has been bitten by a known
rabid animal, the bitten (exposed) dog or cat should be immediately destroyed.



      (2)   If the owner is unwilling to destroy the bitten
(exposed) dog or cat, the animal shall be placed in strict isolation in a
kennel under supervision for a minimum of six (6) months.  Before release of
the dog or cat to its owner, it shall be vaccinated for rabies one (1) month
prior to its release.



   (B)   If the bitten (exposed) dog or cat is vaccinated, the
following shall apply:



      (1)   In the case of a bitten (exposed) dog or cat vaccinated
in accordance with the provisions of § 90.21, the dog or cat shall be
handled as follows:



         (a)   Immediately revaccinated and confined for a period
of thirty (30) days following vaccination; or



         (b)   If the dog or cat is not immediately revaccinated,
it shall be confined in strict isolation in a kennel for six (6) months under
supervision.  Before release of the dog or cat to its owner, it shall be
vaccinated for rabies one (1) month prior to its release.



      (2)   It shall be destroyed if the owner does not comply with
divisions (B)(1)(a) or (b) above, the exposed animal shall be destroyed.



      (3)   All impound costs and/or destruction costs in this
section shall be borne by the owner of the dog or cat.



(1969 Code, § 80.150)  (Ord. 183, passed 12-7-1982)



§ 90.37  IMPOUNDMENT OF DOGS OR CATS WITHOUT A VALID RABIES VACCINATION TAG.



   (A)   The city may authorize an animal shelter or shelters, or it
may take steps to negotiate a cooperative agreement with a licensed
veterinarian for the establishment and operation of an animal shelter.



   (B)   Any dog or cat found off the owner’s premises and not
wearing a valid rabies vaccination tag may be impounded.  All impounded dogs
or cats shall be given proper care and maintenance.  Each impounded dog or
cat shall be kept and maintained as required under § 90.03 unless reclaimed
earlier by the owner.



   (C)   Notice of impoundment of all animals shall be in accordance
with § 90.03.  Any unvaccinated dog or cat may be conditionally reclaimed
by its owner during the period of impoundment by payment of prescribed fees
and complying with rabies vaccination requirements of this chapter prior to
release.  Any vaccinated dog or cat impounded because of lack of rabies
vaccination tag may be reclaimed during normal business hours by its owner by
furnishing proof of rabies vaccination, paying all prescribed fees prior to
release, as described in § 90.04, and by obtaining a rabies vaccination tag.



   (D)   If the dog or cat is unclaimed at the end of five (5) regular
business days, the authority may dispose of the dog or cat in accordance with
§ 90.03.



(1969 Code, § 80.160)  (Ord. 183, passed 12-7-1982)



§ 90.38  REPORTS OF BITE CASES.



   It shall be the duty of every physician or any other person to report
to the Police Department the names and addresses of persons treated for bites
inflicted by animals within the city, together with any other information as
will be helpful in rabies control, and the Police Department shall
immediately inform the State Department of Health of the report.



(1969 Code, § 80.170)  (Ord. 183, passed 12-7-1982)



§ 90.39  RESPONSIBILITIES OF VETERINARIANS.



   It shall be the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the
Police Department his or her  diagnosis of any animal within the city
observed by him or her as a rabies suspect, and the Police Department shall
immediately inform the State Department of Health of the report.



(1969 Code, § 80.180)  (Ord. 183, passed 12-7-1982)



DANGEROUS ANIMALS



§ 90.50  DANGEROUS ANIMALS.



   (A)   Definition. A dangerous animal is an animal which has:



      (1)   Without provocation caused bodily injury or
disfigurement to any person on public or private property;



      (2)   Without provocation engaged in any attack on any person
under circumstances which would indicate danger to personal safety;



      (3)   Exhibited unusually aggressive behavior, such as an
attack on another animal;



      (4)   Bitten one (1) or more persons on two (2) or more
occasions;



      (5)   Been found to be potentially dangerous and/or the owner
has personal knowledge of the same, and the animal aggressively bites,
attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals; or



      (6)   Fresh wounds, scarring, or is observed in a fight, or
has other indications which to a reasonable person evidence that the animal
has been or will be used, trained or encouraged to fight with another animal;
or whose owner has in custody or possession any training apparatus,
paraphernalia or drugs used to prepare such animal to be fought with another
animal.



   (B)   Designation as dangerous animal. The Police Chief shall
designate any animal as a dangerous animal upon receiving evidence that the
animal meets any of the criteria in division (A).



   (C)   Procedure. The Police Chief, after having determined that an
animal is dangerous, may proceed in the following manner:



      (1)   The owner(s) of the animal shall be notified in writing
or in person that the animal has been determined to be dangerous and that the
animal is to be seized and destroyed or that the owner must comply with the
conditions set forth in § 90.51. This notice shall state the dates, times,
places and facts of the incidents which form the basis for the determination,
and that the owner(s) have fourteen (14) calendar days to appeal to the City
Clerk the determination by requesting a hearing before the Hearing Officer.



         (a)   If no appeal is filed, the orders issued will
stand.



         (b)   If an owner requests a hearing for determination
as to the dangerous nature of the animal, the hearing shall be held before
the Hearing Officer not more than three (3) weeks after demand for the
hearing. Pending a hearing on the determination, the animal may be seized and
kept at an animal shelter unless the owner shows proof that the animal has
met the requirement, if any, for rabies vaccinations, and agrees that the
animal, if it is a dog, will not be permitted to be outside without being in
a proper enclosure or being restrained on a leash and wearing a muzzle.



         (c)   The records of the city, including those of animal
control, and any police reports relating to an attack or bite shall be
admissible for consideration by the hearing officer without further
foundation.



         (d)   After considering all evidence pertaining to the
temperament of the animal, the Hearing Officer shall make such order as
he/she deems proper. The Hearing Officer may order that the Police Chief take
the animal into custody for destruction, if such animal is not currently in
custody. If the animal is ordered into custody for destruction, the owner
shall immediately make the animal available to the Police Chief and failure
to do so shall be a misdemeanor.



      (2)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the Police Chief
from ordering the immediate seizure and quarantine of a rabies-suspected
animal.



      (3)   Any person who fails or refuses to release an animal to
a police officer upon demand, after it has been found by the Police Chief to
be dangerous and ordered into custody for destruction, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.



      (4)   The Police Chief or the animal owner may apply to the
district court of the county for subpoenas for hearings under division (C)(1)
above.



   (D)   Authority to order destruction. The Hearing Officer, upon
finding that an animal is dangerous hereunder, is authorized to order, as
part of the disposition of the case, that the animal be destroyed based on a
written order containing one (1) or more of the following findings of fact:



      (1)   The animal is dangerous as demonstrated by a vicious
attack, an unprovoked attack, an attack without warning or multiple attacks;
or



      (2)   The owner of the animal has demonstrated an inability or
unwillingness to control the animal in order to prevent injury to persons or
other animals.



   (E)   Stopping an attack. If any police officer is witness to an
attack by an animal upon a person or another animal, the officer may take
whatever means the officer deems appropriate to bring the attack to an end
and prevent further injury to the victim.



§ 90.51  DANGEROUS ANIMAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Requirements. If the court or Police Chief does not order the
destruction of an animal that has been declared dangerous, the court, or
Police Chief shall, as an alternative, order any or all of the following,
excepting for dogs, in which case all shall be applicable and which will be
reviewed on an annual basis by the Police Chief. If, in reviewing the
conditions for keeping a dangerous dog there have been no ordinance
violations for a period of two (2) years, the Police Chief may use discretion
in determining whether the conditions set forth below are still required:



      (1)   That the owner provides and maintains a proper enclosure
for the dangerous animal. The  enclosure shall be a securely confined indoor
area which prevents escape and provides protection from the elements;



      (2)   Post the front and the rear of the premises with clearly
visible warning signs, including a warning symbol to inform children, that
there is a dangerous animal on the property as specified in M.S. § 347.51,
as it may be amended from time to time;



      (3)   Provides and shows proof annually of public liability
insurance paid in full in the minimum amount of three hundred thousand
dollars ($300,000). The owner shall have fifteen (15) regular business days
from the request to show proof of insurance, except that if the animal is
impounded, proof of insurance must be demonstrated prior to the animal's
release;



      (4)   If the animal is a dog and is outside the proper
enclosure, the dog must be muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or
leash (not to exceed six (6) feet in length) and under the physical restraint
of a person eighteen (18) years of age or older. The muzzle must be of such
design as to prevent the dog from biting any person or animal, but will not
cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration;



      (5)   If the animal is a dog, it must have an easily
identifiable, standardized tag identifying the dog as dangerous affixed to
the dog's collar at all times as specified in M.S. § 347.51, as it may be
amended from time to time;



      (6)   Provides and shows proof of microchip identification;



      (7)   All animals deemed dangerous by the Police Chief shall
be registered with the city within fourteen (14) regular business days after
the date the animal was so deemed and provide satisfactory proof thereof to
the Police Chief; and



      (8)   If the animal is a dog or cat, the animal must be up to
date on rabies vaccination.



   (B)   Seizure. The Police Department shall immediately seize any
dangerous animal if the owner does not meet each of the above requirements
within fourteen (14) calendar days after the date notice is sent to the owner
that the animal is dangerous and no appeal has been filed.



   (C)   Reclaiming animals. A dangerous animal seized under division
(B) may be reclaimed by the owner of the animal upon payment of impounding
and boarding fees, and presenting proof to the Police Chief that each of the
requirements under division (A) is fulfilled. An animal not reclaimed under
this section within fourteen (14) calendar days may be disposed of as
provided under § 90.03, and the owner is liable to animal control for costs
incurred in confining the animal.



   (D)   Subsequent offenses. If an owner of an animal which has been
declared dangerous and is subject to the conditions of this section has
allegedly failed to comply with the conditions, the animal must be seized by
the Police Department. Notice shall be provided to the owner of the basis for
the seizure and the right to request a hearing before the Hearing Officer to
determine whether the conditions were violated. A request for hearing must be
made within ten (10) regular business days of the seizure. If the owner fails
to request a hearing within said time period, or is found to have violated
the conditions, the Hearing Officer shall order the animal destroyed in a
proper and humane manner and the owner shall pay the costs of confining the
animal. If the owner is found not to have violated the conditions, the owner
may reclaim the animal under the provisions of division (C).



   (E)   Registration fee. An owner of an animal that has been declared
dangerous shall pay an annual registration fee in an amount set by the City
Council from time to time. If the animal has been impounded, the fee shall be
paid prior to the animal's release.



§ 90.52  NOTIFICATION OF NEW ADDRESS.



   The owner of an animal which has been identified as dangerous,
potentially dangerous or a public nuisance must notify the Police Chief in
writing if the animal has died or is to be relocated from its current address
or given or sold to another person. The notification must be given in writing
at least ten (10) regular business days prior to the relocation or transfer
of ownership. If the animal has died, notification must be given no later
than ten (10) regular business days after the animal's death. The
notification must include the current owner's name and address, the
relocation address, and the name of the new owner, if any, and in the case of
the death of the animal must include the date of death and the name of any
attending veterinarian as well as information relating to the disposal of the
animal.



§ 90.53  EXEMPTIONS.



   Dogs may not be declared dangerous if the threat, injury, or damage was
sustained by a person:



   (A)   Who was at the time of injury committing or attempting to
commit willful trespass or other tort or crime upon the premises occupied by
the dog;



   (B)   Who was provoking, tormenting, teasing, abusing or assaulting
the dog or who can be shown to have repeatedly, in the past, provoked,
tormented, teased, abused or assaulted the dog; or



   (C)   Who was injured by a dog or dogs used by law enforcement
personnel within the scope of their duty.



CHAPTER 91:  TREES



Section




Boulevard Trees




   91.01   Inspection of trees



   91.02   Notice to owner



   91.03   Personal liability



   91.04   Assessment




Tree Diseases




   91.15   Tree diseases



   91.16   Personal liability



   91.17   Assessment



   91.18   Violation



BOULEVARD TREES



§ 91.01  INSPECTION OF TREES.



   The Public Works Director, or any other official designated by the
Council, shall make periodic inspections of all trees and shrubbery situated
on any street, avenue or other public property within the city to determine
whether the trees and shrubbery need to be trimmed, cared for or removed.



(1969 Code, § 35.010)  (Ord. 80, passed 1-6-1965)



§ 91.02  NOTICE TO OWNER.



   (A)   The Public Works Director shall cause a notice to be served
either by registered or certified mail or by personal service upon the record
owner of the abutting property.  The notice shall order the owner either to
trim, care for or remove certain trees or shrubs abutting his or her property
within thirty (30) days and shall specify with particularity the kind of work
that should be done.



   (B)   It shall also state that if the trimming, care or removal is
not completed within thirty (30) days by the owner, the Public Works
Director, or other official designated by the Council, will do so on behalf
of the city and that the expense thereof, if not paid by the owner, will be
made a special assessment against the property concerned.



(1969 Code, § 35.030)  (Ord. 80, passed 1-6-1965)



§ 91.03  PERSONAL LIABILITY.



   The owner of property on which or adjacent to which work has been
performed under this subchapter shall be personally liable for the cost of
the work pursuant to § 33.17 of this code.



(1969 Code, § 35.040)  (Ord. 80, passed 1-6-1965)



§ 91.04  ASSESSMENT.



   Unpaid charges may be collected pursuant to § 33.18 of this code.



(1969 Code, § 35.050)  (Ord. 80, passed 1-6-1965)



TREE DISEASES



§ 91.15  TREE DISEASES.



   (A)   Trees constituting nuisance declared.  The following are
public nuisances whenever they may be found within the city:



      (1)   Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected
to any degree with the Dutch Elm disease fungus Ceratocystis Ulmi (Buisman)
Moreau or which harbors any of the elm bark beetles Scolytus Multistriatus
(Eichh.) or Hylungopinus Rufipes (Marsh);



      (2)   Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including branches,
stumps, firewood or other elm material from which the bark has not been
removed and burned or sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle insecticide;



      (3)   Any living or standing oak tree or part thereof infected
to any degree with the Oak Wilt fungus Ceratocystis fagacearum;



      (4)   Any dead oak tree or part thereof which in the opinion
of the designated officer constitutes a hazard, including but not limited to
logs, branches, stumps, roots, firewood or other oak material which has not
been stripped of its bark and burned or sprayed with an effective fungicide;



      (5)   Any other shade tree with an epidemic disease.



   (B)   Abatement of nuisance.  It is unlawful for any person to
permit any public nuisance as defined in division (A) of this section to
remain on any premises the person owns or controls within the city.  The
nuisance may be abated.



   (C)   Record of costs.  The Public Works Director shall keep a
record of the costs of abatement done under this section for all work done
for which assessments are to be made, stating and certifying the description
of the land, lots, parcels involved, and the amount chargeable to each.



Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 91.16  PERSONAL LIABILITY.



   The owner of property on which or adjacent to which work has been
performed under this subchapter shall be personally liable for the cost of
the work pursuant to § 33.17 of this code.



§ 91.17  ASSESSMENT.



   Unpaid charges may be collected pursuant to § 33.18 of this code.



§ 91.18  VIOLATION.



   Any person who shall violate any provisions of this subchapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.



(1969 Code, § 36.040)  (Ord. 160, passed 4-1-1980)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 92:  ENVIRONMENT



Section




Warning Signs for Pesticide Application




   92.01   Definitions



   92.02   Posting warning signs



   92.03   Violation




Open Burning




   92.30   Definitions



   92.31   Open burning prohibited



   92.32   Permitted open burning



   92.33   Violation



Cross-reference:



   Nuisance offenses, see Chapter 130 of this code of ordinances



WARNING SIGNS FOR PESTICIDE APPLICATION



§ 92.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMMERCIAL APPLICATOR.  A person who has or is required to have
commercial applicator license under the provisions of M.S. Chapter 18B, as it
may be amended from time to time.



   NONCOMMERCIAL APPLICATOR.  A person who has or is required to have a
noncommercial applicator license under the provisions of M.S. Chapter 18B, as
it may be amended from time to time.



   PESTICIDE.  A substance or mixture of substances intended to prevent,
destroy, repel or mitigate a pest, and a substance or mixture of substances
intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant or desiccant.



(1969 Code, § 38.010)  (Ord. 232, passed 7-17-1990)



§ 92.02  POSTING WARNING SIGNS.



   All commercial or noncommercial applicators who apply pesticides to
turf areas within the city must post or affix warning signs as follows:



   (A)   Warning signs are to be posted on the real property where the
pesticides are applied.



   (B)   Warning signs must project at least eighteen (18) inches above
the top of the grass line.  The warning signs must be of a material that is
rain-resistant for at least a forty-eight (48) hour period and must remain in
place for at least forty-eight (48) hours from the time of application.



   (C)   Information printed on the warning sign must be in contrasting
colors and capitalized letters measuring at least one-half (½) inch, and
must state the name of the business organization, entity or other person
applying the pesticide and must contain the following language:



      “This area chemically treated. Keep children and pets off until
(date of safe entry).”



   (D)   The warning sign must be posted on a lawn or yard between two
(2) feet and five (5) feet from the sidewalk or street.  For parks, golf
courses, athletic fields, playgrounds or other similar recreational property,
the warning signs must be posted immediately adjacent to areas within the
property where pesticides have been applied and at or near the entrances to
the property.



(1969 Code, § 38.020)  (Ord. 232, passed 7-17-1990)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.03  VIOLATION.



   Any person violating a provision of this subchapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor.



(1969 Code, § 38.030)  (Ord. 232, passed 7-17-1990)  Penalty, see § 10.99



OPEN BURNING



§ 92.30  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FIRE CHIEF and FIRE MARSHAL. The Fire Chief and Fire Marshal of the
Fire Department which provides fire protection services to the city.



   OPEN BURNING. The burning of any matter if the resultant combustion
products are emitted directly to the atmosphere without passing through a
stack, duct or chimney. OPEN BURNING does not include a “recreational
fire” as defined herein or the normal use of tobacco products. Mobile
cooking devices such as manufactured hibachis, charcoal grills, wood smokers,
and propane or natural gas devices are not defined as OPEN BURNING.



   RECREATIONAL FIRE. A fire set with approved starter fuel; producing
little detectable smoke, odor or soot beyond the property line; for
recreational, ceremonial, food preparation for social purposes; extinguished
completely before quitting the occasion; and respecting weather conditions,
neighbors, so that nuisance, health or safety hazards will not be created. No
more than one (1) recreational fire is allowed on any property at one (1)
time.



   WOOD. Dry, clean fuel only such as twigs, branches, limbs, “presto
logs,” charcoal, cord wood or untreated dimensional lumber. The term does
not include wood that is green with leaves or needles, rotten, wet, oil
soaked, or treated with paint, glue or preservatives. Clean pallets may be
used for recreational fires when cut into three (3) foot lengths.



(1969 Code, § 43.10)  (Ord. 246, passed 6-16-1992; Am. Ord. 289, passed
6-6-2000)



§ 92.31  OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Open burning is prohibited within the municipal limits of the
city except as permitted under § 92.32.



   (B)   All open burning is prohibited in the areas of the city
described as follows:



      That part of the Northwest Quarter (NW 1/4), Section 24, Township
39, Range 24, Kanabec County, MN described as follows:



      Commencing at the NW corner of the NW 1/4, thence on an assumed
bearing of south along the west line of the NW 1/4 Section 24 a distance of
283.00 to the point of beginning of the property to be described, thence
north 89 degrees 40' east parallel with the north line of NW 1/4 of Section
24 a distance of 1,675 feet, thence south 85 degrees 39' 20" east 198.26
feet, thence south 33 degrees 48' west 273.43 feet, thence south 52 degrees
west 1,225 feet, thence north 38 degrees west 142.88 feet, thence west 617.28
feet to the west line of NW 1/4, thence north along the west line of NW 1/4 a
distance of 874.38 feet more or less to the point of beginning. Subject to
Kanabec County Highway No. 62.



      ALSO, Lots One (1), Two (2), Three (3) and Four (4), Black Three
(3), Spring Brook Estates, Kanabec County, MN, according to the plat thereof
on file and record in the office of the Kanabec County Recorder within and
for Kanabec County, Minnesota.



(1969 Code, § 43.20)  (Ord. 246, passed 6-16-1992; Am. Ord. 289, passed
6-6-2000; Am. Ord. 292, passed 10-3-2000; Am. Ord. 407, passed 6-21-2011; Am.
Ord. 444, passed 2-16-2016)



§ 92.32  OPEN BURNING PERMITTED.



   (A)   Recreational fires shall be permitted under the following
conditions:



      (1)   Recreational fires cannot exceed three (3) feet in
diameter (measured from the inside of the fire ring or border) or height.



      (2)   Recreational fires must be contained in a fire ring made
of a non-combustible and non-smoke or odor producing material, either of
natural rock, cement brick, tile or blocks or ferrous metal only and which
area is depressed below ground, on the ground, or on a raised bed.



      (3)   The ground must be cleared of combustible materials
within five (5) feet of the fire ring.



      (4)   Only wood, coal, or charcoal may be burned in a
recreational fire.



      (5)   A fire suppression device such as a fire extinguisher,
garden hose or pail of sand must be available at the recreational fire.



      (6)   Recreational fires shall not be located closer than
twenty-five (25) feet to any structure.



      (7)   Recreational fires must be attended by a responsible
person at all times.



      (8)   Recreational fires shall be prohibited during a burning
ban or air pollution alert.



   (B)   School homecoming bonfires shall be permitted under the
following conditions:



      (1)   Approval of the bonfire by the Fire Chief or Fire
Marshal.



      (2)   Bonfire cannot exceed twelve (12) feet in diameter or
height;



      (3)   Fire must be a minimum of one hundred and fifty (150)
feet from any structure;



      (4)   Ground must be cleared of combustible material within
twenty-five (25) feet of the base of the fire; and



      (5)   Fire Department must be present from the time the fire
is lit until the fire is completely extinguished, and they will have the
authority to extinguish the fire at any time there is a concern for safety.



   (C)   Fires for instruction and training of firefighting personnel
under the following conditions:



      (1)   An agreement signed with the property owner that
outlines each party's responsibilities is on file at the Fire Hall;



      (2)   All necessary permits have been obtained; and



      (3)   The department must follow the Minnesota State College
guidelines on structural burn training evolutions.



   (D)   Burning of dried leaves shall be permitted during the period
of October 17 through November 7 under the following conditions:



      (1)   Property owner shall obtain a permit from the city.



      (2)   Leaves shall not be burned within fifty (50) feet of any
structure.



      (3)   Leaves shall not be burned on streets, alleys,
sidewalks, curbs, or gutters.



      (4)   A responsible person shall be present at the leaf burn
at all times.



      (5)   Leaf burning shall be prohibited during a burning ban or
air pollution alert.



      (6)   Leaves may not be left to smolder.



      (7)   A fire suppression device such as a fire extinguisher,
garden hose or pail of sand must be available at the leaf burn site.



(1969 Code, § 43.30)  (Ord. 289, passed 6-6-2000; Am. Ord. 389, passed
2-2-2010; Am. Ord. 399, passed 9-21-2010; Am. Ord. 407, passed 6-21-2011; Am.
Ord. 444, passed 2-16-2016)



§ 92.33  VIOLATION.



   Any person who shall ignite a fire for the purpose of open burning in
violation of this subchapter, and any person who shall permit a fire to be
ignited or to burn upon land controlled by him or her for the purpose of open
burning in violation of any part of this subchapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.



(1969 Code, § 43.40)  (Ord. 246, passed 6-16-1992)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 93:  ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES



Section



   93.01   Definitions



   93.02   Impoundment



   93.03   Notice of taking custody



   93.04   Right to reclaim



   93.05   Garagekeeper’s lien



   93.06   Public sale after notice



   93.07   Application of proceeds



   93.08   Disposal when no bid received



   93.09   Public nuisance



   93.10   Duty of property owner



   93.11   Notice to remove



   93.12   Responsibility for removal



   93.13   Notice procedure



   93.14   Content of notice



   93.15   Violation



§ 93.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED VEHICLE.



      (1)   A motor vehicle, as defined in M.S. § 169.01, as it may
be amended from time to time, that:



         (a)   Has remained illegally:



            1.   For a period of more than forty-eight (48)
hours on any property owned or controlled by a unit of government, or more
than four (4) hours on that property when it is properly posted; or



            2.   On private property for a period of time, as
determined under M.S. § 168B.04, subd. 2, as it may be amended from time to
time, without the consent of the person in control of the property; and



         (b)   Lacks vital component parts or is in an inoperable
condition such that it has no substantial potential for further use
consistent with its ususal functions, unless it is kept in an enclosed garage
or storage building.



      (2)   A classic car or pioneer car, as defined in M.S. §
168.10, as it may be amended from time to time, is not considered an
ABANDONED VEHICLE.



      (3)   Vehicles on the premises of junk yards and automobile
graveyards that are defined, maintained and licensed in accordance with M.S.
§ 161.242, as it may be amended from time to time, or that are licensed and
maintained in accordance with local laws and zoning regulations, are not
considered ABANDONED VEHICLES.



      (4)   A vehicle being held for storage by agreement or being
held under police authority or pursuant to a writ or court order is not
considered abandoned, nor may it be processed as abandoned while the police
hold, writ or court order is in effect.



   JUNKED VEHICLE.  A vehicle that:



      (1)   Is extensively damaged, with the damage including such
things as broken or missing wheels, motor, drive train, or transmission;



      (2)   Is apparently inoperable;



      (3)   Does not have a valid, current registration plate; and



      (4)   Has an approximate fair market value equal only to the
approximate value of the scrap in it.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every
vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley
wires. MOTOR VEHICLE does not include an electric personal assistive mobility
device or a vehicle moved solely by human power.



   VEHICLE.  Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.



   VITAL COMPONENT PARTS.  Those parts of a motor vehicle that are
essential to the mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including such things
as the motor, drive train and wheels.



(1969 Code, § 176A.010)  (Ord. 222, passed 10-3-1989 ; Am. Ord. 376, passed
1-20-2009)



§ 93.02  IMPOUNDMENT.



   (A)   The Police Department shall take into custody and impound any
abandoned motor vehicle found within the city.



(1969 Code, § 176A.020)  (Ord. 222, passed 10-3-1989)



   (B)   Any unoccupied vehicle found in violation of the provisions of
the traffic code may be immediately removed and impounded by any police
officer or duly authorized person in accordance with this code.



(Ord. 301, passed 11-6-2001)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.03  NOTICE OF TAKING CUSTODY.



   When an abandoned motor vehicle is taken into custody, the Police
Department shall give notice of the taking within ten (10) days.  The notice
shall set forth the date and place of the taking, the year, make, model and
serial number of the abandoned motor vehicle and the place where the vehicle
is being held, shall inform the owner and any lienholders of his or her right
to reclaim the vehicle under § 93.04, and shall state that failure of the
owner or lien-holders to exercise his, her or their right to reclaim the
vehicle be deemed a waiver by him, her or them of all right, title and
interest in the vehicle and a consent to the sale of the vehicle at a public
auction pursuant to § 93.06.  The notice shall be sent by certified mail to
the registered owner, if any, of the abandoned motor vehicle and to all
readily identifiable lienholders of record.  If it is impossible to
determine with reasonable certainty the identity and address of the
registered owner and all lienholders, the notice shall be published once in a
newspaper of general circulation within the city.



(1969 Code, § 176A.030)  (Ord. 222, passed 10-3-1989)



§ 93.04  RIGHT TO RECLAIM.



   The owner or any lienholder of an abandoned motor vehicle shall have a
right to reclaim the vehicle from the city, upon payment of all towing and
storage charges resulting from taking the vehicle into custody, within
fifteen (15) days after the date of the notice required by § 93.03.



(1969 Code, § 176A.040)  (Ord. 222, passed 10-3-1989)



§ 93.05  GARAGEKEEPER’S LIEN.     



   (A)   Nothing in §§ 93.02 or 93.03 shall be construed to impair
any lien of a garagekeeper under the laws of this state, or the right of a
lienholder to foreclose. 



   (B)   For the purposes of this section, GARAGEKEEPER is an operator
of a parking facility, or an operator of an establishment for the servicing,
repair or maintenance of motor vehicles.



(1969 Code, § 176A.050)  (Ord. 222, passed 10-3-1989)



§ 93.06  PUBLIC SALE AFTER NOTICE.



   An abandoned motor vehicle taken into custody and not reclaimed under
§ 93.04 shall be sold to the highest bidder at public auction or sale,
following two (2) weeks’ published notice thereof.  The purchaser shall be
given a receipt which shall be sufficient title to dispose of the vehicle. 
The receipt shall also entitle the purchaser to register the vehicle and
receive a certificate of title, free and clear of all liens and claims of
ownership.



(1969 Code, § 176A.060)  (Ord. 222, passed 10-3-1989)



§ 93.07  APPLICATION OF PROCEEDS.



   From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor vehicle, the city
shall reimburse itself for the cost of towing, preserving and storing the
vehicle, and all notice and publication costs incurred pursuant to this
chapter.  Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the
owner of the vehicle or entitled lienholder for ninety (90) days and then
shall be deposited in the General Fund of the city.



(1969 Code, § 176A.080)  (Ord. 222, passed 10-3-1989)



§ 93.08  DISPOSAL WHEN NO BID RECEIVED.



   Where no bid has been received for an abandoned motor vehicle offered
for sale at public auction, the city may dispose of it pursuant to contract
under M.S. § 168B.10, as it may be amended from time to time.



(1969 Code, § 176A.090)  (Ord. 222, passed 10-3-1989)



§ 93.09  PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   The presence of an abandoned or junked motor vehicle, or of major
component parts thereof, on private or public land within the city is a
public nuisance which may be abated in accordance with this chapter or any
other applicable law.



(1969 Code, § 176A.100)  (Ord. 222, passed 10-3-1989)



§ 93.10  DUTY OF PROPERTY OWNER.



   No person owning, in charge of or in control of any land within the
city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow
any abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, junked or partially
dismantled motor vehicle of any kind to remain on the property longer than
fourteen (14) days.



(1969 Code, § 176A.110)  (Ord. 222, passed 10-3-1989)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 93.11  NOTICE TO REMOVE.



   Whenever it comes to the attention of the Police Department that any
person has an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, junked or
partially dismantled motor vehicle on his or her property, a notice in
writing shall be served upon that person requesting the removal of the motor
vehicle in the time specified in this chapter.



(1969 Code, § 176A.120)  (Ord. 222, passed 10-3-1989)



§ 93.12  RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL.



   Upon proper notice, the owner of the abandoned, wrecked, dismantled,
inoperative, junked or partially dismantled motor vehicle and the owner or
occupant of the private property on which the same is located, either or all
of them, shall be responsible for its removal.



(1969 Code, § 176A.130)  (Ord. 222, passed 10-3-1989)



§ 93.13  NOTICE PROCEDURE.



   The Police Department shall give notice of removal to the owner or
occupant of the private property where it is located.  It shall constitute
sufficient notice when a copy of same is sent by registered mail to the owner
or occupant of the private property at his or her last known address.



(1969 Code, § 176A.140)  (Ord. 222, passed 10-3-1989)



§ 93.14  CONTENT OF NOTICE.



   The notice shall contain the request for removal within fourteen (14)
days after the mailing of the notice, and the notice shall advise that
failure to comply with the notice to remove shall be a violation of this
chapter.



(1969 Code, § 176A.150)  (Ord. 222, passed 10-3-1989)



§ 93.15  VIOLATION.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of
a misdemeanor.



(1969 Code, § 176A.160)  (Ord. 222, passed 10-3-1989)  Penalty, see §
10.99



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      111.   PAWNBROKERS



      112.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



      113.   TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



      114.   TAXICABS



      115.   TOBACCO



      116.   LAWFUL GAMBLING



      117.   SOLID WASTE



      118.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES



      119.   [RESERVED]



      120.   MASSAGE THERAPISTS



CHAPTER 110:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   110.01   Licenses required to engage in certain businesses



   110.02   Application for license



   110.03   Issuance of license



   110.04   Date and duration of license



   110.05   License not transferable



   110.06   License certificate to be displayed



   110.07   Revocation or suspension



   110.08   Appeal and review



   110.09   Fees



§ 110.01  LICENSES REQUIRED TO ENGAGE IN CERTAIN BUSINESSES.



   No person shall engage in any of the trades, businesses, or professions
for which licenses are required by Title XI of this code or by any other
ordinance of the city or provision of this code without first applying for
and obtaining a license from the City Clerk or other duly authorized issuing
authority.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.02  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   All original applications for licenses, unless otherwise
specifically provided, shall be made to the City Clerk or other authorized
official in writing upon forms to be furnished by him or her and shall
contain:



      (1)   The applicant's full name, address, and telephone
number, and the full name of each officer, partner or business associate, if
applicable;



      (2)   His or her present occupation and principal place of
business;



      (3)   His or her place of residence for the preceding five (5)
years;



      (4)   The nature and location of the intended business or
enterprise;



      (5)   The period of time for which the license is desired;



      (6)   A description of the merchandise, goods or services to
be sold;



      (7)   If a motor vehicle is to be used, a full description of
the motor vehicle, including the make, model, year, color, license number,
and vehicle registration (VIN) number of the vehicle.



      (8)   Other information concerning the applicant and his or
her business as may be reasonable and proper, having regard to the nature of
the license desired.



   (B)   Any change in the information required by division (A) of this
section must be reported to the City Clerk or other authorized official
within fourteen (14) days of that change.



   (C)   With each original or renewal application, the applicant shall
deposit the fee required for the license requested.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful to knowingly make any false statement or
representation in the license application.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.03  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   Upon receipt of an application for a license, accompanied by the proper
fee if approval by another officer or department is not required, the City
Clerk, shall deposit the fee in the general fund of the city and issue to the
applicant a proper license certificate signed by the City Clerk.



§ 110.04  DATE AND DURATION OF LICENSE.



   A license shall not be valid beyond the expiration date therein
specified and, unless otherwise provided, shall be issued for one (1) year
and shall not extend beyond August 31.



§ 110.05  LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.



   Every license shall be issued to a real party in interest in the
enterprise or business, and unless otherwise provided, no license shall be
assigned or transferred.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.06  LICENSE CERTIFICATE TO BE DISPLAYED.



   Every licensee carrying on business at a fixed location shall keep
posted in a prominent place upon the premises the license certificate. 
Other licensees shall carry their licenses at all times, and whenever
requested by any officer or citizen, shall exhibit the license.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.07  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.



   (A)   Any license may be suspended or revoked by the City Clerk or
City Council at any time for the following reasons:



      (1)   For conditions or considerations which, had they existed
at the time of issuance, would have been valid grounds for its denial;



      (2)   For any misrepresentation of a material fact in the
application discovered after issuance of the license;



      (3)   For any misrepresentation or materially false statement
made in the course of carrying on the trade, business or profession;



      (4)   For violation of any provision of this chapter or other
federal, state or municipal law or ordinance relating to the operation of the
business or enterprise for which the license has been issued; or



      (5)   Upon conviction of a licensee for any federal, state or
municipal law or ordinance involving the creation of a nuisance, a breach of
the peace, interference with the rights of property owners, or any other
offense constituting a threat to the public health, safety, morals or general
welfare of the public.



   (B)   The suspension or revocation shall become effective upon
notice served upon the licensee.  The notice shall contain a written summary
of the reasons for the suspension or revocation and a statement concerning
the right to appeal the decision.  The notice shall be delivered by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address given on the
licensee's application.



§ 110.08  APPEAL AND REVIEW.



   In case any applicant has been denied a license by the City Clerk, or
if his or her license has been suspended or revoked by the City Clerk, the
applicant or licensee shall within ten (10) business days have the right to
appeal to the City Council from the denial, suspension or revocation. 
Notice of appeal shall be filed in writing with the City Clerk or other
authorized official.  Notice of appeal shall be filed in writing with the
City Clerk.  Unless a regular meeting of the City Council at which the
appeal can be heard is scheduled within twenty-one (21) days after receiving
the notice of appeal, the Mayor shall schedule a special meeting of the City
Council for the hearing within the twenty-one (21) day period.  Three
members of the City Council shall constitute a quorum to hear the appeal. 
The appellant may appear and be heard in person or by counsel.  If, after
hearing, a majority of the members of the City Council present at the meeting
declare in favor of the applicant, the license shall be issued or fully
reinstated as the case may be; otherwise the suspension or revocation shall
become final.



§ 110.09  FEES.



   (A)   Amount.  Fees for licenses under this title shall be
established in a fee schedule in amounts set by the City Council from time to
time.



   (B)   Payment.  Payment in full for all licenses is due at the time
of application.  No license shall be issued or acted upon until the license
fee has been paid.



   (C)   Refunds.  License fees shall only be refunded under the
following circumstances:



      (1)   If a license is denied or withdrawn for an initial or
renewal application, eighty percent (80%) of the license fee shall be
refunded.



      (2)   If licenses are voluntarily surrendered within six (6)
months of issuance and the total prorated refund would be over two hundred
dollars ($200), a refund shall be issued upon written application of the
licensee.



   (D)   Prorating.  Annual licenses with an established fee greater
than one hundred fifty dollars ($150) that are issued with less than six (6)
months left in the license period shall have the license fee reduced to
one-half (½) the established fee for that particular license.



(Ord. 406, passed 4-5-2011)



CHAPTER 111:  PAWNBROKERS



Section



   111.01   Definitions



   111.02   License required



   111.03   Initial license application



   111.04   Execution of application



   111.05   Fees



   111.06   Granting licenses



   111.07   Bond required



   111.08   Licensee eligibility



   111.09   Conditions of licenses



   111.10   Pawn tickets; records



   111.11   Redemption



   111.12   Restricted transactions



   111.13   Motor vehicle title pawn transactions; special provisions



   111.14   Permitted charges



   111.15   Inspection



   111.16   Conduct of persons on licensed premises



   111.17   Corporations, partnerships or associations



   111.18   Suspension and revocation



   111.19   Violation



§ 111.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHIEF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The chief or head of the law enforcement
agency for the City of Mora or their designee.



   CITY. The City of Mora, Kanabec County, Minnesota, a municipal
corporation.



   LICENSEE. The person to whom a license is issued under this chapter,
including any agents or employees of the person.



   MINOR. Any natural person under the age of eighteen (18) years.



   PAWN TRANSACTION.  Any loan on the security of pledged goods or any
purchase of pledged goods on the condition that the pledged goods are left
with the pawnbroker and may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a
fixed price within a fixed period of time.



   PAWNBROKER.



      (1)   Except as provided in division (2) below, PAWNBROKER
means a person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money
on the security of pledged goods left in pawn, or in the business of
purchasing tangible personal property to be left in pawn on the condition
that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within
a fixed period of time.



      (2)   The following are exempt from the definition of
PAWNBROKER: any bank regulated by the State of Minnesota, the Comptroller of
the currency of the United States, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, or any other federal or
state authority and their affiliates; any bank or savings association whose
deposits or accounts are eligible for insurance by the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation or any successor to it and all affiliates of those
banks and savings associations; any state or federally chartered credit
union; and any industrial loan and thrift company or regulated lender subject
to licensing and regulation by the Department of Commerce.



   PAWNSHOP.  The location at which or premises in which a pawnbroker
regularly conducts business.



   PERSON.  An individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability
company, joint venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity,
however organized.



   PLEDGED GOODS.  Tangible personal property other than choses in
action, securities, bank drafts, or printed evidence of indebtedness, that
are purchased by, deposited with, or otherwise actually delivered into the
possession of a pawnbroker in connection with a pawn transaction.



(Ord. 427, passed 11-18-2014)



§ 111.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   A person may not engage in business as a pawnbroker or otherwise
portray the person as a pawnbroker unless the person has a valid license
authorizing engagement in the business from the city as provided in this
chapter. Any pawn transaction made without benefit of a license is void.



(Ord. 427, passed 11-18-2014)



§ 111.03  INITIAL LICENSE APPLICATION.



   (A)   General. Applications for pawnbrokers licenses to be issued
under this chapter shall contain information as required on forms prescribed
by the city.



   (B)   Nature of application. The application shall state whether the
applicant is a natural person, corporation, partnership or other form of
organization.



   (C)   Natural person. If applicant is a natural person, the
following information shall be furnished:



      (1)   True name, place and date of birth and street residence
address, and length of time at that address, of applicant;



      (2)   Whether applicant has ever used or been known by a name
other than his or her true name and, if so, what was that name or names, and
information concerning dates and places where used;



      (3)   The name of the business if it is to be conducted under
a designation, name or style other than the full individual name of the
applicant;



      (4)   Kind, name and location of every business or occupation
applicant has been engaged in during the preceding five (5) years;



      (5)   Names and addresses of applicant's employers and
partners, if any, for the preceding five (5) years;



      (6)   Whether applicant has ever been convicted of a felony,
gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor, excluding traffic violations, and if so,
the date and place of conviction and the nature of the offense; and



      (7)   If applicant has not resided in the city for three (3)
years last preceding the date of application, at least four (4) character
references from residents of the State of Minnesota.



   (D)   Partnership. If applicant is a partnership, the names and
addresses of all partners and all information concerning each partner as is
required of a single applicant. A managing partner or partners shall be
designated. The interest of each partner in the business shall be disclosed.



   (E)   Corporation. If applicant is a corporation or other
association, the following information shall be required:



      (1)   Name and, if incorporated, the state of incorporation;



      (2)   A true copy of the certificate of incorporation,
articles of incorporation or association agreement and bylaws and, if a
foreign corporation, a certificate of authority as described in Minnesota
Statutes;



      (3)   The name of the operating officer or proprietor or other
agent in charge of the premises to be licensed, giving all the information
about the person as is required of a single applicant. As used in this
chapter, the term OPERATING OFFICER shall mean the person responsible for the
day-to-day operating decisions of the licensed premises; and



      (4)   A list of all persons who, singly or together with their
spouse, or a parent, brother, sister or child or either of them, own or
control an interest in the corporation or association in excess of five
percent (5%) or who are officers or directors of the corporation or
association; together with their addresses and all information as is required
of a single applicant.



   (F)   Description of premises.



      (1)   Legal description. The exact legal description of the
premises to be licensed, together with a plot plan of the area for which the
license is sought showing dimensions, location of buildings and street access
parking facilities.



      (2)   Street address. The street address of the premises on
which application is made.



   (G)   Other information required. Any other information as the city
shall require.



(Ord. 427, passed 11-18-2014)



§ 111.04  EXECUTION OF APPLICATION.



   If application is by a natural person, it shall be signed and sworn to
by that person; if by a corporation, by an officer thereof; if by a
partnership, by one (1) of the general partners; if by an incorporated
association, by the operating officer or managing officer thereof. If the
applicant is a partnership, the application, license and bond shall be made
and issued in the name of all partners. Any false statement in an application
shall result in denial of the application.



(Ord. 427, passed 11-18-2014)



§ 111.05  FEES.



   (A)   Initial fees. The annual license and investigation fees for a
new license shall be paid in full before the application for the license is
accepted. If any investigation outside the State of Minnesota is required,
the applicant shall be charged the cost which shall be paid by the applicant,
prior to issuance of a license, after deducting the initial investigation
fee, whether or not the license is granted.



   (B)   Renewal fees. The annual license fee for a renewal license
shall be paid in full before the application for the license is accepted.



(Ord. 427, passed 11-18-2014)



§ 111.06  GRANTING LICENSES.



   (A)   At the time of making an initial or renewal application, the
applicant shall, in writing, authorize the city to investigate all facts set
out in the application and do a personal background and criminal record check
on the applicant.



   (B)   Any change, directly or beneficially, in the ownership of any
licensed pawnshop shall require the application for a new license and the new
owner(s) must satisfy all current eligibility requirements.



   (C)   No more than three (3) licenses shall be issued by the city at
any time and priority shall be given to qualified applicants for renewal of
existing license.



(Ord. 427, passed 11-18-2014)



§ 111.07  BOND REQUIRED.



   At the time of filing an application for a license, the applicant shall
file a bond in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000) with the city.
The bond, with a duly licensed surety company as surety thereon, must be
approved as to form by the City Attorney. The bond must be conditioned that
the Licensee shall observe the ordinances of the city, in relation to the
business of pawnbroker, and that the licensee will account for and deliver to
any person legally entitled thereto any articles which may have come into the
possession of the licensee as pawnbroker or, in lieu thereof, the licensee
shall pay the person or persons the reasonable value thereof.



(Ord. 427, passed 11-18-2014)



§ 111.08  LICENSEE ELIGIBILITY.



   (A)   To be eligible for or to maintain a pawnbroker license, a
person must operate lawfully and fairly within the purposes of this chapter
and the applicable local ordinance and:



      (1)   May not be a minor at the time that the application for
a pawnbroker's license is filed; and



      (2)   May not have been convicted of any crime directly
related to the occupation licensed as prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 2,
unless the person has shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation
and present fitness to perform the duties of a licensee under this chapter as
prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, Subd, 3; and



      (3)   Must be of good moral character or repute; and



      (4)   Must be a citizen of the United States or a resident
alien; and



      (5)   No license shall be granted where, in the judgment of
the city, the applicant is not the real party in interest or beneficial owner
of the business operated or to be operated under the license.



   (B)   No license shall be granted or renewed for operation of any
premises on which real estate taxes, assessments or other financial claims of
the city or of the state are delinquent or unpaid.



   (C)   No license shall be granted for operation of any premises
located in a residential district within the city.



(Ord. 427, passed 11-18-2014)



§ 111.09  CONDITIONS OF LICENSES.



   (A)   Payment by check. Payment of more than five hundred dollars
($500) by any licensee for any article deposited, left, purchased, pledged,
or pawned shall be made only by a check, draft or other negotiable or
nonnegotiable instrument or order of withdrawal which is drawn against funds
held by a financial institution.



   (B)   Responsibility of licensee. The conduct of agents or employees
of a licensee, while engaged in performance of their duties for their
principal or employer under the license, shall be deemed the conduct of the
licensee.



   (C)   Penalty for property owner. It is unlawful for any person who
owns or controls any real property to knowingly permit it to be used for pawn
brokering without a license required by this chapter.



   (D)   Business at only one (1) place. A license under this chapter
authorizes the licensee to carry on its business only at the permanent place
of business designated in the license. However, upon written request, the
city may approve an off-site locked and secure storage facility. The licensee
shall permit inspection of the facility in accordance with § 111.15. All
provisions of this chapter regarding recordkeeping and reporting apply to the
facility and its contents. Articles of property shall be stored in compliance
with all provisions of the City Code.



(Ord. 427, passed 11-18-2014)



§ 111.10  PAWN TICKETS; RECORDS.



   (A)   Entries of pawn tickets. At the time of making the pawn or
purchase transaction, the pawnbroker shall immediately and legibly record in
English the following information by using ink or other indelible medium on
forms or in a computerized record approved by the city:



      (1)   A complete and accurate description of the property,
including manufacturer name, brand name, model, and serial or other
identifying number if indicated on the property; and



      (2)   The full name, residence address, telephone number, and
date of birth of the pledgor or seller; and



      (3)   Date and time of pawn or purchase transaction; and



      (4)   The identification number and state of issue from one of
the following forms of identification of the seller or pledgor: current valid
Minnesota driver's license; current valid Minnesota identification card; or
current valid photo identification card issued by another state or a province
of Canada; and



      (5)   Description of the pledgor including approximate height,
weight, sex, and race; and



      (6)   Amount advanced or paid; and



      (7)   The maturity date of the pawn transaction and the amount
due; and



      (8)   The monthly and annual interest rates, including all
pawn fees and charges; and



      (9)   The name or unique identifier of the licensee or
employee that conducted the transaction.



   (B)   Printed pawn ticket. The following shall be printed on all
pawn tickets:



      (1)   The statement that "Any personal property pledged to a
pawnbroker within this state is subject to sale or disposal when there has
been no payment made on the account for a period of not less than sixty (60)
days past the date of the pawn transaction, renewal, or extension; no further
notice is necessary. There is no obligation for the pledgor to redeem pledged
goods.";



      (2)   The statement that "The pledgor of this item attests
that it is not stolen, it has no liens or encumbrances against it, and the
pledgor has the right to sell or pawn the item.";



      (3)   The statement that "This item is redeemable only by the
pledgor to whom the receipt was issued, or any person identified in a written
and notarized authorization to redeem the property identified in the receipt,
or a person identified in writing by the pledgor at the time of the initial
transaction and signed by the pledgor. Written authorization for release of
property to persons other than the original pledgor must be maintained along
with the original transaction record."; and



      (4)   A blank line for the pledgor's signature.



   (C)   Records; retention.



      (1)   The pledgor or seller shall sign a pawn ticket and
receive an exact copy of the pawn ticket.



      (2)   The pawnbroker shall maintain on the premises a record
of all transactions of pledged or purchased goods for a period of four (4)
years. These records shall be a correct copy of the entries made of the pawn
transactions. A pawnbroker shall upon request provide to the appropriate law
enforcement agency a complete and accurate record of pawn transactions. The
pawnbroker shall provide the records in a computerized format, using the
interchange file specification format.



      (3)   For purposes of division (2) above, INTERCHANGE FILE
SPECIFICATION FORMAT means the most current version of the Minneapolis
Automated Property System interchange file specification format.



      (4)   Each licensee shall prepare and deliver to the Chief Law
Enforcement Officer, a report describing all transactions of pledged or
purchased goods. The Chief Law Enforcement Officer shall provide, in writing
to the licensee, the requirements, including a reporting schedule, necessary
to meet the licensee's reporting obligations.



   (D)   Records; prohibitions. A pawnbroker and any clerk, agent, or
employee of a pawnbroker shall not:



      (1)   Make any false entry in the records of pawn transactions;



      (2)   Falsify, obliterate, destroy, or remove from the place
of business the records, books, or accounts relating to the licensee's pawn
transactions;



      (3)   Refuse to allow the appropriate law enforcement agency,
the attorney general, or any other duly authorized state or federal law
enforcement officer to inspect the pawn records or any pawn goods in the
person's possession during the ordinary hours of business or other times
acceptable to both parties;



      (4)   Fail to maintain a record of each pawn transaction for
four (4) years;



      (5)   Accept a pledge or purchase property from a person under
the age of eighteen (18) years;



      (6)   Make any agreement requiring the personal liability of a
pledgor or seller, or waiving any provision of this section, or providing for
a maturity date less than one (1) month after the date of the pawn
transaction;



      (7)   Fail to return pledged goods to a pledgor or seller, or
provide compensation as set forth in § 111.11(C) of this chapter, upon
payment of the full amount due the pawnbroker unless either the date of
redemption is more than sixty (60) days past the date of the pawn
transaction, renewal, or extension and the pawnbroker has sold the pledged
goods pursuant to § 111.11(B) of this chapter, or the pledged goods have
been taken into custody by a court or a law enforcement officer or agency;



      (8)   Sell or lease, or agree to sell or lease, pledged or
purchased goods back to the pledgor or seller in the same, or a related,
transaction;



      (9)   Sell or otherwise charge for insurance in connection
with a pawn transaction; or



      (10)   Remove pledged goods from the pawnshop premises or
other storage place approved by a municipality at any time before the
expiration of the redemption period pursuant to § 111.11(B) of this chapter.
However:



         (a)   A pawnbroker is permitted to return pledged goods
to the borrower at any time during the redemption period; and



         (b)   A pawnbroker is permitted to sell the pledged
goods or remove the pledged goods from the pawnshop premises or other storage
at any time after the expiration of the redemption period set forth in §
111.11(B) of this chapter; and



         (c)   A pawnbroker who purchases goods not involving a
pawn transaction is permitted to sell or remove the purchased goods from the
pawnshop premises or other storage thirty-one (31) days or later from the
purchase transaction date.



   (E)   Disposition of articles.



      (1)   When an article of pawned or pledged properly is
redeemed from a licensee, the records shall contain an account of the
redemption with the date, interest charges accrued, and the total amount for
which the article was redeemed.



      (2)   When an article of purchased or forfeited property is
sold or disposed of by a licensee and the licensee receives one hundred
dollars ($100) or more in payment thereof, the records shall contain an
account of the sale with the date, the amount for which the article was sold,
and the full name, current address and telephone number of the person to whom
sold.



   (F)   Exceptions to reports. No licensee shall be required to
furnish descriptions of any property purchased from manufacturers and
wholesale dealers having an established place of business or of any goods
purchased at an open sale from any bankrupt stock or from any other person
doing business and having an established place of business. Any goods
referred to in this section must be accompanied by a bill of sale or other
evidence of open or legitimate purchase and must be shown to the Chief Law
Enforcement Officer on demand.



(Ord. 427, passed 11-18-2014)



§ 111.11  REDEMPTION.



   (A)   Redemption period.



      (1)   Any person pledging, pawning, or depositing an article
of property for security shall have a minimum of sixty (60) days from the
date of that transaction to redeem the article before it may be forfeited and
sold. During the sixty (60) day holding period, articles shall not be removed
from the licensed premises.



      (2)   Licensees are prohibited from redeeming any article of
property to anyone other than the person to whom the receipt was issued; or
to any person identified in a written and notarized authorization to redeem
the article(s) of property identified in the receipt; or to a person
identified in writing by the pledger at the time of the initial transaction
and signed by the pledger; or with the approval of the Chief Law Enforcement
Officer. Written authorization for release of articles of property to persons
other than the original pledger must be maintained along with the original
transaction record.



   (B)   Effect of nonredemption.



      (1)   A pledgor shall have no obligation to redeem pledged
goods or make any payment on a pawn transaction, pledged goods not redeemed
within at least sixty (60) days of the date of the pawn transaction, renewal,
or extension shall automatically be forfeited to the pawnbroker, and
qualified right, title, and interest in and to the goods shall automatically
vest in the pawnbroker.



      (2)   The pawnbroker's right, title, and interest in the
pledged goods under division (B)(1) above is qualified only by the pledgor's
right, while the pledged goods remain in possession of the pawnbroker and not
sold to a third party, to redeem the goods by paying the loan plus fees
and/or interest accrued up to the date of redemption.



      (3)   A pawn transaction that involves holding only the title
to property is subject to M.S. Ch. 168A or Ch. 336.



   (C)   Redemption; risk of loss. Any person to whom the receipt for
pledged goods was issued, or any person identified in a written and notarized
authorization to redeem the pledged goods identified in the receipt, or any
person identified in writing by the pledgor at the time of the initial
transaction and signed by the pledgor shall be entitled to redeem or
repurchase the pledged goods described on the ticket. In the event the goods
are lost or damaged while in possession of the pawnbroker, the pawnbroker
shall compensate the pledgor, in cash or replacement goods acceptable to the
pledgor, for the fair market value of the lost or damaged goods. Proof of
compensation shall be a defense to any prosecution or civil action.



   (D)   Holding period.



      (1)   No article of property pledged, pawned, or on deposit
for security with any licensee shall be permitted to be redeemed for a period
of seventy-two (72) hours from the date of transaction, excluding Sundays and
holidays, except upon written authorization of the Chief Law Enforcement
Officer.



      (2)   No article of property purchased by a licensee may be
sold or otherwise disposed of for thirty (30) days from the date of the
transaction, except that articles of property for which there exists a valid
certificate of title issued by the State of Minnesota, showing ownership and
registration by the person from whom the article was received, may be sold or
otherwise disposed of ten (10) days from the date of transaction.



   (E)   Restrictions on sale or redemption.



      (1)   Investigative hold. Whenever a law enforcement official
from any agency, acting in the course and scope of their duties, notifies a
licensee not to sell or permit to be redeemed an article of property in the
licensee's possession, the article may not be sold, redeemed or removed from
the premises by the licensee. The investigative hold shall be confirmed in
writing by the originating agency within seventy-two (72) hours and will
remain in effect for fifteen (15) days from the date of notification, or
until the hold is cancelled, or until a law enforcement hold is issued
pursuant to division (E)(2) below, or until the article is confiscated,
whichever comes first.



      (2)   Law enforcement hold. Whenever the Chief Law Enforcement
Officer notifies a licensee not to sell or permit to be redeemed an article
of property in the licensee's possession, the article may not be sold,
redeemed, or removed from the premises by the licensee. The law enforcement
hold shall be confirmed in writing within seventy-two (72) hours and will
remain in effect for ninety (90) days from the date of notification unless
the Chief Law Enforcement Officer determines the hold is still necessary and
notifies the licensee in writing. When a law enforcement hold is no longer
needed, the Chief Law Enforcement Officer shall so notify the licensee in
writing.



      (3)   Confiscation report. If an article of property in the
licensee's possession is determined to be stolen, it may be confiscated and
seized as evidence by any law enforcement officer. A request for restitution
from any person charged in regards to the stolen property confiscated shall
be made on behalf of the licensee. When an article of property is
confiscated, the person doing so shall provide identification upon request of
the licensee, and shall complete a confiscation report providing at a minimum
the name and telephone number of the confiscating agency and investigator,
and the case number of the report related to the confiscation. The
confiscation report shall be included with the reports submitted by the
licensee, for review by the Chief Law Enforcement Officer.



(Ord. 427, passed 11-18-2014)



§ 111.12  RESTRICTED TRANSACTIONS.



   (A)   No licensee shall be open for the transaction of business on
any day of the week before 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m.



   (B)   No licensee shall purchase, accept, or receive any article of
property from any minor or from any person of unsound mind or from an
intoxicated person.



   (C)   No licensee shall purchase, accept, or receive any article of
property which contains an altered or obliterated serial number or an article
of property whose serial number has been removed.



   (D)   No licensee shall purchase, accept, or receive any article of
property knowing, or having reason to know, that the article of property is
encumbered by a security interest. For the purpose of this section, SECURITY
INTEREST means an interest in property which secures payment or other
performance of an obligation.



   (E)   No licensee shall purchase, accept, or receive any article of
property from any person, knowing or having reason to know that the person is
not the true and correct owner of the property.



   (F)   No licensee shall purchase, accept or receive any article of
property from any person, without first having examined a valid photo
driver's license or valid photo identification card issued by the state of
residency of the person.



(Ord. 427, passed 11-18-2014)



§ 111.13  MOTOR VEHICLE TITLE PAWN TRANSACTIONS; SPECIAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, a
pawnbroker who holds a title to a motor vehicle as part of a pawn transaction
shall:



      (1)   Be licensed as a used motor vehicle dealer under M.S. §
168.27, and post such license on the pawnshop premises;



      (2)   Verify that there are no liens or encumbrances against
the motor vehicle with the Department of Public Safety; and



      (3)   Verify that the pledgor has automobile insurance on the
motor vehicle as required by law.



   (B)   A pawnbroker may not sell a motor vehicle covered by a pawn
transaction until ninety (90) days after recovery of the motor vehicle.



(Ord. 427, passed 11-18-2014)



§ 111.14  PERMITTED CHARGES.



   (A)   Notwithstanding any other statute, ordinance, rule, or
regulation, a pawnbroker may contract for and receive a pawnshop charge not
to exceed three percent (3%) per month of the principal amount advanced in
the pawn transaction plus a reasonable fee for storage and services. A fee
for storage and services may not exceed twenty dollars ($20) if the property
is not in the possession of the pawnbroker.



   (B)   The pawnshop charge allowed under division (A) above shall be
deemed earned, due, and owing as of the date of the pawn transaction and a
like sum shall be deemed earned, due, and owing on the same day of the
succeeding month. However, if full payment is made more than two (2) weeks
before the next succeeding date, the pawnbroker shall remit one-half of the
pawnshop charge for that month to the pledgor.



   (C)   Interest shall not be deducted in advance, nor shall any ioan
be divided or split so as to yield greater interest or fees than would be
permitted upon a single, consolidated loan or for otherwise evading any
provisions of this section.



   (D)   Any interest, charge, or fees contracted for or received,
directly or indirectly, in excess of the amount permitted under this section,
shall be uncollectible and the pawn transaction shall be void.



   (E)   A schedule of charges permitted by this section shall be
posted on the pawnshop premises in a place clearly visible to the general
public.



(Ord. 427, passed 11-18-2014)



§ 111.15  INSPECTION.



   (A)   Premises. Any licensee shall, at al! times during the term of
the license, allow the Chief Law Enforcement Officer to enter the premises
where the licensee is carrying on business, including all off-site storage
facilities as authorized in § 111.09(D), during normal business hours,
except in an emergency, for the purpose of inspecting the premises and
inspecting the articles and records therein to locate goods suspected or
alleged to have been stolen and to verify compliance with this chapter or
other applicable laws. No licensee shall conceal any article in his or her
possession from the Chief Law Enforcement Officer.



   (B)   Inspection by law enforcement or claimed owner. All articles
of property coming into the possession of any licensee, under the terms
hereof, shall be open to inspection and right of examination of any law
enforcement officer or any person claiming to have been the owner thereof or
claiming to have had an interest therein when the person is accompanied by a
law enforcement officer.



(Ord. 427, passed 11-18-2014)



§ 111.16  CONDUCT OF PERSONS ON LICENSED PREMISES.



   (A)   No person may pawn, pledge, sell, leave or deposit any article
of property not his or her own; nor shall any person pawn, pledge, sell,
leave or deposit the property of another, whether with permission or without;
nor shall any person pawn, pledge, sell, leave or deposit any article of
property in which another has a security interest with any licensee.



   (B)   No minor may pawn, pledge, sell, leave, or deposit any article
of property with any licensee.



   (C)   No person may pawn, pledge, sell, leave or deposit any article
of property with any licensee without first having presented a valid photo
driver's license or valid photo identification card issued by the state of
residency of the person.



   (D)   No person seeking to pawn, pledge, sell, leave or deposit any
article of property with any licensee shall do any of the following to any
licensee: give a false or fictitious name; give a false date of birth; give a
false or out-of-date address of residence or telephone number; nor present a
false driver's license or identification card.



   (E)   (1)   The licensee shall by adequate signage and separate
written notice inform persons seeking to pawn, pledge, sell, leave, or
deposit articles of property with the licensee of the foregoing requirements.



      (2)   For the purpose of this section, ADEQUATE SIGNAGE shall
be deemed to mean at least one (1) sign, of not less than four (4) square
feet in surface area, comprised of lettering of not less than three-fourths
(3/4) inch in height, posted in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises
and stating substantially the following:



         TO PAWN OR SELL PROPERTY:



            YOU MUST BE AT LEAST EIGHTEEN (18) YEARS OF AGE. YOU
MUST BE THE TRUE OWNER OF THE PROPERTY. THE PROPERTY MUST BE FREE OF ALL
CLAIMS AND LIENS. YOU MUST PRESENT VALID PHOTO IDENTIFICATION. VIOLATION OF
ANY OF THESE REQUIREMENTS IS A CRIME.



      (3)   For the purpose of this section, SEPARATE WRITTEN NOTICE
shall be deemed to mean either the receipt, as required in § 111.10(B), or a
printed form, incorporating a statement to the effect that the person
pawning, pledging, selling, leaving or depositing the article is at least
eighteen (18) years of age; is the true owner of the article; and that the
article is free of all claims and liens, which is acknowledged by way of
signature of the person pawning, pledging, selling, leaving or depositing the
article.



(Ord. 427, passed 11-18-2014)



§ 111.17  CORPORATIONS, PARTNERSHIPS, OR ASSOCIATIONS.



   (A)   (1)   Licenses issued to corporations shall be valid only
as long as there is no change in the officers or ownership interest of the
corporation, unless the change is approved by the Council, in which event the
license shall continue in force until the end of the then-current license
year. Failure to report any change in stockholders, officers, or managers
shall be grounds for the revocation of all licenses held by the corporation.



      (2)   Every corporation licensed under the provisions of this
section shall adopt and maintain in its bylaws a provision that no transfer
of stock is valid or effective unless approved by the City Council and shall
require that all of its certificates of stock shall have printed on the face
thereof: "The transfer of this stock certificate is invalid unless approved
by the City Council of Mora, Minnesota," and failure to comply with this
provision shall be grounds for the revocation of all licenses held by the
corporation.



      (3)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the
issuance of any license to a corporation whose stock is traded on a public
stock exchange.



   (B)   Licenses issued to associations or partnerships shall be valid
only as long as there is no change in the partnership or association
agreement or in the ownership of the partnership or association unless the
change is approved by the Council, in which event the license shall continue
in force until the end of the then-current license year.



   (C)   Corporation, partnerships, or associations shall submit
written notice to the city of any such changes described herein on or before
thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of the change. In case of a
corporation, the licensee shall submit written notice to the city when a
person not listed in the initial application will be acquiring an interest
and shall give all information about the person as is required of a person
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 427, passed 11-18-2014)



§ 111.18  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   Each license shall remain in full force and effect until
surrendered, suspended, revoked, or expired. A license may be suspended or
revoked pursuant to § 110.07 for failure to comply with any provision of
this chapter or other federal, state, or municipal law.



   (B)   No expiration, revocation, suspension, or surrender of any
license shall impair or affect the obligation of any preexisting lawful
contract between the licensee and any pledgor.



   (C)   The Chief Law Enforcement Officer shall be notified of any
licensee whose license has expired or been surrendered, suspended, or revoked
as provided by this chapter.



(Ord. 427, passed 11-18-2014)



§ 111.19  VIOLATION.



   Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 427, passed 11-18-2014)



CHAPTER 112:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section




General Provisions




   112.01   Adoption of state law by reference



   112.02   City may be more restrictive than state law



   112.03   Definitions



   112.04   Nudity on the premises of licensed establishments prohibited



   112.05   Consumption in public places



   112.06   Delivery of liquor



   112.07   Growler sales




Licensing




   112.20   License required



   112.21   Term and expiration of licenses



   112.22   Kinds of liquor licenses



   112.23   Fees



   112.24   Council discretion to grant or deny a license



   112.25   Application for license



   112.26   Description of premises



   112.27   Applications for renewal



   112.28   Transfer of license



   112.29   Investigation



   112.30   Hearing and issuance



   112.31   Restrictions on issuance



   112.32   Conditions of license



   112.33   Hours and days of sale



   112.34   Minors on premises



   112.35   Restrictions on purchase and consumption



   112.36   Compliance checks and inspections



   112.37   Suspension and revocation




Municipal Liquor Stores




   112.50   Application of this subchapter



   112.51   Existing municipal stores continued



   112.52   Location



   112.53   Operation



   112.54   Proof of financial responsibility



   112.55   Issuance of other licenses



 



   112.99   Penalties



Cross-reference:



   Regulation of social hosts, see § 130.06



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 112.01  ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.



   The provisions of M.S. Ch. 340A, as they may be amended from time to
time, with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation,
restrictions on consumption, provisions relating to sales, hours of sale, and
all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and
consumption of intoxicating liquor and 3.2% malt liquor are hereby adopted by
reference and are made a part of this Chapter as if set out in full. It is
the intention of the City Council that all future amendments to M.S. Ch. 340A
are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if they had been in
existence at the time this Chapter is adopted.



§ 112.02  CITY MAY BE MORE RESTRICTIVE THAN STATE LAW.



   The Council is authorized by the provisions of M.S. § 340A.509, as it
may be amended from time to time, to impose, and has imposed in this chapter,
additional restrictions on the sale and possession of alcoholic beverages
within its limits beyond those contained in M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be
amended from time to time.



§ 112.03  DEFINITIONS.



   In addition to the definitions contained in M.S. § 340A.101, as it may
be amended from time to time, the following terms are defined for purposes of
this chapter:



   BEER.  Synonymous with the term “non-intoxicating malt liquor,”
meaning any malt liquor containing not less than 0.5% alcohol by volume nor
more than 3.2% alcohol by weight.



   BREWER.  A person who manufactures 3.2% malt liquor or intoxicating
malt liquor for sale.



   BREW PUB.  A brewer who also holds one (1) or more retail on-sale
licenses with a facility that includes a restaurant that seats fifty (50)
guests at one (1) time and sells at retail fewer than three thousand five
hundred (3,500) barrels malt liquor in a year for consumption on or off the
premises.



   GROWLER.  A reusable sixty-four (64) ounce container or seven hundred
and fifty (750) milliliter bottle for the purchase of malt liquor, at
off-sale, from a brew pub or brewer taproom.



   LIQUOR.  As used in this chapter, without modification by the words
“intoxicating” or “3.2 percent malt,” includes both intoxicating
liquor and 3.2 percent malt liquor.



   RESTAURANT. The statutory definition is here amplified to include a
requirement for seating of not less than fifty (50) guests at one (1) time,
and the establishment shall be licensed for food service by the Minnesota
Department of Health.



(Am. Ord. 438, passed 8-4-2015)



§ 112.04  NUDITY ON THE PREMISES OF LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The City Council finds that it is in the best interests of the
public health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the city that
nudity is prohibited as provided in this section on the premises of any
establishment licensed under this chapter. This is to protect and assist the
owners, operators, and employees of the establishment, as well as patrons and
the public in general, from harm stemming from the physical immediacy and
combination of alcohol, nudity, and sex. The Council especially intends to
prevent any subliminal endorsement of sexual harassment or activities likely
to lead to the possibility of various criminal conduct, including
prostitution, sexual assault, and disorderly conduct. The Council also finds
that the prohibition of nudity on the premises of any establishment licensed
under this chapter, as set forth in this section, reflects the prevailing
community standards of the city.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person
or persons on the licensed premises when the person does not have his or her
buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a non-transparent
material. It is unlawful for any person to be on the licensed premises when
the person does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals
covered with a non-transparent material.



   (C) A violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable as provided
by law, and is justification for revocation or suspension of any liquor,
wine, or 3.2% malt liquor license or the imposition of a civil penalty under
the provisions of § 112.99(B).



Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.05  CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   No person shall consume intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor on any
public street, sidewalk, parking lot or alley, or in any public place other
than on the premises of an establishment licensed under this chapter, or
where the consumption and display of liquor is lawfully permitted, unless
expressly permitted by ordinance or action of the City Council.



(Ord. 404, passed 4-5-2011)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.06  DELIVERY OF LIQUOR.



   (A)   Definition. As used in this section the term INTOXICATING
LIQUOR means and includes ethyl alcohol and includes distilled, fermented,
spirituous, vinuous, and malt beverages containing in excess of 3.2% alcohol
by weight.



   (B)   Prohibition on transportation. Intoxicating liquor shall not
be transported or be delivered by any means whatsoever by any person, firm,
or corporation into or within the city except as may be permitted by this
section.



   (C)   Exceptions. The following circumstances are exempt from the
prohibition:



      (1)   Delivery or transportation of intoxicating liquor by
persons, firms, or corporations licensed to engage in the sale and delivery
of intoxicating liquor at wholesale is hereby allowed and permitted within
the city, provided that the deliveries are made only to those persons, firms,
or corporations which are licensed to engage in the sale of intoxicating
liquors and meet all federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, and
regulations concerning the sale of alcoholic beverages;



      (2)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the delivery of
sacramental wines to churches within the city;



      (3)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the delivery of
those products defined as intoxicating liquors in this section to drug stores
for the use of the products in the preparation of drugs and medicines; and



      (4)   This section shall not be construed to prohibit or
prevent an individual from transporting liquor for his or her own use,
provided that the individual has obtained and is transporting the liquor as
is otherwise permitted by law.



(Ord. 390, passed 2-2-2010)



§ 112.07  GROWLER SALES.



   (A)   Holders of a brew pub off-sale license or small brewer
off-sale license shall sell malt liquor only in growlers.



   (B)   The growlers shall bear a twist-type closure, cork, stopper,
or plug. At the time of the sale, a paper or plastic adhesive band, strip, or
sleeve shall be applied to the container or bottle and extended over the top
of the twist-type closure, cork, stopper, or plug forming a seal that must be
broken upon opening of the container or bottle. The adhesive band, strip, or
sleeve shall bear the name and address of the brewer. The containers or
bottles shall be identified as malt liquor, contain the name of the malt
liquor, bear the name and address of the brewer selling the malt liquor, and
shall be considered intoxicating liquor unless the alcoholic content is
labeled as otherwise in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Rules,
Part 7515.1100.



   (C)   Off-sale hours shall be limited to the legal hours for
off-sale at exclusive liquor stores except Sunday sales shall be allowable
from 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.



(Ord. 438, passed 8-4-2015)



LICENSING



§ 112.20  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person, except a wholesaler or manufacturer to the extent authorized
under state license, shall directly or indirectly deal in, sell or keep for
sale in the city any liquor without a license to do so as provided in this
subchapter.



§ 112.21  TERM AND EXPIRATION OF LICENSES.



   Each license shall be issued for a maximum period of one (1) year. All
licenses, except temporary licenses, shall expire on August 31 of each year.
All licenses shall expire on the same date. Temporary licenses expire
according to their terms. Consumption and display permits issued by the
Commissioner of Public Safety, and the accompanying city consent to the
permit, shall expire on March 31 of each year.



§ 112.22  KINDS OF LIQUOR LICENSES.



   The Council is authorized to issue the following licenses and permits.
The Council of a city which has a municipal liquor store is authorized to
issue only those licenses specified in § 112.55.



   (A)   3.2% malt liquor on-sale licenses, which may be issued only to
golf courses, restaurants, hotels, clubs, bowling centers, and establishments
used exclusively for the sale of 3.2% malt liquor with the incidental sale of
tobacco and soft drinks.



   (B)   3.2% malt liquor off-sale license.



   (C)   Temporary on-sale 3.2% malt liquor licenses which may be
issued only to a club, charitable, religious, or non-profit organization.



   (D)   On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, which may be issued to
the following establishments as defined by M.S. § 340A.101, as it may be
amended from time to time, and this chapter: hotels, restaurants, bowling
centers, theaters, clubs or congressionally chartered veterans organizations,
and exclusive liquor stores. Club licenses may be issued only with the
approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety. The fee for club licenses
established by the Council under § 112.23 shall not exceed the amounts
provided for in M.S. § 340A.408, Subd. 2b, as it may be amended from time to
time. The Council may in its sound discretion authorize a retail on-sale
licensee to dispense intoxicating liquor off the licensed premises at a
community festival held within the city under the provisions of M.S. §
340A.404, Subd. 4b, as it may be amended from time to time. The Council may
in its sound discretion authorize a retail on-sale licensee to dispense
intoxicating liquor off the licensed premises at any convention, banquet,
conference, meeting, or social affair conducted on the premises of a sports,
convention, or cultural facility owned by the city, under the provisions of
M.S. § 340A.404, Subd. 4a, as it may be amended from time to time; however,
the licensee is prohibited from dispensing intoxicating liquor to any person
attending or participating in an amateur athletic event being held on the
premises.



   (E)   Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses are approved under
the authority granted to the City Council by the voters of the city pursuant
to M.S. § 340A.504(d), as it may be amended from time to time, through a
special election held on November 7,1995. This authorization permits the
Council to issue licenses for the consumption of intoxicating liquor, beer,
and wine on Sundays between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m. Mondays.
Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued only to a
restaurant as defined in § 112.03, club, bowling center, or hotel which has
a seating capacity of at least fifty (50) persons, which holds an on-sale
intoxicating liquor license, and which serves liquor only in conjunction with
the service of food.



   (F)   Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, with the
approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety, which may be issued only in
connection with a social event sponsored by a club, charitable, religious, or
other nonprofit corporation that has existed for at least three (3) years. No
license shall be for longer than four (4) consecutive days, and the city
shall issue no more than twelve (12) days worth of temporary licenses to any
one (1) organization in one (1) calendar year.



   (G)   On-sale wine licenses, with the approval of the Commissioner
of Public Safety to: theaters, restaurants that have facilities for seating
at least twenty-five (25) guests at one (1) time and meet the criteria of
M.S. § 340A.404, Subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to time, and which
meet the definition of restaurant in § 112.03; and to licensed bed and
breakfast facilities which meet the criteria in M.S. § 340A.401, Subd. 1, as
it may be amended from time to time. The fee for an on-sale wine license
established by the Council under the provisions of § 112.23 shall not exceed
one-half (1/2) of the license fee charged for an on-sale intoxicating liquor
license. The holder of an on-sale wine license who also holds an on-sale 3.2%
malt liquor license is authorized to sell malt liquor with a content over
3.2% (strong beer) without an additional license.



   (H)   One day consumption and display permits with the approval of
the Commissioner of Public Safety to a nonprofit organization in conjunction
with a social activity in the city sponsored by the organization.



   (I)   Approval of the issuance of a consumption and display permit
by the Commissioner of Public Safety.



   (J)   Brew Pub (On-Sale) licenses, are the same as on-sale
intoxicating liquor licenses that additionally authorizes the on-sale of malt
liquor produced by the brewer for consumption on the premises. All licenses
are issued as provided by M.S. § 340A.24, as may be amended from time to
time, and M.S. § 340A.101, Subd. 3a, as may be amended from time to time.



   (K)   Brew Pub (Off-Sale) licenses, authorizes the off-sale of malt
liquor produced by the brewer for consumption off the premises with the
approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety. All licenses are issued as
provided by M.S. § 340A.24, Subd. 2, as may be amended from time to time.



   (L)   Brewer Taproom licenses, authorizes the on-sale of malt liquor
produced by the brewer for consumption on the premises. All licenses are
issued as provided by M.S. § 340A.26, as may be amended from time to time.



   (M)   Small Brewer Off-Sale licenses, authorizes the off-sale of
malt liquor produced by the brewer for consumption off the premises with the
approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety. All licenses are issued as
provided by M.S. § 340A.28, as may be amended from time to time.



(Am. Ord. 376, passed 1-20-2009; Am. Ord. 437, passed 8-4-2015; Am. Ord. 438,
passed 8-4-2015)



§ 112.23  FEES.



   (A)   No license or other fee established by the city shall exceed
any limit established by M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to
time, for a liquor license.



   (B)    Fees for licenses under this chapter shall be in amounts set
by the City Council from time to time.  The license fee may not exceed the
cost of issuing the license and other costs directly related to the
enforcement of the liquor laws of this chapter.  No liquor license fee shall
be increased without providing mailed notice of  a hearing on the proposed
increase to all affected licensees at lest thirty (30) days before the
hearing.



§ 112.24  COUNCIL DISCRETION TO GRANT OR DENY A LICENSE.



   The Council in its sound discretion may either grant or deny the
application for any license or for the transfer or renewal of any license. No
applicant has a right to a license under this chapter.



§ 112.25  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   Form.  Every application for a license issued under this
chapter shall be on a form provided by the city. Every application shall
state the name of the applicant, the applicant's age, representations as to
the applicant's character, with references as the Council may require, the
type of license applied for, the business in connection with which the
proposed license will operate and its location, a description of the
premises, whether the applicant is owner and operator of the business, how
long the applicant has been in that business at that place, and other
information as the Council may require from time to time. An application for
an on-sale intoxicating liquor license shall be in the form prescribed by the
Commissioner of Public Safety and shall also contain the information required
in this section. The form shall be verified and filed with the city. No
person shall make a false statement in an application.



   (B)   Financial responsibility.  Prior to the issuance of any
license under this chapter, the applicant shall demonstrate proof of
financial responsibility as defined in M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended
from time to time, with regard to liability under M.S. § 340A.801, as it may
be amended from time to time. This proof will be filed with the city and the
Commissioner of Public Safety. Any liability insurance policy filed as proof
of financial responsibility under this section shall conform to M.S. §
340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time. Operation of a business
which is required to be licensed by this chapter without having on file with
the city at all times effective proof of financial responsibility is a cause
for revocation of the license.



Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.26  DESCRIPTION OF PREMISES.



   The application shall specifically describe the compact and contiguous
premises within which liquor may be dispensed and consumed. The description
may not include any parking lot or sidewalk.



§ 112.27  APPLICATIONS FOR RENEWAL.



   Before a license issued under this chapter is to be renewed, an
application for renewal shall be filed with the city. The decision whether or
not to renew a license rests within the sound discretion of the Council. No
licensee has a right to have the license renewed.



§ 112.28  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   No license issued under this chapter may be transferred without the
approval of the Council.  Any transfer of stock of a corporate licensee is
deemed to be a transfer of the license, and a transfer of stock without prior
Council approval is a ground for revocation of the license. An application to
transfer a license shall be treated the same as an application for a new
license, and all of the provisions of this code applying to applications for
a license shall apply.



Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.29  INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   Preliminary background and financial investigation.  On an
initial application for a license, on an application for transfer of a
license and, in the sound discretion of the Council that it is in the public
interest to do so, on an application for renewal of a license, the city shall
conduct a preliminary background and financial investigation of the applicant
or it may contract with the Commissioner of Public Safety for the
investigation. The applicant shall pay with the application an investigation
fee in an amount set by the City Council from time to time which shall be in
addition to any license fee. If the cost of the preliminary investigation is
less than the investigation fee, the unused balance shall be returned to the
applicant. The results of the preliminary investigation shall be sent to the
Commissioner of Public Safety if the application is for an on-sale
intoxicating liquor license or an on-sale wine license.



   (B)   Comprehensive background and financial investigation.  If the
results of a preliminary investigation warrant, in the sound discretion of
the Council, a comprehensive background and financial investigation, the
Council may either conduct the investigation itself or contract with the
Commissioner of Public Safety for the investigation. The investigation fee
for this comprehensive background and financial investigation to be paid by
the applicant shall be in an amount set by the City Council from time to
time, less any amount paid for the initial investigation if the investigation
is to be conducted within the state, and in an amount set by the City Council
from time to time, less any amount paid for the initial investigation, if the
investigation is required outside the state. The unused balance of the fee
shall be returned to the applicant whether or not the application is denied.
The fee shall be paid in advance of any investigation and the amount actually
expended on the investigation shall not be refundable in the event the
application is denied. The results of the comprehensive investigation shall
be sent to the Commissioner of Public Safety if the application is for an
on-sale intoxicating liquor license or an on-sale wine license.



§ 112.30  HEARING AND ISSUANCE.



   The Council shall investigate all facts set out in the application and
not investigated in the preliminary or comprehensive background and financial
investigations. Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or
against the granting of the license. After the investigation and hearing, the
Council shall in its sound discretion grant or deny the application. No
license shall become effective until the proof of financial security has been
approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.



§ 112.31  RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE.



   (A)   Each license shall be issued only to the applicant for the
premises described in the application.



   (B)   Not more than one (1) license shall be directly or indirectly
issued within the city to any one (1) person.



   (C)   No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any
premises on which taxes, assessments, utility charges, service charges, or
other financial claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid.



   (D)   No license shall be issued for any place or any business
ineligible for a license under state law.



   (E)   No license shall be issued to any person who is not a resident
of the state. If the applicant is a corporation, all of the shareholders
shall be residents of the state. The provisions of this division (E) shall
not apply to any license existing on the effective date of this chapter or to
the renewal of an existing license.



(Am. Ord. 430, passed 3-17-2015)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.32  CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.



   The failure of a licensee to meet any one (1) of the conditions of the
license specified below shall result in a suspension of the license until the
condition is met.



   (A)   A licensee shall require all of its employees or agents who
serve alcoholic beverages at a licensed premises to successfully complete an
annual program of responsible beverage server training, except as indicated
below:



      (1)   This provision applies to licensees holding any
alcoholic beverage license.



      (2)   The city shall provide a list of responsible beverage
server training programs approved by the City Council to licensees.



      (3)   Within ninety (90) days after employment, every person
selling or serving alcoholic beverages in a licensed premises shall
successfully complete said training.



      (4)   Certificates of attendance indicating proof of such
training shall be maintained on the licensed premises. A copy of said
certificates shall be provided to the city at the time of application for
renewal of license. Any renewal application not containing the certificates
of training attendance shall be deemed incomplete.



      (5)   Organizations applying for temporary on-sale 3.2% malt
liquor licenses or temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses shall
provide a certificate of attendance indicating proof of training for the
member of the organization responsible for alcohol beverage service at the
organization's event. This person shall be responsible for training all
servers of alcoholic beverages. A list of the names of those trained and
serving at the event shall be prepared by the responsible person and
submitted to the city within ten (10) business days of the end of the event.
Failure to do so shall disqualify the organization from obtaining licenses
from the city in the future.



      (6)   Attendance at the training session does not alleviate
applicants from civil and/or criminal penalties for a violation of this
chapter.



   (B)   Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of the place of
business and the conditions of sobriety and order in it. The act of any
employee on the licensed premises is deemed the act of the licensee as well,
and the licensee shall be liable to all penalties provided by this chapter
and the law equally with the employee.



   (C)   Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health officer,
city employee, or any other person designated by the Council to conduct
compliance checks and to otherwise enter, inspect, and search the premises of
the licensee during business hours and after business hours during the time
when customers remain on the premises without a warrant.



   (D)   No on-sale establishment shall display liquor to the public
during hours when the sale of liquor is prohibited.



   (E)   Compliance with financial responsibility requirements of state
law and of this chapter is a continuing condition of any license.



(Am. Ord. 447, passed 12-6-2016)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.33  HOURS AND DAYS OF SALE.



   (A)   The hours of operation and days of sale shall be those set by
M.S. § 340A.504, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   No person shall consume nor shall any on-sale licensee permit
any consumption of intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor in an on-sale
licensed premises more than thirty (30) minutes after the time when a sale
can legally occur.



   (C)   No on-sale licensee shall permit any glass, bottle, or other
container containing intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor to remain upon
any table, bar, stool, or other place where customers are served, more than
thirty (30) minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur.



   (D)   No person, other than the licensee and any employee, shall
remain on the on-sale licensed premises more than thirty (30) minutes after
the time when a sale can legally occur.



   (E)   Any violation of any condition of this section may be grounds
for revocation or suspension of the license.



Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.34  MINORS ON PREMISES.



   (A)   No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be
employed in any rooms constituting the place in which intoxicating liquors or
3.2% malt liquor are sold at retail on sale, except that persons under the
age of eighteen (18) may be employed as musicians or to perform the duties of
a bus person or dishwashing services in places defined as a restaurant,
hotel, motel or other multi-purpose building serving food in rooms in which
intoxicating liquors or 3.2% malt liquor are sold at retail on sale.



   (B)   No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years may enter a
licensed establishment except to work, consume meals on premises that qualify
as a restaurant, or attend social functions that are held in a portion of the
premises where liquor is not sold.



Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.35  RESTRICTIONS ON PURCHASE AND CONSUMPTION.



   No person shall mix or prepare liquor for consumption in any public
place of business unless it has a license to sell on-sale, or a permit from
the Commissioner of Public Safety under the provisions of M.S. § 340A.414,
as it may be amended from time to time, which has been approved by the
Council, and no person shall consume liquor in any such place.



Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.36  COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS.



   All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by police officers or
other authorized city official during regular business hours.  From time to
time, but at least once per year, the city shall conduct compliance checks by
engaging, with the written consent of their parents or guardians, minors over
the age of fifteen (15) years but less than eighteen (18) years to enter the
licensed premise to attempt to purchase alcoholic beverages.  Minors used
for the purpose of compliance checks shall be supervised by city designated
law enforcement officers or other designated city personnel.  Minors used
for compliance checks shall not be guilty of unlawful possession of alcoholic
beverages when those items are obtained as a part of the compliance check. 
No minor used in compliance checks shall attempt to use a false
identification misrepresenting the minor's age, and all minors lawfully
engaged in a compliance check shall answer all questions about the minor's
age asked by the licensee or his or her employee and shall produce any
identification, if any exists, for which he or she is asked.  Nothing in
this section shall prohibit compliance checks authorized by state or federal
laws for educational, research, or training purposes, or required for the
enforcement of a particular state or federal law.



Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.37  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Council shall either suspend for a period not to exceed
sixty (60) days or revoke any liquor license upon finding that the licensee
has failed to comply with any applicable statute, regulation, or provision of
this chapter relating to liquor. Except in cases of lapse of proof of
financial responsibility, no suspension or revocation shall take effect until
the licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to the
Administrative Procedures Act, M.S. §§ 14.57 to 14.70, as it may be amended
from time to time. The Council may act as the hearing body under that act, or
it may contract with the Office of Hearing Examiners for a hearing officer.



   (B)   The following are the minimum periods of suspension or
revocation which shall be imposed by the Council for violations of the
provisions of this chapter or M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time
to time, or any rules promulgated under that chapter as they may be amended
from time to time.



      (1)   For commission of a felony related to the licensed
activity, sale of alcoholic beverages while the license is under suspension,
sale of intoxicating liquor where the only license is for 3.2% malt liquor,
or violation of § 112.04, the license shall be revoked.



      (2)   The license shall be suspended by the Council after a
finding under division (A) above that the licensee has failed to comply with
any applicable statute, rule, or provision of this chapter for at least the
minimum periods as follows:



         (a)   For the first violation within any three (3) year
period, one (1) day suspension in addition to any criminal or civil penalties
which may be imposed;



         (b)   For a second violation within any three (3) year
period, three (3) consecutive days suspension in addition to any criminal or
civil penalties which may be imposed;



         (c)   For the third violation within any three (3) year
period, seven (7) consecutive days suspension in addition to any criminal or
civil penalties which may be imposed; and



         (d)   For a fourth violation within any three (3) year
period, the license shall be revoked.



      (3)   The suspension or revocation of the license shall begin
at 12:01 a.m. on the Thursday following the Council meeting at which the
licensee had the opportunity for a hearing under division (A) above.



   (C)   Lapse of required proof of financial responsibility shall
effect an immediate suspension of any license issued pursuant to this chapter
or state law without further action of the Council. Notice of cancellation or
lapse of a current liquor liability policy shall also constitute notice to
the licensee of the impending suspension of the license. The holder of a
license who has received notice of lapse of required insurance or of
suspension or revocation of a license may request a hearing thereon and, if a
request is made in writing to the Clerk, a hearing before the Council shall
be granted within ten (10) days. Any suspension under this division shall
continue until the Council determines that the financial responsibility
requirements of state law and this chapter have again been met.



   (D)   The provisions of § 112.99 pertaining to administrative
penalty shall be imposed in addition to any suspension or revocation under
this chapter.



   (E)   The provisions of this section shall not be imposed upon any
licensee who has failed a city initiated compliance check where minors are
utilized to attempt to purchase liquor or beer under § 112.36.



(Ord. 370, passed 5-20-2008)  Penalty, see § 112.99



MUNICIPAL LIQUOR STORES



§ 112.50  APPLICATION OF THIS SUBCHAPTER.



   This subchapter, consisting of §§ 112.50 through 112.55, applies only
to the municipal liquor store.



§ 112.51  EXISTING MUNICIPAL STORES CONTINUED.



   If the city has in existence on the effective date of this chapter a
municipal liquor store for the sale of intoxicating liquor, the store is
continued. Except as provided in § 112.55, no intoxicating liquor may be
sold at retail elsewhere in the city.



Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.52  LOCATION.



   The municipal liquor store shall be located at a suitable place in the
city as the Council determines by motion. However, no premises upon which
taxes, assessments, or other public charges are delinquent shall be leased
for municipal liquor store purposes. The Council shall have the right to
establish additional off-sale and on-sale stores at other locations as it
may, from time to time, by motion, determine.



§ 112.53  OPERATION.



   (A)   Manager.  The municipal liquor store shall be in the
immediate charge of a Liquor Store Manager selected by the Council and paid
compensation as is fixed by the Council. The Manager shall not be a person
who would be prohibited by law or any provision of this chapter from being
eligible for an intoxicating liquor license. The Manager shall furnish a
surety bond to the city, conditioned upon the faithful discharge of the
duties of the office, in a sum as specified by the Council. The bond premium
may be paid by the city or the Manager, in the discretion of the Council. The
Manager shall operate the municipal liquor store under the Council's
direction and shall perform those duties in connection with the store as may
be established by the Council. The Manager shall be responsible to the
Council for the conduct of the store in full compliance with this chapter and
with the laws relating to the sale of intoxicating liquor and 3.2% malt
liquor.



   (B)   Other employees.  The Council may also appoint additional
employees as may be required and shall fix their compensation. All employees,
including the Manager, shall hold their positions at the pleasure of the
Council.  No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be employed in the
store.  The Council may require the employees to furnish surety bonds
conditioned for the faithful discharge of their duties in a sum as specified
by the Council.  The premium on the bond may be paid by the city or the
employees, as the Council determines.



   (C)   Municipal liquor store fund.  All of the revenues received
from the operation of a municipal liquor store shall be deposited in a
municipal liquor store fund from which all ordinary operating expenses,
including compensation of the Manager and employees, shall be paid. 
Surpluses accumulating in the fund may be transferred to the general fund of
the city or to any other appropriate fund of the city by resolution of the
Council, and may be expended for any municipal purpose. The handling of
municipal liquor store receipts and disbursements shall comply with the
procedure prescribed by law and charter for the receipts and disbursements of
city funds generally.



   (D)   Financial statement.  The Council shall provide within ninety
(90) days following the end of the calendar year for publication a balance
sheet using generally accepted accounting procedures and a statement of
operations of the municipal liquor store for that year. The balance sheet and
statement shall be published in accordance with the provisions of M.S. §
471.6985, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (E)   Hours of operation.  The hours during which the sale of
intoxicating liquor may be sold shall be as provided in § 112.33.  No
person, other than the Manager or a store employee, may remain in the
municipal liquor store longer than one-half (½) hour after the time when the
sale of intoxicating liquor must cease.



Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.54  PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   The city shall demonstrate proof of financial responsibility required
by licensees of retail intoxicating liquor establishments under the
provisions of M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time.



§ 112.55  ISSUANCE OF OTHER LICENSES.



   State law does not authorize the issuance of off-sale licenses for the
sale of intoxicating liquor by cities which operate a municipal liquor
dispensary.



§ 112.99  PENALTIES.



   (A)   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or M.S.
Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, or any rules promulgated
under that chapter, as they may be amended from time to time, is guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided by law.



   (B)   The Council shall impose a civil penalty of up to two thousand
dollars ($2,000) for each violation of M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended
from time to time, and of this chapter. Conviction of a violation in a court
of law is not required in order for the Council to impose the civil penalty.
A hearing under the Administrative Procedures Act, M.S. §§ 14.57 to 14.70,
as it may be amended from time to time, is not required before the penalty is
imposed, but the Council shall hold a hearing on the proposed violation and
the proposed penalty and hear any person who wishes to speak. Non-payment of
the penalty is grounds for suspension or revocation of the license. The
following is the minimum schedule of presumptive civil penalties which must
be imposed in addition to any suspension or revocation:



      (1)   For the first violation within any three (3) year
period, five hundred dollars ($500);



      (2)   For the second violation within any three (3) year
period, one thousand dollars ($1,000); and



      (3)   For the third and subsequent violations within any three
(3) year period, two thousand dollars ($2,000).



   (C)   The term VIOLATION, as used in this section, includes any and
all violations of the provisions of this chapter, or of M.S. Ch. 340A, as it
may be amended from time to time, or any rules promulgated under that chapter
as they may be amended from time to time. The number of violations shall be
determined on the basis of the history of violations for the preceding three
(3) year period.



(Ord. 370, passed 5-20-2008)



CHAPTER 113:  TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



Section



   113.01   Definitions



   113.02   Exceptions to definitions



   113.03   Licensing; exemptions



   113.04   License ineligibility



   113.05   License suspension and revocation



   113.06   License transferability



   113.07   Registration



   113.08   Prohibited activities



   113.09   Exclusion by placard



§ 113.01  DEFINITIONS.



   Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all
terms shall be given their commonly accepted definitions.  For the purpose
of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PEDDLER.  A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door,
business-to-business, street-to- street, or any other type of place-to-place,
for the purpose of offering for sale, displaying or exposing for sale,
selling or attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the
goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personnel property that the
person is carrying or otherwise transporting.  The term PEDDLER shall mean
the same as the term “hawker.”



   PERSON.  Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation,
partnership or association.  As applied to groups, organizations,
corporations, partnerships and associations, the term shall include each
member, officer, partner, associate, agent or employee.



   REGULAR BUSINESS DAY.  Any day during which the city hall is normally
open for the purpose of conducting public business.  Holidays defined by
state law shall not be counted as regular business days.



   SOLICITOR.  A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door,
business-to-business, street- to-street, or any other type of place-to-place,
for the purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares,
products, merchandise, other personal property or services of which he or she
may be carrying or transporting samples, or that may be described in a
catalog or by other means, and for which delivery or performance shall occur
at a later time.  The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a
person from the scope of this provision if the actual purpose of the person's
activity is to obtain or attempt to obtain orders as discussed above.  The
term shall mean the same as the term “canvasser.”



   TRANSIENT MERCHANT.  A person who temporarily sets up business out of
a vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent, other portable shelter, or empty store
front for the purpose of exposing or displaying for sale, selling or
attempting to sell, and delivering, goods, wares, products, merchandise or
other personal property and who does not remain or intend to remain in any
one (1) location for more than fourteen (14) consecutive days.



§ 113.02  EXCEPTIONS TO DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of the requirements of this chapter, the terms
PEDDLER, SOLICITOR, and TRANSIENT MERCHANT shall not apply to any person
selling or attempting to sell at wholesale any goods, wares, products,
merchandise or other personal property to a retailer of the items being sold
by the wholesaler.  The terms also shall not apply to any person who makes
initial contacts with other people for the purpose of establishing or trying
to establish a regular customer delivery route for the delivery of perishable
food and dairy products such as baked goods and milk, nor shall they apply to
any person making deliveries of perishable food and dairy products to the
customers on his or her established regular delivery route.



   (B)   In addition, persons conducting the type of sales commonly
known as garage sales, rummage sales, or estate sales, as well as those
persons participating in an organized multi-person bazaar or flea market,
shall be exempt from the definitions of PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, and TRANSIENT
MERCHANTS, as shall be anyone conducting an auction as a properly licensed
auctioneer, or any officer of the court conducting a court-ordered sale. 
Exemption from the definitions for the scope of this chapter shall not excuse
any person from complying with any other applicable statutory provision or
local ordinance.



   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to prohibit or
restrict door-to-door advocacy. Persons engaging in door-to-door advocacy
shall not be required to register as solicitors under § 113.07. The term
DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCACY includes door-to-door canvassing and pamphleteering as
vehicles for the dissemination of religious, political and other ideas.



§ 113.03  LICENSING; EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   County license required.  No person shall conduct business as
a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant within the city limits without
first having obtained the appropriate license from the county as required by
M.S. Ch. 329 as it may be amended from time to time, if the county issues a
license for the



activity.



   (B)   City license required.  Except as otherwise provided for by
this chapter, no person shall conduct business as either a peddler or a
transient merchant without first having obtained a license from the city. 
Solicitors need not be licensed, but are still required to register pursuant
to § 113.07.



   (C)   Application.  Application for a city license to conduct
business as a peddler or transient merchant shall be made at least fourteen
(14) regular business days before the applicant desires to begin conducting
business.  Application for a license shall be made on a form approved by the
City Council and available from the office of the City Clerk.  All
applications shall be signed by the applicant.  All applications shall
include the following information:



      (1)   Applicant's full legal name.



      (2)   All other names under which the applicant conducts
business or to which applicant officially answers.



      (3)   A physical description of the applicant (hair color, eye
color, height, weight, distinguishing marks and features, and the like).



      (4)   Full address of applicant's permanent residence.



      (5)   Telephone number of applicant's permanent residence.



      (6)   Full legal name of any and all business operations
owned, managed or operated by applicant, or for which the applicant is an
employee or agent.



      (7)   Full address of applicant's regular place of business
(if any).



      (8)   Any and all business related telephone numbers of the
applicant.



      (9)   The type of business for which the applicant is applying
for a license.



      (10)   Whether the applicant is applying for an annual or
daily license.



      (11)   The dates during which the applicant intends to conduct
business, and if the applicant is applying for a daily license, the number of
days he or she will be conducting business in the city (maximum fourteen (14)
consecutive days).



      (12)   Any and all addresses and telephone numbers where the
applicant can be reached while conducting business within the city, including
the location where a transient merchant intends to set up business.



      (13)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been
convicted within the last five (5) years of any felony, gross misdemeanor, or
misdemeanor for violation of any state or federal statute or any local
ordinance, other than traffic offenses.



      (14)   A list of the three (3) most recent locations where the
applicant has conducted business as a peddler or transient merchant.



      (15)   Proof of any requested county license.



      (16)   Written permission of the property owner or the
property owner's agent for any property to be used by a transient merchant.



      (17)   A general description of the items to be sold or
services to be provided.



      (18)   All additional information deemed necessary by the City
Council.



      (19)   The applicant's driver's license number or other
acceptable form of identification.



      (20)   The license plate number, registration information and
vehicle identification number for any vehicle to be used in conjunction with
the licensed business and a description of the vehicle.



   (D)   Fee.  All applications for a license under this chapter shall
be accompanied by the fee in an amount set by the City Council from time to
time.



   (E)   Procedure.  Upon receipt of the completed application and
payment of the license fee, the City Clerk, within two (2) regular business
days, must determine if the application is complete.  An application is
determined to be complete only if all required information is provided.  If
the City Clerk determines that the application is incomplete, the City Clerk
must inform the applicant of the required necessary information that is
missing.  If the application is complete, the City Clerk must order any
investigation, including background checks, necessary to verify the
information provided with the application.  Within ten (10) regular business
days of receiving a complete application the City Clerk must issue the
license unless there exist grounds for denying the license under § 113.04,
in which case the Clerk must deny the license. If the City Clerk denies the
license, the applicant must be notified in writing of the decision, the
reason for denial, and of the applicant's right to appeal the denial by
requesting, within twenty (20) days of receiving notice of rejection, a
public hearing before the City Council.  The City Council shall hear the
appeal within twenty (20) days of the date of the request.  The decision of
the City Council following the public hearing can be appealed by petitioning
the Minnesota Court of Appeals for a writ of certiorari.



   (F)   Duration.  An annual license granted under this chapter shall
be valid for one (1)  calendar year from the date of issue.  All other
licenses granted under this chapter shall be valid only during the time
period indicated on the license.



   (G)   License exemptions.



      (1)   No license shall be required of any person going from
house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or
other type of place-to-place when the activity is for the purpose of
exercising that person's State or Federal Constitutional rights such as the
freedom of speech, press, religion and the like, except that this exemption
may be lost if the person's exercise of Constitutional rights is merely
incidental to a commercial activity.



      (2)   Professional fund raisers working on behalf of an
otherwise exempt person or group shall not be exempt from the licensing
requirements of this chapter.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.04  LICENSE INELIGIBILITY.



   The following shall be grounds for denying a license under this chapter:



   (A)   The failure of the applicant to obtain and show proof of
having obtained any required county license.



   (B)   The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the
information requested by the city as a part of the application, or the
failure to sign the application, or the failure to pay the required fee at
the time of application.



   (C)   The conviction of the applicant within the past five (5) years
from the date of application for any violation of any federal or state
statute or regulation, or of any local ordinance, which adversely reflects on
the person's ability to conduct the business for which the license is being
sought in an honest and legal manner.  Those violations shall include but
not be limited to burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful
business practices, and any form of actual or threatened physical harm
against another person.



   (D)   The revocation within the past five (5) years of any license
issued to the applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler,
solicitor or transient merchant.



   (E)   The applicant is found to have a bad business reputation. 
Evidence of a bad business reputation shall include, but not be limited to,
the existence of more than three (3) complaints against the applicant with
the Better Business Bureau, the Attorney General's Office, or other similar
business or consumer rights office or agency, within the preceding twelve
(12) months, or three (3) complaints filed against the applicant within the
preceding five (5) years.



§ 113.05  LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   Generally.  Any license issued under this section may be
suspended or revoked at the discretion of the City Council for violation of
any of the following:



      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statements on the
application form.



      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made during
the course of the licensed activity.



      (3)   Conviction of any offense for which granting of a
license could have been denied under § 113.04.



      (4)   Violation of any provision of this chapter.



   (B)   Multiple persons under one (1) license.  The suspension or
revocation of any license issued for the purpose of authorizing multiple
persons to conduct business as peddlers or transient merchants on behalf of
the licensee shall serve as a suspension or revocation of each authorized
person's authority to conduct business as a peddler or transient merchant on
behalf of the licensee whose license is suspended or revoked.



   (C)   Notice.  Prior to revoking or suspending any license issued
under this chapter, the city shall provide the license holder with written
notice of the alleged violations and inform the licensee of his or her right
to a hearing on the alleged violation.  Notice shall be delivered in person
or by mail to the permanent residential address listed on the license
application, or if no residential address is listed, to the business address
provided on the license application.



   (D)   Public hearing.  Upon receiving the notice provided in
division (C) of this section, the licensee shall have the right to request a
public hearing.  If no request for a hearing is received by the City Clerk
within ten (10) regular business days following the service of the notice,
the city may proceed with the suspension or revocation.  For the purpose of
mailed notices, service shall be considered complete as of the date the
notice is placed in the mail.  If a public hearing is requested within the
stated time frame, a hearing shall be scheduled within twenty (20) days from
the date of the request.  Within three (3) regular business days of the
hearing, the City Council shall notify the licensee of its decision.



   (E)   Emergency.  If, in the discretion of the City Council,
imminent harm to the health or safety of the public may occur because of the
actions of a peddler or transient merchant licensed under this chapter, the
City Council may immediately suspend the person's license and provide notice
of the right to hold a subsequent public hearing as prescribed in division
(C) of this section.



   (F)   Appeals.  Any person whose license is suspended or revoked
under this section shall have the right to appeal that decision in court.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.06  LICENSE TRANSFERABILITY.



   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred to any person
other than the person to whom the license was issued.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.07  REGISTRATION.



   All solicitors, and any person exempt from the licensing requirements
of this chapter under § 113.03, shall be required to register with the
city.  Persons engaging in door-to-door advocacy shall not be required to
register. The term DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCACY includes door-to-door canvassing and
pamphleteering as vehicles for the dissemination of religious, political and
other ideas.  Registration shall be made on the same form required for a
license application, but no fee shall be required.  Immediately upon
completion of the registration form, the City Clerk shall issue to the
registrant a Certificate of Registration as proof of the registration. 
Certificates of Registration shall be non- transferable.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.08  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.



   No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall conduct business in
any of the following manners:



   (A)   Calling attention to his or her business or items to be sold
by means of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out, or by
any other noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an enclosed
structure.



   (B)   Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian
traffic on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public right-of-way.



   (C)   Conducting business in a way as to create a threat to the
health, safety and welfare of any individual or the general public.



   (D)   Conducting business before 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. 



   (E)   Failing to provide proof of license or registration, and
identification, when requested; or using the license or registration of
another person.



   (F)   Making any false or misleading statements about the product or
service being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement.  No peddler,
solicitor or transient merchant shall claim to have the endorsement of the
city solely based on the city having issued a license or certificate of
registration to that person.



   (G)   Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave,
or to otherwise conduct business in a manner a reasonable person would find
obscene, threatening, intimidating or abusive.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.09  EXCLUSION BY PLACARD.



   No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant, unless invited to do so by
the property owner or tenant, shall enter the property of another for the
purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant
when the property is marked with a sign or placard at least four (4) inches
long and four (4) inches wide with print of at least forty-eight (48) point
in size stating “No Peddlers, Solicitors or Transient Merchants,” or
“Peddlers, Solicitors, and Transient Merchants Prohibited,” or other
comparable statement.  No person other than the property owner or tenant
shall remove, deface or otherwise tamper with any sign or placard under this
section.



Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 114:  TAXICABS



Section



   114.01   Establishment



   114.02   Definitions of terms



   114.03   License required



   114.04   Application



   114.05   Transfer



   114.06   Fees



   114.07   Insurance required



   114.08   Reserved



   114.09   Driver’s license and driver’s identity required



   114.10   Taxicabs not to be driven by certain persons;
identification of drivers and licenses



   114.11   Taximeters



   114.12   Rates



   114.13   Violations



§ 114.01  ESTABLISHMENT.



   Establishment of licensing and regulating taxicabs operating in the
city.



§ 114.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DRIVER.  The person driving and having physical control over a taxicab
whether he or she be the licensee or in the employ of the licensed operator.



   OPERATOR.  A licensee owning or otherwise having control of one (1) or
more taxicabs.



   TAXICAB.  Any passenger conveyance being driven, on call or traversing
a scheduled or unscheduled route for public use or hire upon payment of a
fare or at regular fare rates, but not including such as are designed for
mass transportation as buses, trains or streetcars.



§ 114.03  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a taxicab without a
license therefor from the city, and the owner, operator and driver are
equally culpable and may be charged criminally under this chapter.



§ 114.04  APPLICATION.



   An application for a taxicab license or licenses shall be filed with
the City Clerk upon forms provided by the city. The application shall be
verified by the applicant under oath and shall include the following
information:



   (A)   The name and business address of the applicant.



   (B)   The experience of the applicant in the transportation of
passengers for hire.



   (C)   The description of the vehicle or vehicles to be operated or
controlled by the applicant.



   (D)   The color scheme, design, trade name or insignia to be used to
designate the vehicle or vehicles of applicant.



   (E)   Such further information as the Police Department may
reasonably require.



   (F)   The name, address, and date of birth of each taxicab driver
employed or expected to be employed by applicant, and the name, address, and
date of birth of any other person who will be driving such taxicab including
independent contractors and their employees.



§ 114.05  TRANSFER.



   (A)   No taxicab license shall be assigned or transferred by the
licensee unless a request for such assignment or transfer has first been
submitted to the City Clerk for approval or denial. If the City Clerk denies
the request for assignment or transfer, the requesting party may, within ten
(10) days appeal such denial to the City Council, which may by resolution
approve the assignment or transfer of the license.



   (B)   Prior to consideration of an assignment or transfer of a
taxicab license by the City Clerk, the proposed transferee shall file with
the City Clerk an application for a taxicab license in the same form as
required in the case of an original license.



   (C)   For the purposes of this section, the leasing of a taxicab by
a licensee to an independent contractor shall not be deemed an assignment or
transfer.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.06  FEES.



   The applicant applying for a taxicab license shall pay an annual
license fee, as set forth by the City Council, for each vehicle to be so
licensed.



§ 114.07  INSURANCE REQUIRED.



    (A)   No taxicab vehicle license shall be issued until the
applicant has filed with the City Clerk an insurance policy, a certificate of
insurance or any insurance binder, approved as to form by the City Attorney,
which evidences that the owner of such taxicab is insured against claims,
demands or losses resulting from the negligent operation or use or defective
condition of such taxicab in the minimum amounts of one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000) for injury to or death of any person in any one (1)
accident, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000) for injury to or death of
any number of persons in any one (1) accident, and one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000) for property damage in any one (1) accident. Such
insurance policy shall be in effect through the term of the license. The city
shall be named as additional insured.



   (B)   No policy shall include or contain any limitation, condition
or clause excluding coverage of any vehicle otherwise covered by such policy
or releasing the insurer from liability under such policy when such vehicle
is driven, used, operated or maintained while the driver of any occupant
thereof is intoxicated or engaged in the illicit transportation of liquor.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit the
operation of any taxicab unless at the time of such operation there is on
file with the City Clerk an insurance policy, a certificate of insurance or
an insurance binder, in full force and effect, which manifests insurance
coverage of the owner of such taxicab as provided in this section; provided,
however, that for the purpose of satisfying the filing requirements of this
division an insurance binder shall not be effective for more than sixty (60)
days after such binder is filed with the City Clerk.



(Am. Ord. 364, passed 1-2-2008)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.08  RESERVED.



§ 114.09  DRIVER'S LICENSE AND DRIVER'S IDENTITY REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall drive a taxicab and no person holding a
taxicab license or taxicab vehicle shall permit the taxicab covered by such
license to be driven, unless the driver of such taxicab shall have then in
force a valid driver's license issued by the state.



   (B)   The licensee shall submit to the City Clerk the full name,
address, and date of birth of each taxicab driver, including independent
contractors, who drive any taxicab operated pursuant to the licensee's
license. The information shall be submitted in writing to the Police Chief at
least ten (10) days before the taxicab driver commences driving. Any lease
agreement between the licensee and any independent contractor operating the
taxicab shall also be filed with the City Clerk.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.10  TAXICABS NOT TO BE DRIVEN BY CERTAIN PERSONS; IDENTIFICATION OF 
DRIVERS AND LICENSEES.



   (A)   No licensee shall permit any taxicab operated pursuant to his
or her license to be driven by any person convicted of a driving under the
influence charge, a crime of violence or of theft, a sex crime, or a crime of
illegal use of drugs, or by a person who has been adjudged legally
incompetent by reason of mental illness, mental deficiency or inebriety. It
shall not be a defense to a violation of this section that the driver was an
independent contractor or the employee of an independent contractor.



   (B)   Every person driving a taxicab licensed pursuant to this
chapter shall identify himself or herself and the licensee of the taxicab to
any customer upon demand of such customer.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.11  TAXIMETERS.



   Where the rates as approved by the City Council under § 114.12 require
a taximeter to ensure fairness and accuracy of the fare, then no person shall
operate a taxicab for which he or she holds a license unless the taximeter in
such taxicab has affixed to it an inspection sticker by an authorized agency
of the state which was placed thereon by the agency.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.12  RATES.



   Every person operating a taxicab shall charge, and every person holding
a taxicab license shall permit the charging only of the rates for taxicab
service that have been approved by the City Council on an annual basis. The
rates shall be approved in conjunction with an application for a license or a
license renewal.



§ 114.13  VIOLATIONS.



   Every person and/or licensee who violates the provisions of this
chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as and for a
misdemeanor.



CHAPTER 115:  TOBACCO REGULATIONS



Section



   115.01   Purpose and intent



   115.02   Definitions



   115.03   License



   115.04   Fees



   115.05   Basis for denial of license



   115.06   Prohibited sales



   115.07   Vending machines



   115.08   Self-service sales



   115.09   Responsibility



   115.10   Compliance checks and inspections



   115.11   Other illegal acts



   115.12   Exceptions and defenses



   115.99   Violations and penalty



§ 115.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   Because the city recognizes that many persons under the age of eighteen
(18) years purchase or otherwise obtain, possess and use tobacco, tobacco
products, and tobacco related devices, and the sales, possession, and use are
violations of both state and federal laws; and because studies, which the
city hereby accepts and adopts, have shown that most smokers begin smoking
before they have reached the age of eighteen (18) years and that those
persons who reach the age of eighteen (18) years without having started
smoking are significantly less likely to begin smoking; and because smoking
has been shown to be the cause of several serious health problems which
subsequently place a financial burden on all levels of government; this
chapter shall be intended to regulate the sale, possession and use of
tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related devices for the purpose of
enforcing and furthering existing laws, to protect minors against the serious
effects associated with the illegal use of tobacco, tobacco products, and
tobacco related devices, and to further the official public policy of the
state in regard to preventing young people from starting to smoke as stated
in M.S. § 144.391, as it may be amended from time to time.



§ 115.02  DEFINITIONS.



   Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all
terms shall be given their commonly accepted definitions.  For the purpose
of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMPLIANCE CHECKS.  The system the city uses to investigate and ensure
that those authorized to sell tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related
devices are following and complying with the requirements of this chapter. 
COMPLIANCE CHECKS shall involve the use of minors as authorized by this
chapter.  COMPLIANCE CHECKS shall also mean the use of minors who attempt to
purchase tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices for
educational, research and training purposes as authorized by state and
federal laws.  COMPLIANCE CHECKS may also be conducted by other units of
government for the purpose of enforcing appropriate federal, state or local
laws and regulations relating to tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco
related devices.



   INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED.  The practice of selling any tobacco or tobacco
product wrapped individually for sale.  Individually wrapped tobacco and
tobacco products shall include but not be limited to single cigarette packs,
single bags or cans of loose tobacco in any form, and single cans or other
packaging of snuff or chewing tobacco.  Cartons or other packaging
containing more than a single pack or other container as described in this
definition shall not be considered individually packaged.



   LOOSIES.  The common term used to refer to a single or individually
packaged cigarette.



   MINOR.  Any natural person who has not yet reached the age of eighteen
(18) years.



   MOVEABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS.  Any form of business operated out of a
truck, van, automobile or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and
not a fixed address store front or other permanent type of structure
authorized for sales transactions.



   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT.  Any place of business where tobacco, tobacco
products or tobacco related devices are available for sale to the general
public.  The phrase shall include but not be limited to grocery stores,
convenience stores and restaurants.



   SALE.  Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter or other
consideration.



   SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING.  Open displays of tobacco, tobacco
products or tobacco related devices in any manner where any person shall have
access to the tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices, without
the assistance or intervention of the licensee or the licensee's employee. 
The assistance or intervention shall entail the actual physical exchange of
the tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device between the customer
and the licensee or employee.  The phrase shall not include vending
machines.  Self-service sales are interpreted as being any sale where there
is not an actual physical exchange of the tobacco between the clerk and the
customer.



   TOBACCO or TOBACCO PRODUCTS.  Any substance or item containing tobacco
leaf, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff,
fine cut or other chewing tobacco, cheroots, stogies, perique, granulated,
plug cut, crimp cut, ready-rubbed, and other smoking tobacco, snuff flowers,
cavendish, shorts, plug and twist tobaccos, dipping tobaccos, refuse scraps,
clippings, cuttings, and sweepings of tobacco, and other kinds and forms of
tobacco leaf prepared in a manner as to be suitable for chewing, sniffing or
smoking.



   TOBACCO RELATED DEVICES.  Any tobacco product as well as a pipe,
rolling papers or other device intentionally designed or intended to be used
in a manner which enables the chewing, sniffing or smoking of tobacco or
tobacco products.



   VENDING MACHINE.  Any mechanical, electric or electronic, or other
type of device which dispenses tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related
devices upon the insertion of money, tokens or other form of payment directly
into the machine by the person seeking to purchase the tobacco, tobacco
product or tobacco related device.



§ 115.03  LICENSE.



   (A)   License required.  No person shall sell or offer to sell any
tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related device without first having
obtained a license to do so from the city.



   (B)   Application.  An application for a license to sell tobacco,
tobacco products, or tobacco related devices shall be made on a form provided
by the city.  The application shall contain the full name of the applicant,
the applicant's residential and business addresses and telephone numbers, the
name of the business for which the license is sought, and any additional
information the city deems necessary.  Upon receipt of a completed
application, the City Clerk shall forward the application to the City Council
for action at its next regularly scheduled City Council meeting.  If the
City Clerk shall determine that an application is incomplete, he or she shall
return the application to the applicant with notice of the information
necessary to make the application complete.



   (C)   Action.  The City Council may either approve or deny the
license, or it may delay action for a reasonable period of time as necessary
to complete any investigation of the application or the applicant it deems
necessary.  If the City Council shall approve the license, the City Clerk
shall issue the license to the applicant.  If the City Council denies the
license, notice of the denial shall be given to the applicant along with
notice of the applicant's right to appeal the City Council's decision.



   (D)   Revocation or suspension.  Any license issued under this
chapter may be revoked or suspended as provided in § 110.07.



   (E)   Transfers.  All licenses issued under this chapter shall be
valid only on the premises for which the license was issued and only for the
person to whom the license was issued.  No transfer of any license to
another location or person shall be valid without the prior approval of the
City Council.



   (F)   Moveable place of business.  No license shall be issued to a
moveable place of business.  Only fixed location businesses shall be
eligible to be licensed under this chapter.



   (G)   Display.  All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain
view of the general public on the licensed premise.



   (H)   Renewals.  The renewal of a license issued under this section
shall be handled in the same manner as the original application.



   (I)   Issuance as privilege and not a right.  The issuance of a
license issued under this chapter shall be considered a privilege and not an
absolute right of the applicant and shall not entitle the holder to an
automatic renewal of the license.



Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.04  FEES.



   No license shall be issued under this chapter until the appropriate
license fee shall be paid in full.  The fee for a license under this chapter
shall be in an amount set by the City Council from time to time.



Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.05  BASIS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a license under
this chapter includes but is not limited to the following:



      (1)   The applicant is under the age of eighteen (18) years.



      (2)   The applicant has been convicted within the past five
(5) years of any violation of a federal, state, or local law, ordinance
provision, or other regulation relating to tobacco or tobacco products, or
tobacco related devices.



      (3)   The applicant has had a license to sell tobacco, tobacco
products, or tobacco related devices revoked within the preceding twelve (12)
months of the date of application.



      (4)   The applicant fails to provide any information required
on the application, or provides false or misleading information.



      (5)   The applicant is prohibited by federal, state, or other
local law, ordinance, or other regulation from holding a license.



   (B)   However, except as may otherwise be provided by law, the
existence of any particular ground for denial does not mean that the city
must deny the license.



   (C)   If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a person, it
shall be revoked upon the discovery that the person was ineligible for the
license under this chapter.



Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.06  PROHIBITED SALES.



   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to sell or offer
to sell any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device:



   (A)   To any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.



   (B)   By means of any type of vending machine, except as may
otherwise be provided in § 115.07.



   (C)   By means of self-service methods whereby the customer does not
need to a make a verbal or written request to an employee of the licensed
premise in order to receive the tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related
device and whereby the there is not a physical exchange of the tobacco,
tobacco product, or tobacco related device between the licensee, or the
licensee's employee, and the customer.



   (D)   By means of loosies as defined in § 115.02.



   (E)   Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, bella donna,
strychnos, cocaine, marijuana, or other deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic or
controlled substances except nicotine and other substances found naturally in
tobacco or added as part of an otherwise lawful manufacturing process.  It
is not the intention of this provision to ban the sale of lawfully
manufactured cigarettes or other tobacco products.



   (F)   By any other means, to any other person, on in any other
manner or form prohibited by federal, state or other local law, ordinance
provision, or other regulation.



Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.07  VENDING MACHINES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under this chapter to
allow the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices by
the means of a vending machine.



Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.08  SELF-SERVICE SALES.



   It shall be unlawful for a licensee under this chapter to allow the
sale of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices by any means
where by the customer may have access to those items without having to
request the item from the licensee or the licensee's employee and whereby
there is not a physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, or the
tobacco related device between the licensee or his or her clerk and the
customer.  All tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related devices shall
either be stored behind a counter or other area not freely accessible to
customers, or in a case or other storage unit not left open and accessible to
the general public.  Any retailer selling tobacco, tobacco products, or
tobacco related devices at the time this chapter is adopted shall comply with
this section within ninety (90) days following the effective date of this
chapter.



Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.09  RESPONSIBILITY.



   All licensees under this chapter shall be responsible for the actions
of their employees in regard to the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, or
tobacco related devices on the licensed premises, and the sale of an item by
an employee shall be considered a sale by the license holder.  Nothing in
this section shall be construed as prohibiting the city from also subjecting
the clerk to whatever penalties are appropriate under this chapter, state or
federal law, or other applicable law or regulation.



Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.10  COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS.



   All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by police officers or
other authorized city official during regular business hours.  From time to
time, but at least once per year, the city shall conduct compliance checks by
engaging, with the written consent of their parents or guardians, minors over
the age of fifteen (15) years but less than eighteen (18) years to enter the
licensed premise to attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco
related devices.  Minors used for the purpose of compliance checks shall be
supervised by city designated law enforcement officers or other designated
city personnel.  Minors used for compliance checks shall not be guilty of
unlawful possession of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices
when those items are obtained as a part of the compliance check.  No minor
used in compliance checks shall attempt to use a false identification
misrepresenting the minor's age, and all minors lawfully engaged in a
compliance check shall answer all questions about the minor's age asked by
the licensee or his or her employee and shall produce any identification, if
any exists, for which he or she is asked.  Nothing in this section shall
prohibit compliance checks authorized by state or federal laws for
educational, research, or training purposes, or required for the enforcement
of a particular state or federal law.



Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.11  OTHER ILLEGAL ACTS.



   Unless otherwise provided, the following acts shall be a violation of
this chapter:



   (A)   Illegal sales.  It shall be a violation of this chapter for
any person to sell or otherwise provide any tobacco, tobacco product, or
tobacco related device to any minor.



   (B)   Illegal possession.  It shall be a violation of this chapter
for any minor to have in his or her possession any tobacco, tobacco product,
or tobacco related device.  This division (B) shall not apply to minors
lawfully involved in a compliance check.



   (C)   Illegal use.  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
minor to smoke, chew, snuff or otherwise use any tobacco, tobacco product, or
tobacco related device.



   (D)   Illegal procurement.  It shall be a violation of this chapter
for any minor to purchase or attempt to purchase or otherwise obtain any
tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco related device, and it shall be a
violation of this chapter for any person to purchase or otherwise obtain
those items on behalf of a minor.  It shall further be a violation for any
person to coerce or attempt to coerce a minor to illegally purchase or
otherwise obtain or use any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related
device.  This division (D) shall not apply to minors lawfully involved in a
compliance check.



   (E)   Use of false identification.  It shall be a violation of this
chapter for any minor to attempt to disguise his or her true age by the use
of a false form of identification, whether the identification is that of
another person or one on which the age of the person has been modified or
tampered with to represent an age older than the actual age of the person.



Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.12  EXCEPTIONS AND DEFENSES.



   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the providing of tobacco, tobacco
products, or tobacco related devices to a minor as part of a lawfully
recognized religious, spiritual, or cultural ceremony.  It shall be an
affirmative defense to the violation of this chapter for a person to have
reasonably relied on proof of age as described by state law.



§ 115.99  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY.



   (A)   Violations.



      (1)   Notice. Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the
alleged violator shall be issued, either personally or by mail, a citation
that sets forth the alleged violation and which shall inform the alleged
violator of his or her right to be heard on the accusation.



      (2)   Hearings.  If a person accused of violating this
chapter so requests, a hearing shall be scheduled, the time and place of
which shall be published and provided to the accused violator.



      (3)   Hearing Officer.  The city official designated by the
City Council shall serve as the hearing officer.



      (4)   Decision.  If the hearing officer determines that a
violation of this chapter did occur, that decision, along with the hearing
officer's reasons for finding a violation and the penalty to be imposed under
division (B) of this section, shall be recorded in writing, a copy of which
shall be provided to the accused violator.  Likewise, if the hearing officer
finds that no violation occurred or finds grounds for not imposing any
penalty, those findings shall be recorded and a copy provided to the
acquitted accused violator.



      (5)   Appeals.  Appeals of any decision made by the hearing
officer shall be filed in the district court for the city in which the
alleged violation occurred.



      (6)   Misdemeanor prosecution.  Nothing in this section shall
prohibit the city from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any alleged
violation of this ordinance.



      (7)   Continued violation.  Each violation, and every day in
which a violation occurs or continues, shall constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   Administrative penalties.



      (1)   Licensees.  Any licensee found to have violated this
chapter, or whose employee shall have violated this chapter, shall be charged
an administrative fine of seventy-five dollars ($75) for a first violation of
this chapter; two hundred dollars ($200) for a second offense at the same
licensed premises within a twenty-four (24) month period; and two hundred
fifty dollars ($250) for a third or subsequent offense at the same location
within a twenty-four (24) month period.  In addition, after the third
offense, the license shall be suspended for not less than seven (7) days.



      (2)   Other individuals.  Other individuals, other than
minors regulated by division (B)(3) of this section, found to be in violation
of this chapter shall be charged an administrative fine of fifty dollars
($50).



      (3)   Minors.  Minors found in unlawful possession of or who
unlawfully purchase or attempt to purchase, tobacco, tobacco products, or
tobacco related devices, shall be subject to an administrative fine, or may
be subject to tobacco related education classes, diversion programs,
community services, or another penalty that the city believes will be
appropriate and effective.  The administrative fine or other penalty shall
be established by City Council ordinance upon the City Council's consultation
with interested parties of the courts, educators, parents and children to
determine an appropriate penalty for minors in the city. This administrative
fine or other penalty may also be established by the City Council from time
to time.



      (4)   Misdemeanor.  Nothing in this section shall prohibit
the city from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any violation of this
chapter.



      (5)   Statutory penalties.  If the administrative penalties
authorized to be imposed by M.S. § 461.12, as it may be amended from time to
time, differ from those established in this section, then the statutory
penalties shall prevail.



(Am. Ord. 364, passed 1-2-2008)



CHAPTER 116:  LAWFUL GAMBLING



Section



   116.01   Adoption of state law by reference



   116.02   City may be more restrictive than state law



   116.03   Purpose



   116.04   Definitions



   116.05   Applicability



   116.06   Lawful gambling permitted



   116.07   Council approval



   116.08   Application and local approval of premises permits



   116.09   Local permits



   116.10   Revocation and suspension of local permit



   116.11   License and permit display



   116.12   Notification of material changes to application



   116.13   Designated trade area



   116.14   Records and reporting



   116.15   Hours of operation



   116.16   Severability



   116.99   Penalty



§ 116.01  ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.



   The provisions of M.S. Ch. 349, as they may be amended from time to
time, with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation,
provisions relating to sales, and all other matters pertaining to lawful
gambling, are hereby adopted by reference and are made a part of this chapter
as if set out in full.  It is the intention of the Council that all future
amendments of M.S. Ch. 349 are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as
if they had been in existence at the time this chapter was adopted.



§ 116.02  CITY MAY BE MORE RESTRICTIVE THAN STATE LAW.



   The Council is authorized by the provisions of M.S. § 349.213, as it
may be amended from time to time, to impose, and has imposed in this chapter,
additional restrictions on gambling within its limits beyond those contained
in M.S. Ch. 349, as it may be amended from time to time.



§ 116.03  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate lawful gambling within the
city, to prevent its commercialization, to ensure the integrity of
operations, and to provide for the use of net profits only for lawful
purposes.



§ 116.04  DEFINITIONS.



   In addition to the definitions contained in M.S. § 349.12, as it may
be amended from time to time, the following terms are defined for purposes of
this chapter:



   BOARD.  The State of Minnesota Gambling Control Board.



   LICENSED ORGANIZATION. An organization licensed by the Board.



   LOCAL PERMIT.  A permit issued by the city.



   TRADE AREA.  This city and each city and township contiguous to this
city.



§ 116.05  APPLICABILITY.



   This chapter shall be construed to regulate all forms of lawful
gambling within the city except:



   (A)   Bingo conducted within a nursing home or a senior citizen
housing project or by a senior citizen organization if: the prizes for a
single bingo game do not exceed ten dollars ($10); total prizes awarded at a
single bingo occasion do not exceed two hundred dollars ($200); no more than
two (2) bingo occasions are held by the organization or at the facility each
week; only members of the organization or residents of the nursing home or
housing project are allowed to play in a bingo game; no compensation is paid
for any persons who conduct the bingo; and a manager is appointed to
supervise the bingo.



   (B)   Raffles, if the value of all prizes awarded by the
organization in a calendar year does not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars
($750).



§ 116.06  LAWFUL GAMBLING PERMITTED.



   Lawful gambling is permitted within the city if the Council, by
resolution adopted by a majority of its members authorizes lawful gambling to
occur, provided it is conducted in accordance with M.S. §§ 609.75 to
609.763, inclusive, as they may be amended from time to time; M.S. §§
349.11 to 349.23, inclusive, as they may be amended from time to time, and
this chapter.



§ 116.07  COUNCIL APPROVAL.



   Lawful gambling authorized by M.S. §§ 349.11 to 349.23, inclusive, as
they may be amended from time to time, shall not be conducted unless approved
by the Council, subject to the provisions of this chapter and state law.



Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.08  APPLICATION AND LOCAL APPROVAL OF PREMISES PERMITS.



   (A)   Any organization seeking to obtain a premises permit or bingo
hall license or renewal of a premises permit or bingo hall license from the
Board shall file with the City Clerk an executed, complete duplicate
application together with all exhibits and documents accompanying the
application as filed with the Board.  The application and accompanying
exhibits and documents shall be filed not later than three (3) days after
they have been filed with the Board.



   (B)   Upon receipt of an application for issuance or renewal of a
premises permit or bingo hall license, the City Clerk shall transmit the
application to the Police Chief, or the Sheriff of the county in which this
city is located, for review and recommendation.



   (C)   The Police Chief shall investigate the matter and make a
review and recommendation to the City Council as soon as possible, but in no
event later than forty-five (45) days following receipt of the notification
by the city.



   (D)   Organizations or bingo halls applying for a state-issued
premises permit or bingo hall license shall pay the city an investigation fee
in an amount set by the City Council from time to time.



   (E)   The applicant shall be notified in writing of the date on
which the Council will consider the recommendation.



   (F)   The Council shall receive the Police Chief's report and
consider the application within forty-five (45) days of the date the
application was submitted to the City Clerk.



   (G)   The Council shall, by resolution, approve or disapprove the
application within sixty (60) days of receipt of the application.



   (H)   The Council shall disapprove an application for issuance or
renewal of a premises permit for any of the following reasons:



      (1)   Violation by the gambling organization of any state
statute, state rule or city ordinance relating to gambling within the last
three (3) years.



      (2)   Violation by the on-sale establishment or organization
leasing its premises for gambling of any state statute, state rule or city
ordinance relating to the operation of the establishment, including, but not
limited to, laws relating to alcoholic beverages, gambling, controlled
substances, suppression of vice, and protection of public safety within the
last three (3) years.



      (3)   Lawful gambling would be conducted at premises other
than those for which an on-sale liquor license has been issued.



      (4)   Lawful gambling would be conducted at more than one (1)
premises within the city.  The city  may limit the number of premises where
lawful gambling may be conducted.



      (5)   An organization would be permitted to conduct lawful
gambling activities at more than one (1) premises in the city.



      (6)   More than one (1) licensed organization would be
permitted to conduct lawful gambling activities at one (1) premises.



      (7)   Failure of the applicant to pay any investigation fee
provided by division (D) of this section within the prescribed time limit.



      (8)   Operation of gambling at the site would be detrimental
to health, safety, and welfare of the community.



Otherwise the Council shall pass a resolution approving the application.



§ 116.09  LOCAL PERMITS.



   (A)   No organization shall conduct lawful gambling excluded or
exempted from state licensure requirements by M.S. § 349.166, as it may be
amended from time to time, without a valid local permit. This section shall
not apply to lawful gambling exempted from local regulation by § 116.05.



   (B)   Applications for issuance or renewal of a local permit shall
be on a form prescribed by the city. The application shall contain the
following information:



      (1)   Name and address of the organization requesting the
permit.



      (2)   Name and address of the officers and person accounting
for receipts, expenses, and profits for the event.



      (3)   Dates of gambling occasion for which permit is requested.



      (4)   Address of premises where event will occur.



      (5)   Copy of rental or leasing arrangement, if any, connected
with the event, including rental to be charged to organization.



      (6)   Estimated value of prizes to be awarded.



   (C)   The fee for a local permit shall be in an amount set by the
City Council from time to time.



   (D)   Upon receipt of an application for issuance or renewal of a
local permit, the City Clerk shall transmit the notification to the Police
Chief for review and recommendation.



   (E)   The Police Chief shall investigate the matter and make review
and recommendation to the City Council as soon as possible, but in no event
later than forty-five (45) days following receipt of the notification by the
city.



   (F)   The applicant shall be notified in writing of the date on
which the Council will consider the recommendation.



   (G)   The Council shall receive the Police Chief's report and
consider the application within forty-five (45) days of the date the
application was submitted to the City Clerk.



   (H)   The Council shall disapprove an application for issuance or
renewal of a premises permit for any of the following reasons:



      (1)   Violation by the gambling organization of any state
statute, state rule or city ordinance relating to gambling within the last
three (3) years.



      (2)   Violation by the on-sale establishment or organization
leasing its premises for gambling of any state statute, state rule or city
ordinance relating to the operation of the establishment, including, but not
limited to, laws relating to the operation of the establishment, laws
relating to alcoholic beverages, gambling, controlled substances, suppression
of vice, and protection of public safety within the last three (3) years.



      (3)   The organization has not been in existence in the city
for at least three (3) consecutive years prior to the date of application.



      (4)   The organization does not have at least thirty (30)
active members.



      (5)   Exempted or excluded lawful gambling will not take place
at a premises the organization owns or rents.



      (6)   Exempted or excluded lawful gambling will not be limited
to a premises for which an on- sale liquor license has been issued.



      (7)   An organization will have a permit to conduct exempted
or excluded lawful gambling activities on more than one (1) premises in the
city.



      (8)   More than one (1) licensed, qualified organization will
be conducting exempted or excluded lawful gambling activities at any one (1)
premises.



      (9)   Failure of the applicant to pay permit fee provided by
division (C) of this section within the prescribed time limit.



      (10)   Operation of gambling at the site would be detrimental
to health, safety, and welfare of the community.



Otherwise the council shall approve the application.



   (I)   Local permits shall be valid for one (1) year after the date
of issuance unless suspended or revoked.



Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.10  REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION OF LOCAL PERMIT.



   A local permit may be revoked or temporarily suspended for a violation
by the gambling organization of any state statute, state rule or city
ordinance relating to gambling as provided in § 110.07.



§ 116.11  LICENSE AND PERMIT DISPLAY.



   All permits issued under state law or this chapter shall be prominently
displayed during the permit year at the premises where gambling is conducted.



Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.12  NOTIFICATION OF MATERIAL CHANGES TO APPLICATION.



   An organization holding a state-issued premises permit or a local
permit shall notify the city in writing whenever any material change in the
information submitted in the application occurs within ten (10) days of the
change.



Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.13  DESIGNATED TRADE AREA.



   (A)   Each organization licensed to conduct gambling within the city
shall expend one hundred percent (100%) of its lawful purpose expenditures on
lawful purposes conducted within the city's trade area.



   (B)   This section applies only to lawful purpose expenditures of
gross profits derived from gambling conducted at a premises within the city's
jurisdiction.



Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.14  RECORDS AND REPORTING.



   (A)   Organizations conducting lawful gambling shall file with the
City Clerk one (1) copy of all records and reports required to be filed with
the Board, pursuant to M.S. Ch. 349, as it may be amended from time to time,
and rules adopted pursuant thereto, as they may be amended from time to time.
The records and reports shall be filed on or before the day they are required
to be filed with the Board.



   (B)   Organizations licensed by the Board shall file a report with
the city proving compliance with the trade area spending requirements imposed
by § 116.13.  Such report shall be made on a form prescribed by the city
and shall be submitted annually and in advance of application for renewal.



Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.15  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   Lawful gambling shall not be conducted between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
on any day of the week.



Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.16  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this chapter is found to be invalid for any reason
by a court of competent jurisdiction, the validity of the remaining
provisions shall not be affected.



§ 116.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates:



   (A)   Any provision of this chapter;



   (B)   M.S. §§ 609.75 to 609.763, inclusive, as they may be amended
from time to time; or



   (C)   M.S. §§ 349.11 to 349.21, as they may be amended from time
to time, or any rules promulgated under those sections, as they may be
amended from time to time;



shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in § 10.99



CHAPTER 117:  SOLID WASTE



Section



   117.01   Purpose



   117.02   Definitions



   117.03   License required



   117.04   Application for license



   117.05   Licensed collector; duties and obligations



   117.06   Collection charges; establishment



   117.07   Equipment



   117.08   Indemnification



   117.09   Violation



§ 117.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   In order to provide for a continuous system of solid waste
collection in a manner that meets the needs of the community, the City
Council hereby determines that it is in best interest of the city to require
licenses of persons collecting and hauling solid waste for hire.



   (B)   Therefore, the city shall provide for the collection of solid
waste from all premises within the city in a manner provided for in this
chapter.



   (C)   Every household unit and business must have a contract for
collection services, or demonstrate to the city that an environmentally sound
alternative method of disposal is used.



(1969 Code, § 56.01)  (Ord. 332, passed 11-2-2004)



§ 117.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY.  The City of Mora, Kanabec County, Minnesota.



   COLLECTION.  The aggregation of waste from the place at which it is
generated, and including all activities up to the time the waste is delivered
to a waste facility.



   CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS. Waste building materials, packaging and rubble
resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition of buildings,
roads and other facilities.



   DISPOSAL FACILITY.  A waste facility permitted by the State Pollution
Control Agency that is designated or operated for the purpose of disposing of
waste on or in the land, together with any appurtenant facilities needed to
process waste for disposal or transfer to another waste facility.



   HOUSEHOLD UNIT. Any building or group of buildings, or part of a
building or group of buildings, used or intended to be used solely or
principally for residential purposes, including any living quarters
containing a separate kitchen and/or bathroom, and occupied or intended to be
occupied exclusively as the home or residence of not more than one (1) family
or household.



   MIXED MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE.  Garbage, refuse and other solid waste
from residential, commercial, industrial and community activities that the
generator of the waste aggregates for collection; but not including auto
hulks, street sweepings, ash, water-borne wastes, construction debris, mining
waste, sludge, tree and agricultural wastes, tires, lead acid batteries,
motor and vehicle fluids and filters, and other materials collected,
processed and disposed of as separate waste streams; but the term does
include source-separated compostable materials.



   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.  Materials that are separated from mixed
municipal solid waste for the purpose of recycling, including paper, glass,
plastics, metals, automobile oil and batteries.  Refuse- derived fuel or
other material that is destroyed by incineration is not a RECYCLABLE MATERIAL.



   SOLID WASTE.  Mixed municipal solid waste and construction debris, as
defined in this section.



(1969 Code, § 56.02)  (Ord. 332, passed 11-2-2004)



§ 117.03  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   There shall be two (2) classes of licenses for the collection
of solid waste.



      (1)   Mixed municipal solid waste (MMSW) collection license.
This license shall be for regularly scheduled collection service to customers
of MMSW.



      (2)   Roll-off service solid waste collection license. This
license shall be for occasional service to customers where the type and
amount of solid waste generated is greater than can be accommodated through
MMSW collection.



   (B)   No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall contract
for the collection or collect solid waste in the city without first securing
a license from the city.  The City Council, in the interest of maintaining
healthful and sanitary conditions in the city, hereby limits the number of
MMSW collector licenses issued to three (3).  There shall be no limit on the
number of roll-off service solid waste collection licenses issued.  No
person or business entity shall permit solid waste to be collected from his
or her premises for hire by an unlicensed collector.



   (C)   The annual license fee shall be established in an amount set
by the City Council from time to time.



   (D)   Any license issued under this chapter shall be nontransferable.



   (E)   No license shall be required by any person, firm, corporation
or other entity for purposes of collecting, hauling or disposing of their own
mixed municipal solid waste; provided that any collection, hauling and/or
disposal shall be done in a lawful manner.



(1969 Code, § 56.03)  (Ord. 332, passed 11-2-2004)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 117.04  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   Required information.  Any person, firm or corporation
desiring a license to collect mixed municipal solid waste or construction
debris shall make application for the same to the city upon a form prescribed
by the city.  The applicant shall provide for the city the following
information at a minimum:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;



      (2)   A proposed service and rate schedule;



      (3)   An agreement to provide the collection services
described at the rates described in the proposed schedules;



      (4)   The disposal facility to which the solid waste is to be
hauled; and



      (5)   The manner in which the solid waste is to be disposed of.



   (B)   Insurance and liability coverage. The applicant shall also
submit with his or her application evidence that the applicant has in effect
workers’ compensation coverage as required by M.S. Chapter 176, as it may
be amended from time to time, and general liability, property, casualty and
vehicle insurance for at least the amount of five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000) for bodily injuries to or death of one (1) person, and one million
dollars ($1,000,000) for any one (1) accident resulting in injuries and/or
death of more than one (1) person, and a total of two hundred fifty thousand
dollars ($250,000) liability for damages to property of others arising out of
any accident.  Before the license shall be issued, the licensee shall agree
to hold the city harmless and shall agree to defend and indemnify the city,
and the city’s employees and agents, for any claims, damages, losses and
expenses related to the work under the license.  The city shall be named as
an additional insured under that insurance for the services provided under
the license.  The licensee’s contract of insurance shall be the primary
insurance for the city, and the licensee or insurance company shall provide a
certificate of insurance which verifies the existence of the insurance
required, including provisions to hold the city harmless and defend and
indemnify the city.  Each policy shall expressly provide that the city will
be given thirty (30) days’ notice of any termination or cancellation of
coverage.  Each license shall terminate upon termination of the required
insurance coverage.



   (C)   Performance bond.  No license shall be issued until the
applicant files with the city a performance bond, with a surety approved by
the City Council, in the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000),
the bond to be conditioned upon the faithful performance on the part of the
licensee of his or her agreement to provide the collection services described
in his or her application for license.



   (D)   Financial arrangement in lieu of performance bond.  As an
alternative to posting a performance bond, the licensee may deposit with the
city a cashier’s check, certificate of deposit, escrow account or other
instrument which may readily be drawn upon by the city in the event the
licensee ceases, for any reason, including revocation of this license for
cause by the city, to effect collection.



   (E)   Receipt and review. The City Council shall issue licenses only
after receipt and review of all required forms, certificates and fees.  Upon
review of the documents submitted, the City Council shall issue a license if
the documents comply with provisions previously stated.  An applicant denied
a license by the city may have the decision reconsidered by the City
Council.  The applicant shall request reconsideration by the City Council in
writing within ten (10) days after denial of the license.



   (F)   Suspension or revocation.  Licenses may be suspended or
revoked by the City Council, after the licensee has been given reasonable
notice and an opportunity to be heard, for the violation of any provision of
this chapter or upon failure of the licensee to comply with any condition,
order or direction issued by the city.



(1969 Code, § 56.04)  (Ord. 332, passed 11-2-2004)



§ 117.05  LICENSED COLLECTOR; DUTIES AND OBLIGATIONS.



   (A)   All licensees shall operate in a manner consistent with their
application materials and shall provide notice to the city within fifteen
(15) days of any change in the information, forms or certificates filed as a
part of the license application process.



   (B)   All licensees shall comply with all federal, state, county and
local laws, ordinances and regulations.



   (C)   MMSW licensees shall offer each customer at least weekly
collection service for mixed municipal solid waste.



   (D)   Weekly collection of mixed municipal solid waste shall be made
in accordance with a schedule submitted by the licensee and approved by the
Council.  This schedule may be changed as necessary by the licensee,
provided such notice is given to residents by mail at least fifteen (15) days
prior to the effective date of the change.



   (E)   All licensees shall use only vehicles and equipment so
constructed that the contents will not leak or spill.  The vehicles and
equipment shall be kept clean and as free from offensive odors as possible,
and shall not stand in any street or public place longer than is reasonably
necessary to collect solid waste and recyclables.  The licensee shall also
ensure that the immediate collection site is left tidy and free of litter.



   (F)   MMSW licensees shall be required to offer a recycling program,
accepting at a minimum the following materials: glass, type two (2) plastic,
tin, aluminum, paper and cardboard.  This list shall be reviewed by the City
Council regarding the feasibility of recycling the items.



   (G)   MMSW licensees shall offer residential customers curbside
recycling at least once per calendar month and shall not impose a greater
charge on residential customers who recycle than those who do not recycle.



(1969 Code, § 56.05)  (Ord. 332, passed 11-2-2004)



§ 117.06  COLLECTION CHARGES; ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A)   The charges for services submitted by the licensee shall be
the charges charged to all customers within the city during the license
period.  The licensee shall impose charges on residential and commercial
customers for the collection of mixed municipal solid waste that increase
with the volume or weight of the waste collected.  The licensee shall
provide to new residential customers, and once per year to all residential
customers, written notice of the volume- or weight-based structure.  The
licensee shall provide, upon request of a residential customer, a schedule of
the licensee’s charges.



   (B)   The licensee shall not impose a greater charge for the
collection of mixed municipal solid waste on residential customers that
recycle than on residential customers that do not recycle.



(1969 Code, § 56.06)  (Ord. 332, passed 11-2-2004)



§ 117.07  EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   All motor vehicles or other equipment used by the licensee
shall be marked on the exterior of the vehicle so as to identify the licensee.



   (B)   All motor vehicles or other equipment used by the licensee
shall be watertight so as not to allow the leakage of liquids or other
materials while hauling the same and shall be used in a manner to prevent the
scattering of their contents upon the public streets or private properties in
the city.



   (C)   All motor vehicles or equipment used by the licensee shall be
kept clean to prevent nuisances, pollution or insect breeding, and shall be
maintained in good order.



   (D)   No roll-offs in the street.



(1969 Code, § 56.07)  (Ord. 332, passed 11-2-2004)



§ 117.08  INDEMNIFICATION.



   All licensees under this chapter shall hold the city harmless from all
damages and claims of damage that may arise by reason of any negligence of
the licensee or the licensee’s agent or employee while engaged in the
performance of the work and services covered by the license requirements, and
shall indemnify the city against all claims, liens, expenses and claims for
liens for work, tools, machinery, materials or insurance premiums or
equipment or supplies, and against all loss by reason of failure of the
licensee in any respect to fully perform all obligations outlined in the
duties and obligations of licensees as solid waste collectors.



(1969 Code, § 56.08)  (Ord. 332, passed 11-2-2004)



§ 117.09  VIOLATION.



   Any person convicted of violating this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment, as provided
by law.



(1969 Code, § 56.09)  (Ord. 332, passed 11-2-2004)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 118:  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES



Section



   118.01   Authority, purpose and intent



   118.02   Definitions



   118.03   Application of this chapter



   118.04   Hours of operation



   118.05   Operation



   118.06   License required



   118.07   License application



   118.08   Disqualifications and requalification



   118.09   Expiration and renewal



   118.10   Suspension



   118.11   Revocation



   118.12   Procedures for appeal



   118.13   Posting



   118.14   Fees



   118.15   Inspection



   118.16   Transfer of license



   118.17   Investigation



 



   118.99   Penalty



§ 118.01  AUTHORITY, PURPOSE, AND INTENT.



   (A)   Authority. The United States Supreme Court has ruled that
sexually-explicit speech, including nude dancing, is entitled to some level
of protection under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. As
a result, municipalities may not ban adult establishments. However, the
Supreme Court has ruled that cities may adopt content-neutral zoning and
licensing provisions to regulate and control the adverse secondary effects of
adult establishments on the community.



   (B)   Findings of the City Council. The Minnesota Attorney General's
Office and the cities of St. Paul, Alexandria, and Rochester, Minnesota, as
well as Indianapolis, Indiana; Phoenix, Arizona; Los Angeles, California;
Seattle, Washington, St. Croix County, Wisconsin; and Adams County, Colorado;
have conducted studies of the impact of adult establishments on their
respective communities. These studies have concluded that adult
establishments have an adverse impact on the surrounding neighborhoods. Those
impacts include increased crime rates, lower property values, increased
transiency, neighborhood blight, and potential health risks. The City Council
is relying on the studies, many of which were conducted in larger cities,
recognizing that the same or similar adverse impacts could occur in a small
city such as the City of Mora. The findings are based upon the experiences of
other cities where such businesses have located. Based on these studies, the
City Council makes the following findings regarding the need to regulate
adult establishments:



      (1)   Adult establishments have adverse secondary impacts of
the types set forth above.



      (2)   The adverse impacts caused by adult establishments tend
to diminish if adult establishments are governed by location and licensing
requirements.



      (3)   The city may adopt regulations to promote the public
health, safety, morals, and general welfare.



      (4)   The public health, safety, morals, and general welfare
will be promoted by regulations governing adult establishments.



      (5)   Adult establishments can contribute to increased
criminal activity and police calls in the area in which they are located,
taxing law enforcement services.



      (6)   Adult establishments can be used as fronts for
prostitution and other criminal activity. The experience of other cities
indicates that the proper management and operation of such businesses can,
however, minimize this risk.



      (7)   Adult establishments can cause or contribute to public
health problems by the presence of live adult entertainment in conjunction
with food and/or drink on the same premises.



      (8)   Many members of the public perceive areas within which
adult establishments are located as less safe than other areas that do not
have such uses.



      (9)   The adverse impact that adult establishments have on the
surrounding area diminishes as the distance from the adult establishments
increases.



      (10)   A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate
mechanism to place the burden of reasonable regulation on the owners and the
operators of the adult establishment. A licensing procedure will place an
incentive on the operators to see that the adult establishment is run in a
manner consistent with the health, safety, and welfare of its patrons and
employees, as well as the citizens of the city. It is appropriate to require
reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the
sexually-oriented business, fully in possession and control of the premises
and activities occurring therein.



      (11)   The fact that an applicant for an adult use license has
been convicted of a sexually-related crime leads to the rational assumption
that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of this
chapter.



      (12)   The barring of individuals with sexually-related
criminal convictions from the management of adult establishments for a period
of years serves as a deterrent to and prevents conduct which may lead to the
transmission of sexually-transmitted diseases.



      (13)   The general health, safety, and welfare of the
community is promoted by prohibiting nudity in adult establishments. This
prohibition is based on concerns of potential adverse effects such as
prostitution, the transmission of sexually-transmitted diseases, exposure to
minors, obscenity, and unsanitary conditions in public places.



      (14)   Small cities experience many of the same adverse
impacts of adult establishments present in larger communities.



   (C)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate adult
establishments to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of
the citizens of the city and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations
to:



      (1)   Prevent criminal activity within the city;



      (2)   To allow for efficient and effective law enforcement
services in the city;



      (3)   Prevent deterioration of neighborhoods and its
consequent adverse effect on real estate values of properties within the
neighborhood;



      (4)   To locate adult establishments away from residential
areas, schools, parks and places of worship;



      (5)   To provide a content-neutral, objective, licensing
scheme that allows the city to monitor adult establishments for violations of
building and health codes; and



      (6)   Prevent ownership of adult establishments by persons
with prior, relevant criminal convictions.



   (D)   Reasonable opportunity. The provisions of this chapter do not
prohibit adult establishments from having a reasonable opportunity to locate
in the city. This chapter is not for the purpose of, nor is it intended to,
impose a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative
materials, including adult-oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the
intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to
adult-oriented materials protected by the first amendment or to deny access
by distributors and exhibitors of adult-oriented entertainment to their
intended market.



§ 118.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADULT ESTABLISHMENT.



      (1)   Any business that devotes a substantial or significant
portion of its inventory, stock in trade, or publicly-displayed merchandise,
or devotes a substantial or significant portion of its floor area (not
including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements, or any portion of
the business not open to the public) to, or derives a substantial or
significant portion of its gross revenues from items, merchandise, devices or
other materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on material
depicting, exposing, simulating, describing, or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas; or



      (2)   Any business that engages in any adult use as defined in
this section.



   ADULT USE.  Any of the activities and businesses described below:



      (1)   ADULT BODY PAINTING STUDIO.  An establishment or
business that provides the service of applying paint, ink, or other
substance, whether transparent or non-transparent, to the body of a patron
when the person is nude.



      (2)   ADULT BOOKSTORE.  An establishment or business used for
the barter, rental, or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures,
slides, records, audio tape, videotape, movies, or motion picture film if a
substantial or significant portion of its inventory, stock in trade, or
publicly-displayed merchandise consists of, or if a substantial or
significant portion of its floor area (not including storerooms, stock areas,
bathrooms, basements, or any portion of the business not open to the public)
is devoted to, or if substantial or significant portion of its gross revenues
is derived from items, merchandise, devices or materials that are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on material depicting,
exposing, simulating, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.



      (3)   ADULT CABARET. A business or establishment that provides
dancing or other live entertainment distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the depiction of nudity, specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas; or the presentation, display, or depiction of matter that
seeks to evoke, arouse, or excite sexual or erotic feelings or desire.



      (4)   ADULT COMPANIONSHIP ESTABLISHMENT.  A business or
establishment that provides the service of engaging in or listening to
conversation, talk, or discussion distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (5)   ADULT CONVERSATION/RAP PARLOR.  A business or
establishment that provides the services of engaging in or listening to
conversation, talk, or discussion distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (6)   ADULT HEALTH/SPORT CLUB.  A health/sport club that is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.



      (7)   ADULT HOTEL OR MOTEL. A hotel or motel that presents
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.



      (8)   ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR/HEALTH CLUB. A massage parlor or
health club that provides massage services distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (9)   ADULT MODELING STUDIO.  A business or establishment
that provides live models who, with the intent of providing sexual
stimulation or sexual gratification, engage in specified sexual activities or
display specified anatomical areas while being observed, painted, painted
upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted.



      (10)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE. Any place to which the
public is permitted or invited where coin or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically, or mechanically controlled or operated still or motion picture
machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are used to show
images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where
the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.



      (11)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A motion picture theater
that as a prevailing practice presents material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas for observation by patrons.



      (12)   ADULT NOVELTY BUSINESS. An establishment or business
that devotes a substantial or significant portion of its inventory, stock in
trade, or publicly-displayed merchandise or devotes a substantial or
significant portion of its floor area (not including storerooms, stock areas,
bathrooms, basements, or any portion of the business not open to the public)
to, or derives a substantial or significant portion of its gross revenues
from items, merchandise, or devices that are distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis of material depicting or describing specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, or items, merchandise or devices
that simulate specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or
are designed for sexual stimulation.



      (13)   ADULT SAUNA. A sauna that provides a steam bath or heat
bathing room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxation, or reducing, if the
service provided by the sauna is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (14)   ADULT STEAM ROOM/BATHHOUSE FACILITY. A building or
portion of a building used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room
used for the purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation, or reducing, if the
service provided by the steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.



   NUDE or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.



      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anuses, or female breasts below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; and



      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even
if completely and opaquely covered.



   PREMISES.  The real property and all building and structures located
on the real property.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.



      (1)   An act of sexual intercourse, normal or perverted,
actual or simulated, including genital-genital, anal-genital, or oral-genital
intercourse, whether between human beings or between a human being and an
animal;



      (2)   Sadomasochistic abuse, meaning flagellation or torture
by or upon a person who is nude or clad in undergarments or in a revealing
costume or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically
restricted on the part of one so clothed;



      (3)   Masturbation or lewd exhibitions of the genitals
including any explicit, close-up representation of a human genital organ
clothed or unclothed; and



      (4)   Physical contact or simulated physical contact with the
clothed or unclothed pubic areas or buttocks of a human male or female, or
breasts of a female, whether alone or between members of the same or opposite
sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or
gratification.



   SUBSTANTIAL OR SIGNIFICANT PORTION.  Twenty-five percent (25%) or more.



§ 118.03  APPLICATION OF THIS CHAPTER.



   (A)   Other laws. No adult establishment shall engage in any
activity or conduct or permit any other person to engage in any activity or
conduct in the establishment that is prohibited by any ordinance of the city,
the laws of the sate, or the United States of America. Nothing in this
chapter shall be construed as authorizing or permitting conduct that is
prohibited or regulated by other statutes or ordinances, including but not
limited to statutes or ordinances prohibiting the exhibition, sale, or
distribution of obscene material generally, or the exhibition, sale, or
distribution of specified materials to minors.



   (B)   Existing adult establishments. Except as otherwise provided in
this chapter, existing adult establishments must comply with all requirements
of this chapter immediately upon its effective date.



Penalty, see § 118.99



§ 118.04  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   No adult establishment shall be open to the public from the hours of
2:00 a.m. until 10:00 a.m. weekdays and Saturdays, any time after 2:00 a.m.
on Sundays, or at any time on national holidays.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 118.05  OPERATION.



   Adult establishments are subject to the following business regulations.



   (A)   Off-site viewing. An adult establishment must prevent off-site
viewing of its merchandise or any materials depicting, describing, or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas by any
visual or auditory media, including display, decoration, sign, show window,
sound transmission, or other means.



   (B)   Prohibition on liquor.



      (1)   Adult establishments shall not sell or dispense
intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor nor shall the adult establishment be
located in a building or on a premise that contains a business that sells or
dispenses intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor.



      (2)   The sale and consumption of alcohol is prohibited on the
premises of an adult establishment, including, but not limited to, any
parking areas or lots that are owned or leased by the adult establishment or
its owner, or used by patrons when they are at the adult establishment.



   (C)   Entrances. All entrances to an adult establishment, with the
exception of emergency fire exits that are not useable by patrons to enter
the business, shall be visible from a public right-of-way.



   (D)   Layout. The layout of any display areas shall be designed so
that the management of the adult establishment and any law enforcement
personnel inside the store can observe all patrons while they have access to
any merchandise offered for sale or viewing including but not limited to
books, magazines, photographs, video tapes, or any other material, or any
live dancers or entertainers.



   (E)   Illumination. Illumination of the premises exterior shall be
adequate to observe the location and activities of all persons on the
exterior premises.



   (F)   Signs. Signs for adult establishments shall not contain
representational depiction of an adult nature or graphic descriptions of the
adult theme of the operation. An adult establishment must prominently display
at the entrance of the business, or no more than two (2) feet from the
door-opening device of the establishment, a sign that states “This business
sells or displays material containing adult themes. Persons under eighteen
(18) years of age shall not enter.” The sign must contain letters between
three-eighths (3/8) inch and two (2) inches in height.



   (G)   Access by minors. No minor shall be permitted on the premises
of an adult establishment. Adult goods or materials may not be offered, sold,
transferred, conveyed, given or bartered to a minor, or displayed in a
fashion that allows them to be viewed by a minor, whether or not the minor is
on the licensed premises.



   (H)   Additional conditions for adult cabarets. The following
additional conditions apply to adult cabarets:



      (1)   No dancer, live entertainer, or performer shall be under
eighteen (18) years old.



      (2)   All dancing or live entertainment shall occur on a
platform intended for that purpose and which is raised at least two (2) feet
from the level of the floor.



      (3)   No dancer or performer shall fondle, caress, or touch
any patron and no patron shall fondle, caress, or touch any dancer or
performer.



   (I)   No nudity. No person may be nude on the premises of any adult
establishment.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 118.06  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   License required. It is unlawful for any person or entity to
own, lease, rent, manage, or operate an adult establishment without a valid
license issued by the city pursuant to this chapter.



   (B)   Existing businesses. Within ten (10) working days of the
effective date of this chapter, any existing adult establishment must apply
for a license from the city. Failure to apply for a license is a violation of
this chapter and is subject to penalty under § 118.99. An existing adult
establishment may continue to operate pending review of the license
application by the city.



Penalty, see § 118.99



§ 118.07  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   (A)   An application for a license must be made on a form provided
by the city. The completed application must contain the following information:



      (1)   All applicants. For all applicants:



         (a)   Whether the applicant is a natural person,
corporation, partnership, or other form of organization.



         (b)   The legal description of the premises to be
licensed, along with a sketch or diagram showing the floor plan of the
premises. The floor plan of the premises shall detail all internal operations
and activities, including a statement of the total floor space occupied by
the business. The floor plan need not be professionally prepared but must be
drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior
of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches.



         (c)   The name and street address of the business. If
the business is to be conducted under a designated name, or style other than
the name of the applicant, a certified copy of the certificate required by
M.S. § 333.01, as it may be amended from time to time, shall be submitted.



         (d)   Whether the applicant has had a previous adult
establishment license suspended or revoked.



      (2)   Applicants who are natural persons. If the applicant is
a natural person:



         (a)   The name, place, and date of birth, street, city
and mailing address, and phone number of the applicant.



         (b)   Whether the applicant has ever used or has been
known by a name other than the applicant's name, and if so, the name or names
used and information concerning dates and places where used.



         (c)   The street and city addresses at which the
applicant has lived during the preceding two (2) years.



         (d)   The type, name, and location of every business or
occupation in which the applicant has been engaged during the preceding two
(2) years and name(s) and address(es) of the applicant's employer(s) and
partner(s), if any, for the preceding two (2) years.



         (e)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a
gross misdemeanor or felony relating to sex offenses, obscenity offenses, or
adult establishments.



      (3)   Applicants that are partnerships. If the applicant is a
partnership:



         (a)   The name(s) and address(es) of the partnership,
the name(s) and address(es) of all partners and all of the information
concerning each partner that is required of applicants in subsection (2) of
this section.



         (b)   Whether the partnership is general or limited.



         (c)   A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be
submitted with the application. If the partnership is required to file a
certificate as to a trade name pursuant to M.S. § 333.01, as it may be
amended from time to time, a certified copy of the certificate shall be
attached to the application.



      (4)   Corporate or other applicants. If the applicant is a
corporation or other organization:



         (a)   The name of the corporation or business form, and
if incorporated, the date and state of incorporation.



         (b)   A true copy of the certificate of incorporation,
articles of incorporation or association agreement and bylaws shall be
attached to the application. If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a
certificate of authority as required by M.S. § 303.06, as it may be amended
from time to time, shall be attached. If the entity is a limited liability
company, then true and accurate copies of the articles of organization and
any membership agreements shall be attached to the application.



         (c)   The name of the manager(s), proprietor(s), or
other agent(s) in charge of the business and all of the information
concerning each manager, proprietor, or agent that is required of the
applicants in subsection (2) of this section.



         (d)   Accurate and complete business records showing the
names, addresses, and dates of birth of all officers, directors and
controlling stockholders for the business.



         (e)   The name of the registered corporate agent and the
address of the registered office for service of process.



   (B)   Changes in the information provided on the application or
provided during the investigation must be brought to the attention of the
city by the applicant or licensee. If such a change takes place during the
investigation, it must be reported to the City Clerk-Treasurer in writing. A
failure by an applicant or licensee to report such a change may result in a
denial or revocation of a license.



§ 118.08  DISQUALIFICATIONS AND REQUALIFICATION.



   (A)   The city will issue a license to an applicant within thirty
(30) days of the application unless one (1) or more of the following
conditions exist:



      (1)   The applicant is under eighteen (18);



      (2)   The applicant failed to supply all of the information
requested on the license application;



      (3)   The applicant gives false, fraudulent, or untruthful
information on the license application;



      (4)   The applicant has been convicted of a misdemeanor, gross
misdemeanor, or felony relating to sex offenses, obscenity offenses, or adult
establishments;



      (5)   The adult establishment is not in full compliance with
the city code and all provisions of state and federal law;



      (6)   The applicant has not paid the required license fee;



      (7)   The applicant has been denied a license by the city or
any other Minnesota municipal corporation to operate an adult establishment
or such license has been suspended or revoked, within the  preceding twelve
(12) months;



      (8)   The applicant is not the proprietor of the establishment
for which the license is issued; or



      (9)   The adult establishment premises holds an intoxicating
liquor, beer, or wine license.



   (B)   An applicant may qualify for a license:



      (1)   After one (1) year has elapsed in the case of a previous
license revocation;



      (2)   After two (2) years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement in the case of a
misdemeanor or gross misdemeanor offense;



      (3)   After five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the
last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is later, in the case of a felony offense; or



      (4)   After five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the
last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last
conviction, whichever is later, if the conviction is of two (2) or more
misdemeanor or gross misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor or
gross misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty-four (24) month period.



§ 118.09  EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL.



   (A)   Expiration. An adult establishment license expires at the end
of the calendar year.



   (B)   Renewal. A licensee may renew a license by completing an
application as provided in § 118.07. The applicant will be allowed to
continue business until the city has determined that the applicant meets the
criteria for renewal of the license. If the city denies the renewal, the
applicant shall not be issued a license for one (1) year from the date of
denial.



§ 118.10  SUSPENSION.



   (A)   Causes of suspension. The city may suspend a license for a
period not to exceed thirty (30) days if it determines that the licensee or
an employee of a licensee has:



      (1)   Violated or is not in compliance with any provision of
this chapter;



      (2)   Allowed or engaged in the sale or use of alcoholic
beverages while on the adult establishment premises other than at an adult
hotel or motel;



      (3)   Refused to allow an inspection of the adult
establishment as authorized by this chapter; or



      (4)   Knowingly permitted unlawful gambling by any person on
the adult establishment premises.



   (B)   Notice. A suspension by the city shall be preceded by written
notice to the licensee and a public hearing. The notice shall give at least
ten (10) days' notice of the time and place of the hearing and shall state
the nature of the charges against the licensee. The notice may be served upon
the licensee personally, or by leaving the same at the licensed business
premises with the person in charge thereof, or by mailing the notice by U.S.
mail to the last known address of the owner or agent authorized to receive
legal notices for the business, as listed on its license application.



§ 118.11  REVOCATION.



   (A)   Suspended licenses. The city may revoke a license if a cause
of suspension in § 118.10 occurs and the license has been suspended at least
once before within the preceding twelve (12) months.



   (B)   Causes of revocation. The city may revoke a license if it
determines that:



      (1)   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the
material submitted to the city during the application process;



      (2)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed
possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises;



      (3)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed
prostitution on the premises;



      (4)   A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the adult
establishment during a period of time when the licensee's license was
suspended;



      (5)   A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in §
118.08(A)(4), for which the time period required in § 118.08(B) has not
elapsed; or



      (6)   Except in the case of an adult hotel or motel, a
licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse,
sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation to occur in or on the licensed
premises.



   (C)   Appeals. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall
have no effect on the revocation of the license.



   (D)   Granting a license after revocation. When the city revokes a
license, the revocation shall continue for one (1) year and the licensee
shall not be issued an adult establishment license for one (1) year from the
date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the city
finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the
applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed
since the date the revocation became effective. If the license is revoked due
to a criminal conviction under § 118.08(A)(4), an applicant may not be
granted another license until the appropriate number of years required under
§ 118.08(B), has elapsed.



§ 118.12  PROCEDURES FOR APPEAL.



   Non-renewals, suspensions, and revocations of an adult establishment
license are governed by the following:



   (A)   Notice and hearing. In the event that the city proposes not to
renew, suspend, or revoke a license, the city will notify the licensee in
writing of the basis for the action. The Council will hold a hearing for the
purpose of determining whether to not renew, suspend, or revoke the license.
The hearing must be within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice. The
City Council must determine whether to not renew, suspend, or revoke a
license within thirty (30) days after the close of the hearing or within
sixty (60) days of the date of the notice, whichever is sooner. The Council
must notify the licensee of its decision within that period.



   (B)   Suspension or revocation. If the Council determines to suspend
or revoke a license, the suspension or revocation is not effective until
fifteen (15) days after notification of the decision to the licensee. If,
within that fifteen (15) days, the licensee files and serves an action in
state or federal court challenging the Council's action, the suspension or
revocation is stayed until the conclusion of such action.



   (C)   Non-renewal. If the City Council determines not to renew a
license, the licensee may continue its business for fifteen (15) days after
receiving notice of such non-renewal. If the licensee files and serves an
action in state or federal court within the fifteen (15) days for the purpose
of determining whether the city acted properly, the licensee may continue in
business until the conclusion of the action.



   (D)   Prompt judicial review. After denial of an application or a
renewal of an application, or suspension or revocation of any license, the
applicant or licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such action in any
court of competent jurisdiction. The court shall promptly review such action.



§ 118.13  POSTING.



   The license, if granted, must state on its face the name of the person
or entity to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the
adult establishment. The license must be posted in a conspicuous place at or
near the entrance to the adult establishment.



§ 118.14  FEES.



   The annual license fee for adult establishments shall be an amount set
by the City Council from time to time.



§ 118.15  INSPECTION.



   (A)   Access. An applicant or licensee shall permit health
officials, representatives of the Police Department, Fire Department, and
Building Inspector, to inspect the premises of an adult establishment for the
purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or
open for business. The licensee is at all times responsible for the conduct,
activity, and operation of the business.



   (B)   Refusal to permit inspections. Refusal to permit a lawful
inspection of the premises by health officials, representatives of the Police
Department, Fire Department, or Building Inspector at any time it is occupied
or open for business is a violation of this chapter. Refusal to permit
inspections may result in non-renewal, suspension, or revocation of the
license.



   (C)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to
areas of an adult hotel or motel that are currently being rented by a
customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation. Temporary habitation
is defined as a period of time of at least twelve (12) hours.



§ 118.16  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   A licensee shall not transfer this license to another, nor shall a
licensee operate an adult establishment under the authority of a license at
any place other than the address designated in the application.



§ 118.17  INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   Preliminary background and financial investigation. On an
initial application for a license, on an application for transfer of a
license and, in the sound discretion of the Council that it is in the public
interest to do so, on an application for renewal of a license, the city shall
conduct a preliminary background and financial investigation of the applicant
or it may contract with the Commissioner of Public Safety for the
investigation. The applicant shall pay with the application an investigation
fee in an amount set by the City Council from time to time which shall be in
addition to any license fee. If the cost of the preliminary investigation is
less than the investigation fee, the unused balance shall be returned to the
applicant.



   (B)   Comprehensive background and financial investigation. If the
results of a preliminary investigation warrant, in the sound discretion of
the Council, a comprehensive background and financial investigation, the
Council may either conduct the investigation itself or contract with the
Commissioner of Public Safety for the investigation. The investigation fee
for this comprehensive background and financial investigation to be paid by
the applicant shall be in an amount set by the City Council from time to
time, less any amount paid for the initial investigation if the investigation
is to be conducted within the state, and in an amount set by the City Council
from time to time, less any amount paid for the initial investigation, if the
investigation is required outside the state. The unused balance of the fee
shall be returned to the applicant whether or not the application is denied.
The fee shall be paid in advance of any investigation and the amount actually
expended on the investigation shall not be refundable in the event the
application is denied.



(Ord. 389, passed 2-2-2010)



§ 118.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties for a
misdemeanor as prescribed by state law. Each day the violation continues
shall be considered a separate misdemeanor offense punishable by a separate
misdemeanor penalty. The city may also enforce any provision of this chapter
by mandamus, injunction, or any other appropriate civil remedy in any court
of competent jurisdiction.



CHAPTER 119: [RESERVED]



CHAPTER 120: MASSAGE THERAPISTS



Section



   120.01   Purpose and intent



   120.02   Definitions



   120.03   License required



   120.04   General provisions



   120.05   License requirements



   120.06   Investigation



   120.07   License fee



   120.08   Denial of license



   120.09   Home occupation



 



   120.99   Penalty



§ 120.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to establish
standards to protect health, safety and general welfare of the people of the
City of Mora through regulation of the persons performing massage therapy.



   (B)   The principal objective of this chapter is to provide
standards for the training and insuring of massage therapists.



(Ord. 401, passed 12-21-2010)



§ 120.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MASSAGE THERAPIST.  An individual, other than a person licensed as a
medical doctor; chiropractor; osteopath; podiatrist; licensed nurse; physical
therapist; athletic director or trainer; or beautician or barber who confine
his/her treatment to the scalp, face and neck; who for compensation practices
and provides massage therapy.



   MASSAGE THERAPY.  The method of treating the superficial parts of the
human body by rubbing, pressing, stroking, kneading, tapping, pounding,
vibrating or stimulating with the hand or any instrument.



(Ord. 401, passed 12-21-2010)



§ 120.03  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any individual to perform or provide massage
therapy services within the city without first obtaining a license to do so
and except as provided for in this chapter.



(Ord. 401, passed 12-21-2010) Penalty, see § 120.99



§ 120.04  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Scope.  This chapter shall apply to all individuals
performing massage therapy.



   (B)   Exceptions.  The following persons are exempt from licensing
under this chapter.



      (1)   Any person who is licensed by the Minnesota Board of
Medical Practice or the Minnesota Board of Chiropractic Examiners shall not
be required to obtain a license for massage therapy if said person provides
proof of licensure to the City Clerk upon request.



      (2)   Any person who is working for or an employee of a
medical professional licensed by the Minnesota Board of Medical Practice or
the Minnesota Board of Chiropractic Examiners shall not be required to obtain
a license for massage therapy if said person provides proof of said
employment to the City Clerk upon request.



      (3)   Any person who is licensed by another governmental
jurisdiction shall not be required to obtain a license for massage therapy if
said person provides proof of said licensure to the City Clerk upon
request.  This exemption is limited to a total of seven (7) days of work
within the city without a city license per calendar year.



(Ord. 401, passed 12-21-2010)



§ 120.05  LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Application.  All applications, new and renewal, shall be
made on forms provided by the City Clerk and shall include the following
information in addition to that required by § 110.02 of the City Code. 



      (1)   The name of all other jurisdictions where the applicant
has been licensed for massage therapy or similar activity and the dates the
applicant was licensed;



      (2)   A description of any crime or other offense, including
the time, place, date, and disposition, for which the applicant had been
arrested.



   (B)   Education and training. 



      (1)   Each applicant shall provide a diploma or certificate of
graduation evidencing completion of five hundred (500) or more hours from a
recognized school of massage therapy which:



         (a)   Is either accredited by a recognized educational
accrediting association or agency, or is licensed by the state or local
governmental agency having jurisdiction over the school; and



         (b)   Offers course work or degree programs in physical
therapy, anatomy, physiology, physical culture, massage, hydrotherapy and
hygiene; and



         (c)   Has for its purpose, either wholly or in part, the
teaching of theory, method, work or profession of massage; and



         (d)   As a prerequisite of graduation, requires clinical
experience.



      (2)   In lieu of a diploma or certificate of graduation from a
recognized school of message therapy the applicant may submit a current
certification from the National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage
and Bodywork evidencing successful completion of one of the following exams:



         (a)   The National Certification Examination for
Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork (NCETMB); or



         (b)   The National Certification Examination for
Therapeutic Massage (NCETM); or



         (c)   The National Examination for State Licensure
(NESL) option.



   (C)   Proof of insurance.



      (1)   Each applicant shall provide a certificate of insurance
issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of
Minnesota showing the applicant to be currently covered by a liability
insurance policy.  The minimum limits of coverage for such insurance shall
be:



         (a)   Each claim, at least three hundred thousand
dollars ($300,000).



         (b)   Each group of claims, at least five hundred
thousand dollars ($500,000).



      (2)   Such insurance shall be kept in force during the term of
the license and shall provide for notification to the city prior to
termination or cancellation. Any license issued hereunder shall automatically
be revoked upon notice of termination or cancellation of such insurance and
shall remain revoked until or unless other insurance is provided as required
herein.



(Ord. 401, passed 12-21-2010)  Penalty, see § 120.99



§ 120.06  INVESTIGATION.



   At the time of an applicant’s initial application for a license under
this chapter the city shall conduct a background investigation of the
applicant to determine if the applicant is eligible for said license.  At
the time of the initial application for a license under this chapter the
applicant shall pay, in full, an investigation fee. 



(Ord. 401, passed 12-21-2010)



§ 120.07  LICENSE FEE.



   The annual license fee for massage therapy and the initial application
investigation fee under this chapter shall be an amount set by the City
Council from time to time. 



(Ord. 401, passed 12-21-2010)



§ 120.08  DENIAL OF LICENSE.



   No license shall be issued to an applicant who:



   (A)   Is under eighteen (18) years of age;



   (B)   Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the
occupation and has not shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation
and present fitness to perform the duties and responsibilities of a licensee
as prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 3;



   (C)   Owes taxes, assessments, or other financial claims to any
governmental agency that are due and delinquent.



(Ord. 401, passed 12-21-2010)



§ 120.09  HOME OCCUPATION.



   Whenever massage therapy is conducted in a residential area as a home
occupation, the person(s) conducting the business shall adhere to all aspects
of the zoning code in relation to home occupations.



(Ord. 401, passed 12-21-2010)  Penalty, see § 120.99



§ 120.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in § 10.99.  Each day
the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense punishable by
a separate penalty.



(Ord. 401, passed 12-21-2010)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   GENERAL OFFENSES



      131.   PUBLIC NUISANCE OFFENSES



CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL OFFENSES



Section



   130.01   Prohibited parking; car dealers



   130.02   Damage to property; graffiti



   130.03   Discharging firearms



   130.04   Curfew for minors



   130.05   Fireworks



   130.06   Social hosts



 



   130.99   Penalty



§ 130.01  PROHIBITED PARKING; CAR DEALERS.



   No person engaged in the sale of new or used cars or trucks within the
city shall at anytime park any new or used automobile or truck in his or her
possession for sale on any street in the city or on any lot in a residential
district of the city.



(1969 Code, § 140.020)  (Ord. 49, passed 9-1-1954)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.02  DAMAGE TO PROPERTY; GRAFFITI.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      GRAFFITI.  In addition to its usual and customary meaning of
defacing walls or structures with messages or slogans, GRAFFITI shall also
mean any letter, numeral, figure, emblem, insignia, picture, outline,
character, spectacle, delineation, announcement, word, phrase, diagram,
symbol, sketch, inscription or representation, wherein the contents thereof
are visible to any member of the general public and which contains references
to sexual activity, diagrams relating to sexual activity or sexual organs,
references to criminal activities or groups which promote or are involved in
criminal activity, swearing or fighting words, defamatory materials about any
person, references to relationships, or any marking of any kind whatsoever
which results in damage to, defacing of, marring of, or discoloring of any
sidewalk, street, or other public surface, any vehicle, any equipment, lamp,
lamp post or other city property, or of the exterior surface of a wall,
fence, door, building or other structure, whether publicly or privately owned.



      OWNER.  Means and includes the owner of record of the subject
property, whether public or private, at the time of the placement or
discovery of the graffiti or at a subsequent time, the beneficial owner under
a land trust, the contract purchaser, or that person or persons or trust in
whose name the general taxes for the last preceding year were paid, except
that OWNER shall not include the city.



   (B)   Conduct prohibited.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to inscribe, draw, or
otherwise place or cause to be placed any graffiti upon the surface of any
building, structure, wall or surface of other property that is publicly or
privately owned.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any parent or legal guardian to
knowingly permit any minor child in his or her custody or control to violate
division (B)(1) of this section.



      (3)   The parent or legal guardian of a minor defendant who
resides with the parent or legal guardian at the time of the offense may be
held liable for any fine or condition of restitution or reparation imposed by
a court upon a minor for violation of this section; provided, that minor has
not paid the fine or made restitution or reparation within the time ordered
by the court; and further provided that the parent or legal guardian has been
served with summons or notice to appear whether in the original cause or in
any subsequent proceedings arising therefrom, including sentencing or
collection actions, as provided by law.



   (C)   Removal by owner.



      (1)   Owner's responsibility.  It shall be the duty of the
owner of the structure or wall or other private property upon which any
graffiti is placed or made to remove, eradicate, or eliminate the inscription
or representation within thirty (30) days of the occurrence unless granted
additional time by the City Council.



      (2)   Notice to remove graffiti.  In the event the owner has
failed to eliminate the graffiti, the owner shall be notified by certified
mail or personal notice that he or she has thirty (30) days from the date of
the notice in which to remove the graffiti.  In the event that charges have
been filed against the person believed responsible for placement of the
graffiti and the owner can show to the city that there is a reasonable
likelihood that the person will be required to make restitution or restore
the premises to its previous condition, the owner may be given additional
time to meet the removal requirements.  In no event shall the owner be
granted more than a total of six (6) months' time to remove graffiti, but any
extensions shall be based solely upon a reasonable likelihood of apprehension
and conviction of the person responsible.  In the absence of the reasonable
likelihood, the owner is responsible for removal within the time allowed in
divisions (C)(1) and (2) of this section.



      (3)   List of contractors and cleaning materials.  The city
may make available a list of contractors in the business of removing graffiti
and list of cleaning materials generally recognized in the industry as
effective in the removal of graffiti.  By providing lists of contractors and
cleaning materials,



the city does not guarantee the quality or adequacy of work performed by
anyone selected by owner or the effectiveness or safety of the materials
listed, and the city expressly disclaims responsibility or liability for the
quality or adequacy of the work or materials or any claims for damage or
injury arising therefrom.



   (D)   Removal by the city.



      (1)   The city shall have the right but not the duty to remove
graffiti from the exterior of private property if the owner informs the city
of the presence of the graffiti and of the owner's inability to remove it. 
Prior to the city entering any private property to remove graffiti, the owner
must sign a statement authorizing removal by the city and agreeing to pay the
reasonable costs of the removal and to allow the recording of a lien against
the real estate upon which the work was performed if the cost is not paid to
the city within thirty (30) days of the date of the invoice sent to the
owner.  The owner must also sign a release holding the city harmless from
any claims or suits brought for damages pursuant to any adverse or injurious
effects of such chemicals or from the actions taken by the city or its
employees to remove the graffiti prior to the city commencing work on the
property.  If the property owner does not remove the graffiti within the
time specified or extended time requested and granted by the city or if the
city is unable to perform the work at the request of the owner, the owner
shall be subject to the penalties listed in division (E) of this section.



      (2)   If the city performs the graffiti removal pursuant to
division (D)(1) of this section, it shall be entitled to a lien and to file a
notice of lien against the property upon which the work was performed for the
cost of the removal.



   (E)   Penalty.



      (1)   Upon a finding of guilty for violation of division (B)
of this section, an offender shall be punished as provided in § 130.99. 
Additionally, the court may, as a condition of probation, supervision, or
conditional discharge, require that the party guilty of violating the
provisions of division (B) of this section make full and complete restitution
to the owner of the property for expenses incurred in the removal of the
graffiti or, with the consent of the owner, restore the structure, wall,
building or surface to its previous condition.  In addition, the court may
order as a further penalty community service in the form of time to be spent
in cleaning property that has been defaced by graffiti in any location in the
city.



      (2)   Upon a finding of guilty for violation of division
(C)(1) of this section, an offender shall be punished as provided in §
130.99.  Each and every day that graffiti is permitted to remain beyond the
time specified in division (C)(2) of this section shall constitute a separate
violation.



   (F)   Compliance by the city.



      (1)   It is the intention of the city that graffiti discovered
upon city property or public property under the jurisdiction and control of
the city will be removed within the time periods for graffiti removal imposed
upon other governmental bodies and owners of private property under this
section.  The City Council shall have the authority to order and direct the
removal of graffiti.



      (2)   A designated city officer, or his or her designee, shall
provide, no less than semi-annually, a written report to the City Council of
graffiti incidents involving city property and removal efforts by the city. 
The report shall include at a minimum the location of the graffiti, charges
filed against or convictions of offenders where relevant, the date and
methods of graffiti removal undertaken by the city and the cost of the
removal.



Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.03  DISCHARGING FIREARMS.



   (A)   No person shall discharge a firearm within the city limits
except as provided below.



   (B)   Exceptions. This section shall not prohibit the following:



      (1)   The firing of a military salute;



      (2)   The firing of weapons by persons of the nation's armed
forces acting under military authority;



      (3)   The firing of weapons by any person engaged in public
entertainment, provided they have applied for and received permission from
the city to do so in advance of the performance where the discharge of
firearms shall take place;



      (4)   The firing of shotguns only be any person engaged in
hunting on city owned or controlled property, provided they have applied for
and received permission from the city to do so;



      (5)   The firing of weapons by law enforcement officials in
the proper enforcement of the law;



      (6)   The firing of weapons by any person in the proper
exercise of the right of self-defense; or



      (7)   The firing of weapons by any person otherwise lawfully
permitted by proper Federal, state or local authorities to discharge a
firearm in a manner contrary to the provisions of this section.



   (C)   If any of the above provisions are found to be in conflict
with M.S. § 624.717, as it may be amended from time to time, the provisions
of that statute shall prevail.



(Ord. 439, passed 8-18-2015; Ord. 442, passed 10-20-2015)  Penalty, see §
130.99



§ 130.04  CURFEW FOR MINORS.



   (A)   Purpose.  The curfew for minors established by this section
is maintained for four (4) primary reasons:



      (1)   To protect the public from illegal acts of minors
committed during the curfew hours;



      (2)   To protect minors from improper influences that prevail
during the curfew hours, including involvement with gangs;



      (3)   To protect minors from criminal activity that occurs
during the curfew hours; and



      (4)   To help parents control their minor children.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      EMERGENCY ERRAND.  A task that if not completed promptly
threatens the health, safety, or comfort of the minor or a member of the
minor's household.  The term shall include, but shall not be limited to,
seeking urgent medical treatment, seeking urgent assistance from law
enforcement or fire department personnel, and seeking shelter from the
elements or urgent assistance from a utility company due to a natural or
human-made calamity.



      OFFICIAL CITY TIME.  The time of day as determined by reference
to the master clock used by the Police Department.



      PLACES OF AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAINMENT OR REFRESHMENT.  Those places
that include, but are not limited to, movie theaters, pinball arcades,
shopping malls, nightclubs catering to minors, restaurants, and pool halls.



      PRIMARY CARE or PRIMARY CUSTODY.  The person who is responsible
for providing food, clothing, shelter, and other basic necessities to the
minor.  The person providing primary care or custody to the minor shall not
be another minor.



      SCHOOL ACTIVITY.  An event which has been placed on a school
calendar by public or parochial school authorities as a school sanctioned
event.



   (C)   Hours.



      (1)   Minors under the age of thirteen (13) years.  No minor
under the age of thirteen (13) years shall be in or upon the public streets,
alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public
buildings; nor in or upon places of amusement, entertainment or refreshment;
nor in or upon any vacant lot or building, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. the following day, official city time.



      (2)   Minors ages thirteen (13) to fifteen (15) years.  No
minor of the ages of thirteen (13), fourteen (14), or fifteen (15) years
shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other
public grounds, public places, public buildings; nor in or upon places of
amusement, entertainment or refreshment; nor in or upon any vacant lot or
building, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the following day,
official city time.



      (3)   Minors ages sixteen (16) to seventeen (17) years.  No
minor of the ages of sixteen (16) or seventeen (17) years shall be in or upon
the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds,
public places, public buildings; nor in or upon places of amusement,
entertainment or refreshment; nor in or upon any vacant lot or building,
between the hours of 12:00 a.m. (midnight) and 5:00 a.m. the following day,
official city time.



   (D)   Effect on control by adult responsible for minor.  Nothing in
this section shall be construed to give a minor the right to stay out until
the curfew hours designated in this section if otherwise directed by a
parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and custody
of the minor; nor shall this section be construed to diminish or impair the
control of the adult person having the primary care or custody of the minor.



   (E)   Exceptions.  The provisions of this section shall not apply
in the following situations:



      (1)   To a minor accompanied by his or her parent or guardian,
or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor;



      (2)   To a minor who is upon an emergency errand at the
direction of his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the
primary care and custody of the minor;



      (3)   To a minor who is in any of the places described in this
section if in connection with or as required by an employer engaged in a
lawful business, trade, profession, or occupation; or to a minor traveling
directly to or from the location of the business, trade, profession or
occupation and the minor's residence.  Minors who fall within the scope of
this exception shall carry written proof of employment and proof of the hours
the employer requires the minor's presence at work.



      (4)   To a minor who is participating in or traveling directly
to or from an event which has been officially designated as a school activity
by public or parochial school authorities; or who is participating in or
traveling directly to or from an official activity supervised by adults and
sponsored by the city, a civic organization, school, religious institution,
or similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor and with the
permission of the minor's parent, guardian, or other adult person having the
primary care and custody of the minor.



      (5)   To a minor who is passing through the city in the course
of interstate travel during the hours of curfew.



      (6)   To a minor who is attending or traveling directly to or
from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free
speech, freedom of assembly, or freedom of religion.



      (7)   To minors on the sidewalk abutting his or her residence
or abutting the residence of a next- door neighbor if the neighbor does not
complain to the city's designated law enforcement provider about the minor's
presence.



      (8)   To a minor who is married or has been married, or is
otherwise legally emancipated.



   (F)   Duties of person legally responsible for minor.  No parent,
guardian, or other adult having the primary care or custody of any minor
shall permit any violation of the requirements of this section by the minor.



   (G)   Duties of other persons.  No person operating or in charge of
any place of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment shall permit any minor
to enter or remain in his or her place of business during the hours
prohibited by this section unless the minor is accompanied by his or her
parent, guardian or other adult person having primary care or custody of the
minor, or unless one (1) of the exceptions to this section applies.



   (H)   Defense. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this
section that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly
notified the city's designated law enforcement provider that a minor was
present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused
to leave.



   (I)   A law enforcement officer must look into whether a minor has
an affirmative defense before making an arrest.



Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.05  FIREWORKS.



   (A)   The use, display, possession, discharge or sale of any
fireworks not expressly permitted by M.S. § 624.20, Subd. 1(c), as it may be
amended from time to time, is strictly prohibited.



   (B)   All use, display or discharge of those non-explosive,
non-aerial pyrotechnic entertainment devices only containing the limited
amounts of pyrotechnic chemical compositions described in and permitted by
M.S. § 624.20, Subd. 1(c), as it may be amended from time to time,
hereinafter referred to as “permitted consumer fireworks”, is strictly
prohibited in:



      (1)   The area on, below, above or within or in close
proximity to: recreational areas, roadways, streets, highways, bicycle lanes,
pedestrian paths, sidewalks, rights-of-way, lakes, rivers, waterways and all
other property owned or leased by the city, the county in which the city is
located, the State of Minnesota or the federal government and located in
whole or in part within the city limits;



      (2)   Private property within the city limits that has
conspicuously posted a written sign or notice that no fireworks discharge is
allowed;



      (3)   Within three hundred (300) feet of any consumer
fireworks retail sales facility or storage area that has posted a written
sign or notice that no fireworks discharge is allowed; and



      (4)   Any property, area, or structure that, by its physical
condition or the physical conditions in which it is set, would constitute a
fire or personal safety hazard.



   (C)   All other use, display or discharge of permitted consumer
fireworks must be conducted in a manner that minimizes the risk of fire or
injury to other persons or property.



§ 130.06  SOCIAL HOSTS.



   (A)   Purpose and findings.  The city intends to discourage
underage possession and consumption of alcohol, even if done within the
confines of a private residence, and intends to hold persons criminally
responsible who host events or gatherings where persons under twenty-one (21)
years of age possess or consume alcohol, regardless of whether the person
hosting the event or gathering supplied the alcohol.  The Mora City Council
finds that:



      (1)   Events and gatherings held on private or public property
where alcohol is possessed or consumed by persons under the age of twenty-one
(21) are harmful to those persons and constitute a potential threat to public
health requiring prevention or abatement.



      (2)   Prohibiting underage consumption acts to protect
underage persons, as well as the general public, from injuries related to
alcohol consumption, such as alcohol overdose or alcohol-related traffic
collisions.



      (3)   Alcohol is an addictive drug which, if used
irresponsibly, could have drastic effects on those who use it as well as
those who are affected by the actions of an irresponsible user.



      (4)   Often, events or gatherings involving underage
possession and consumption occur outside the presence of parents or
guardians.  However, there are times when a parent or guardian or other
adult is present and condones the activity and, in some circumstances,
provides the alcohol.



      (5)   Even though giving or furnishing alcohol to an underage
person is a crime, it is difficult to prove, and an ordinance is necessary to
help further combat underage consumption.



      (6)   A deterrent effect will be created by holding a person
criminally responsible for hosting an event or gathering where underage
possession or consumption occurs.



   (B)   Definitions.  For purposes of this section, the following
terms have the following meanings:



      (1)   ALCOHOL means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or
spirits of wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits
including dilutions and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever
process produced. 



      (2)   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE means alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine,
beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer,
and which contains one-half of one percent (0.5%) or more of alcohol by
volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted,
mixed, or combined with other substances.



      (3)   EVENT OR GATHERING means any group of three (3) or more
persons who have assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or
other activity.



      (4)   HOST means to aid, conduct, allow, entertain, organize,
supervise, control, or permit a gathering or event.



      (5)   PARENT means any person having legal custody of a
juvenile as:



         (a)   A natural, adoptive parent, or step-parent;



         (b)   A legal guardian; or



         (c)   A person to whom legal custody has been given by
order of the court.



      (6)   PERSON means any individual, partnership,
co-partnership, corporation, or any association of one or more individuals.



      (7)   RESIDENCE or PREMISES means any home, yard, farm, field,
land, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or
a hall or meeting room, park, or any other place of assembly, public or
private, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied
as a dwelling or specifically for a party or other social function, and
whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without permission or
compensation.



      (8)   UNDERAGE PERSON is any individual under twenty-one (21)
years of age.



   (C)   Prohibited acts. It is unlawful for any person(s) to host,
allow or have control over an event or gathering, or intentionally aid, hire,
advise, counsel, or conspire with or otherwise procure another to host, allow
or have control over an event or gathering, at any residence, premises, or on
any other private or public property, where alcohol or alcoholic beverages
are present, when the person knows, has reason to know, or acts in reckless
disregard of knowledge that any underage person will or does consume any
alcohol or alcoholic beverage, or possess any alcohol or alcoholic beverage
with the intent to consume it, and the person fails to take reasonable steps
to prevent possession or consumption by the underage person(s).



   (D)   Exceptions.  This section does not apply to:



      (1)   Conduct solely between an underage person and his or her
parent while present in the parent’s household.



      (2)   Legally protected religious observances.



   (E)   Enforcement.  This section can be enforced by any peace
officer licensed by the State of Minnesota.



(Ord. 392, passed 6-1-2010)



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally.  Whoever violated any provision of this chapter
for which no other penalty has been established shall be punished as provided
in § 10.99.



   (B)   Curfew penalties.



      (1)   Minors.  Any minor found to be in violation of §
130.03 may be adjudicated delinquent and shall be subject to the
dispositional alternatives set forth in M.S. § 260.185, as it may be amended
from time to time.



      (2)   Adults.  Any adult person found to be in violation of
§ 130.04 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



CHAPTER 131:  PUBLIC NUISANCE OFFENSES



Section




Generally




   131.01   Definitions



   131.02   Public nuisances affecting health



   131.03   Public nuisances affecting morals and decency



   131.04   Public nuisances affecting peace and safety



   131.05   Public nuisances affecting public property



   131.06   Duties of city officers



   131.07   Abatement



   131.08   Personal liability



   131.09   Assessment




Sound Nuisances




   131.20   Public nuisances caused by sound



   131.21   Nuisance noises



   131.22   Persons liable



   131.23   Exceptions



   131.24   Violation




Weed Nuisances




   131.40   Short title



   131.41   Jurisdiction



   131.42   Definitions; exclusions



   131.43   Owners responsible for trimming, removal and the like



   131.44   Filing complaint



   131.45   Notice of violations



   131.46   Appeals



   131.47   Abatement by city



   131.48   Personal liability



   131.49   Assessment



Cross-reference:



   Nuisances in the environment, see Chapter 92 of this code of ordinances



GENERALLY



§ 131.01  DEFINITIONS.



   Whoever does any of the following is guilty of maintaining a public
nuisance, which is a misdemeanor:



   (A)   Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys,
injures or endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort or repose of any
members of the public;



   (B)   Interferes with, obstructs or deposits garbage or refuse upon
or otherwise renders dangerous for passage any public highway or
right-of-way, or waters used by the public; or



   (C)   Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law or this
code to be a public nuisance and for which no sentence is specifically
provided.



(1969 Code, § 139.01)  (Ord. 257, passed 7-18-1995)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.02  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.



   The following are declared to be nuisances affecting health:



   (A)   Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or
vegetable matter and/or the accumulation of manure; except that a compost
pile otherwise permitted by this code shall not be considered a violation of
this section;



   (B)   All diseased animals running at large;



   (C)   Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within
twenty-four (24) hours after death;



   (D)   Accumulations of refuse or other debris;



   (E)   Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not rodent-free or
fly-tight, or which are so maintained as to constitute a health hazard or to
emit foul and disagreeable odors;



   (F)   The pollution of any public or private well or cistern, stream
or lake, canal or body of water by sewage, industrial waste or other
substances;



   (G)   All noxious weeds and other rank growths of vegetation upon
public or private property;



   (H)   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders, in
unreasonable quantities;



   (I)   Open or controlled burning in violation of state statutes,
regulations and city ordinances;



   (J)   Any offensive trade or business as defined by statute not
licensed by the Council;



   (K)   Bodies of stagnant water or vessels holding stagnant water in
which mosquitos can breed except that stormwater holding ponds and wetlands
shall be exempt from this provision; and



   (L)   All other acts, omissions, occupations and uses of property
which are, in fact, a menace to the public health.



(1969 Code, § 139.02)  (Ord. 257, passed 7-18-1995)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.03  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY.



   The following are, by this section, declared to be nuisances affecting
public morals and decency:



   (A)   All gambling devices, slot machines and punch boards kept in
violation of law;



   (B)   Betting, bookmaking and all apparatus used in those
occupations;



   (C)   All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous
sexual intercourse, gambling houses, houses of ill fame and bawdy houses;



   (D)   All places where intoxicating liquor and illegal drugs are
manufactured or dispensed, sold, stored, consumed or used in violation of
law; and



   (E)   Any vehicle used for the transportation of intoxicating
liquor, illegal drugs or for promiscuous sexual intercourse, or any other
immoral or illegal purpose.



(1969 Code, § 139.03)  (Ord. 257, passed 7-18-1995)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.04  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.



   The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and
safety:



   (A)   All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks twenty-four
(24) hours after the snow or other precipitation causing the condition has
ceased to fall; ice build-ups and snow accumulations on the roof of any
building which could fall onto any street or sidewalk;



   (B)   All trees, hedges, billboards or obstructions which prevent
persons from having a clear view of all traffic approaching an intersection;



   (C)   All wires and limbs of trees which are so close to the surface
of a sidewalk or street as to constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles;



   (D)   All unnecessary noises and annoying vibrations;



   (E)   Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary use by the
public of streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds except under those
conditions as are permitted by this code or other applicable law;



   (F)   Radio aerials, television antennae or satellite dishes erected
or maintained in a dangerous manner;



   (G)   Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or
any use of a public street or sidewalk which obstructs traffic and the free
use of the streets or sidewalks;



   (H)   All dangerous machinery or equipment left unattended or
unguarded which may attract the public;



   (I)   Wastewater permitted to flow upon streets or other public
property;



   (J)   Accumulations on public or private property of discarded or
disused machinery, household appliances, furniture, automobile bodies, wood
or other material, which constitute a public eyesore, devalue neighboring
properties, or promote the harboring of rats, mice, snakes or vermin; or
which constitute fire, health or safety hazards, or promote the rank growth
of vegetation among the items so accumulated;



   (K)   Any well, hole or similar excavation which is left uncovered
or in such other condition as to constitute a hazard to any person coming on
the premises where it is located;



   (L)   Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or
a public street drain, gutter or ditch with trash or other materials;



   (M)   The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk or other
public property of any glass, tacks, nails, bottles or other substance which
may injure any person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire when passing
over that substance;



   (N)   The depositing of garbage, construction debris or other refuse
on a public right-of-way or on adjacent private property;



   (O)   The emission of exhaust fumes from an unmoving motorized
vehicle in a residential zone for more than fifteen (15) minutes;



   (P)   All structures damaged by fire, decay or otherwise which are
situated so as to endanger the safety of the public;



   (Q)   Allowing any dog, horse, mule, cow, hog, sheep, goat or other
domesticated animal to run at large, or the herding of the same on any public
street, alley or property;



   (R)   The practice of soliciting from door to door without being
properly licensed under the provisions of this code; and



   (S)   All other conditions or things which are likely to cause
injury to the person or property of anyone.



(1969 Code, § 139.04)  (Ord. 257, passed 7-18-1995)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.05  NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   (A)   Any person operating any vehicle, equipment, object or
contrivance upon any street, road, highway or structure shall be liable for
all damages which the surface or structure may sustain as a result of any
illegal operation of the equipment.  This illegal operation includes
vehicles weighing in excess of the maximum weight permitted by statute or
this code.  When the operator is not the owner of the vehicle, equipment,
object or contrivance, but is operating, driving or moving the same with the
express or implied permission of the owner, then the owner and the driver
shall be jointly and severally liable for any damage. 



   (B)   Any person who acts or fails to exercise due care and by that
act damages any public property shall be liable for the amount.  This amount
shall be collectable by action or as a lien under M.S. §§ 514.67 et seq.,
as may be amended from time to time.



(1969 Code, § 139.05)  (Ord. 257, passed 7-18-1995)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.06  DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.



   The Police Department or other designated officials shall enforce the
provisions relating to nuisances affecting public safety.  These officers
shall have the power to inspect private premises and take all reasonable
precautions to prevent the commission and maintenance of public nuisances.



(1969 Code, § 139.06)  (Ord. 257, passed 7-18-1995) 



§ 131.07  ABATEMENT.



   (A)   Notice.  Written notice of violation; notice of the time,
date, place and subject of any hearing before the Council; notice of Council
order; and notice of motion for summary enforcement hearing shall be given as
set forth in this section.



      (1)   Notice of violation.  Written notice of violation shall
be served by the enforcing officer upon the owner of record or occupant of
the premises either in person or by certified or registered mail. If the
premises are not occupied, the owner of record is unknown, or the owner of
record or occupant refuses to accept notice of violation, notice of violation
shall be served by posting it on the premises.



      (2)   Notice of Council hearing.  Written notice of any
Council hearing to determine or abate nuisance shall be served on the owner
of record and occupant of the premises either in person or by certified or
registered mail.  If the premises are not occupied, the owner of record is
unknown, or the owner of record or occupant refuses to accept notice of
Council hearing, notice of Council hearing shall be served by posting it on
the premises.



      (3)   Notice of Council order.  Except for those cases
determined by the city to require summary



enforcement, written notice of any Council order shall be made as provided in
M.S. § 463.17 (Hazardous and Substandard Building Act), as it may be amended
from time to time.



      (4)   Notice of motion for summary enforcement.  Written
notice of any motion for summary enforcement shall be made as provided for in
M.S. § 463.17.



   (B)   Procedure.  Whenever the officer charged with enforcement
determines that a public nuisance is being maintained or exists on premises
in the city, the officer shall notify in writing the owner of record or
occupant of the premises of this fact and order that the nuisance be
terminated or abated.  If the notice of violation is not complied with
within the time specified, the enforcing officer shall report that fact
immediately to the Council.  Thereafter, the Council may, after notice to
the owner or occupant and an opportunity to be heard, determine that the
condition identified in the notice of violation is a nuisance and further
order that if the nuisance is not abated within the time prescribed by the
Council, the city may seek injunctive relief by serving a copy of the Council
order and notice of motion for summary enforcement.



   (C)   Emergency procedure; summary enforcement.  In cases of
emergency, where delay in abatement required to complete the notice and
procedure requirements set forth in divisions (A) and (B) of this section
will permit a continuing nuisance to unreasonably endanger public health,
safety or welfare, the Council may order summary enforcement and abate the
nuisance.  To proceed with summary enforcement, the officer charged with
enforcement shall determine that a public nuisance exists or is being
maintained on premises in the city and that delay in abatement of the
nuisance will unreasonably endanger public health, safety or welfare.  The
enforcement officer shall notify in writing the occupant or owner of the
premises of the nature of the nuisance and of the city’s intention to seek
summary enforcement and the time and place of the Council meeting to consider
the question of summary enforcement.  The Council shall determine whether or
not the condition identified in the notice to the owner or occupant is a
nuisance, whether public health, safety or welfare will be unreasonably
endangered by delay in abatement required to complete the procedure set forth
in division (A) above, and may order that the nuisance be immediately
terminated or abated.  If the nuisance is not immediately terminated or
abated, the Council may order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance.



   (D)   Immediate abatement.  Nothing in this section shall prevent
the city, without notice or other process, from immediately abating any
condition which poses an imminent and serious hazard to human life or safety.



(1969 Code, § 139.07)  (Ord. 257, passed 7-18-1995) 



§ 131.08  PERSONAL LIABILITY.



   The owner of premises on which or adjacent to which work has been
performed under this subchapter shall be personally liable for the cost of
the work pursuant to § 33.17 of this code.



(1969 Code, § 139.08)  (Ord. 257, passed 7-18-1995) 



§ 131.09  ASSESSMENT.



   Unpaid charges may be collected pursuant to § 33.18 of this code.



(1969 Code, § 139.09)  (Ord. 257, passed 7-18-1995) 



SOUND NUISANCES



§ 131.20  PUBLIC NUISANCES CAUSED BY SOUND.



   It is declared to be a public nuisance for any person to make or assist
in the making of any nuisance noise or any loud, unnecessary or unusual sound
or any sound which annoys, disturbs or affects the comfort, repose, health,
peace or safety of others in the city.



(1969 Code, § 139.10)  (Ord. 291, passed 10-3-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.21  NUISANCE NOISES.



   The following are declared to be nuisance noises:



   (A)   Horns or sirens.  The sounding of any siren or any horn,
siren or other signaling device on a motor vehicle, except in cases of
eminent danger or emergency, or blowing of a locomotive whistle or steam
whistle, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a
warning of fire or danger.



   (B)   Radios, stereos, tape recorders and the like. 



      (1)   The use or operation of a radio receiving set, musical
instrument, phonograph, stereo, tape recorder, CD player or other machine or
device used for production or reproduction of sound at a volume in excess of
that reasonably necessary for the convenient hearing of the person or persons
in the room, vehicle or chamber in which the same is being operated.



      (2)   The operation of any radio receiving set, musical
instrument, phonograph, stereo, tape recorder, or other machine or device for
the reproducing or producing of sound between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall
be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subchapter if sound therefrom
is plainly audible:



         (a)   In an apartment or hallway of a multi-family
building adjacent to the unit where the device is operating;



         (b)   At the boundary of the real property on which the
device is operated; or



         (c)   At a distance of fifty (50) feet from any motor
vehicle in which the device is operating.



   (C)   Loudspeakers, amplifiers, sound trucks.  The use or operation
of any loudspeaker, sound amplifier, sound truck or vehicle equipped with
sound amplifying devices or other machine or device for the producing or
reproducing of sound which is used to attract the attention of the public to
any building, structure, business, vehicle or other area.



   (D)   Human noise. Yelling, shouting, screaming, whistling or
singing at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or
repose of any persons in any office, dwelling, hotel, motel, other place of
residence, or in the vicinity of the source.



   (E)   Animal noises.  The frequent or continued barking, howling or
other noise from any animal or bird not confined within a building.



   (F)   Vehicle loading and exhaust.  The discharge of the exhaust of
any motor vehicle into the ambient air except through a muffler which is free
of holes, cracks or other defects.  The operation, loading or unloading of
any motor vehicle in such a manner as to create loud and unnecessary grading,
grinding, rattling or other noise which shall disturb the comfort or repose
of any persons in the vicinity.



   (G)   Engine/brake noise.  The use of engine retarder brakes is
prohibited within the city limits of the city except in an emergency.



   (H)   Construction activities.  The erection, demolition,
alteration or repair of any building or earth moving or excavation activities
occurring between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Monday through
Saturday or on Sunday, except as undertaken by persons working on
single-family residences occupied by them or as authorized by the Building
Inspector based upon emergency for the protection of health and safety.



   (I)   Schools, courts, churches and hospitals. Any activity which
generates sound occurring adjacent to a school, court, church or hospital
while the same are in use and which unreasonably interferes with the use
thereof.



   (J)   Loud parties. 



      (1)   Sound emanating from any party or gathering between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of a sufficient volume so as to disturb
peace, quiet or repose of other persons within the city.



      (2)   It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this
subchapter if the sound of the party or gathering is audible to a human ear
at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the building or dwelling unit from
which the sound emanates.



(1969 Code, § 139.11)  (Ord. 291, passed 10-3-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.22  PERSONS LIABLE.



   (A)   Any person who participates in a party or gathering which
generates nuisance noise shall be guilty of maintaining a public nuisance. 
In the event that any party or gathering is determined by a city official to
generate nuisance noise, all persons except the owner or permanent occupant
shall promptly leave the premises in an orderly manner.



   (B)   A violation of this subchapter shall be deemed to be the act
of the owner of the residential dwelling unit wherein it occurs, as well as
the persons on the premises who violate the regulations, except that the
owner of a dwelling unit occupied by others shall be liable only for those
violations occurring after a written notice of a violation of this subchapter
shall have been received.



(1969 Code, § 139.12)  (Ord. 291, passed 10-3-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.23  EXCEPTIONS.



   The City Council may grant reasonable exceptions via permit to
accommodate city, county or fairground functions which would exempt the
permit holder from this subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 139.13)  (Ord. 291, passed 10-3-2000)



§ 131.24  VIOLATION.



   Any person(s), firm, corporation and/or other entity found guilty of
violation of this subchapter shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished according to the provisions of § 10.99.



(1969 Code, § 139.14)  (Ord. 291, passed 10-3-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



WEED NUISANCES



§ 131.40  SHORT TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be cited as the “Weed Ordinance.”



§ 131.41  JURISDICTION.



   This subchapter shall be in addition to any state statute or county
ordinance presently in effect, subsequently added, amended or repealed.



§ 131.42  DEFINITIONS; EXCLUSIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      DESTRUCTION ORDER.  The notice served by the City Council or
designated city official, in cases of appeal, on the property owner of the
ordinance violation.



      PROPERTY OWNER.  The person occupying the property, the holder
of legal title or a person having control over the property of another, such
as a right-of-way, easement, license or lease.



      WEEDS, GRASSES and RANK VEGETATION.  Includes but is not limited
to the following:



         (1)   Noxious weeds and rank vegetation shall include
but not be limited to:  alum (allium), Buckthorn, Bur Cucumber, Canada
Thistle, Corncockle, Cressleaf Groundsel, Curly Dock, Dodder, Field Bindweed,
French Weed, Hairy Whitetop, Hedge Bindweed, Hoary Cress, Horsenettle,
Johnsongrass, Leafy Spurge, Mile-A-Minute Weed, Musk Thistle, Oxeye Daisy,
Perennial Sowthistle, Poison Hemlock, Purple Loosestrife, Quackgrass, Russian
Knapweed, Russian Thistle, Serrated Tussock, Shatter Cane, Sorghum, Wild
Carrot, Wild Garlic, Wild Mustard, Wild Onion, Wild Parsnip;



         (2)   Grapevines when growing in groups of one hundred
(100) or more and not pruned, sprayed, cultivated, or otherwise maintained
for two (2) consecutive years;



         (3)   Bushes of the species of tall, common, or European
barberry, further known as berberis vulgaris or its horticultural varieties;



         (4)   Any weeds, grass, or plants, other than trees,
bushes, flowers, or other ornamental plants, growing to a height exceeding
eight (8) inches;



         (5)   Rank vegetation includes the uncontrolled,
uncultivated growth of annuals and perennial plants;



         (6)   The term WEEDS does not include shrubs, trees,
cultivated plants or crops.



   (B)   In no event shall cultivated plants or crops include plants
which have been defined by state statute or administrative rule as being
noxious or detrimental plants.



§ 131.43  OWNERS RESPONSIBLE FOR TRIMMING, REMOVAL AND THE LIKE.



   All property owners shall be responsible for the removal, cutting, or
disposal and elimination of weeds, grasses and rank vegetation or other
uncontrolled plant growth on their property, which at the time of notice, is
in excess of eight (8) inches in height.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.44  FILING COMPLAINT.



   Any person, including the city, who believes there is property located
within the corporate limits of the city which has growing plant matter in
violation of this subchapter shall make a written complaint signed, dated and
filed with the Public Works Director.  If the city makes the complaint, an
employee, officer or Council Member of the city shall file the complaint in
all respects as set out above.



§ 131.45  NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Upon receiving notice of the probable existence of weeds in
violation of this subchapter, the Public Works Director shall make an
inspection and prepare a written report to the City Council regarding the
condition.  The City Council, upon concluding that there is a probable
belief that this subchapter has been violated, shall forward written
notification in the form of a “Destruction Order” to the property owner
or the person occupying the property as that information is contained within
the records of the City Clerk or any other city agency.  The notice shall be
served in writing by certified mail.  The notice shall provide that within
seven (7) regular business days after the receipt of the notice that the
designated violation shall be removed by the property owner or person
occupying the property.



   (B)   (1)   All notices are to be in writing and all filings are
to be with the City Clerk.



      (2)   Certified mailing to the City Clerk or others is deemed
filed on the date of posting to the United States Postal Service.



§ 131.46  APPEALS.



   (A)   The property owner may appeal by filing written notice of
objections with the City Council within forty-eight (48) hours of the notice,
excluding weekends and holidays, if the property owner contests the finding
of the City Council.  It is the property owner's responsibility to
demonstrate that the matter in question is shrubs, trees, cultivated plants
or crops or is not otherwise in violation of this subchapter, and should not
be subject to destruction under the subchapter.



   (B)   An appeal by the property owner shall be brought before the
City Council and shall be decided by a majority vote of the Council Members
in attendance and being at a regularly scheduled or special meeting of the
City Council.



§ 131.47  ABATEMENT BY CITY.



   In the event that the property owner shall fail to comply with the
“Destruction Order” within seven (7) regular business days and has not
filed a notice within forty-eight (48) hours to the City Clerk of an intent
to appeal, the City Council may employ the services of city employees or
outside contractors and remove the weeds to conform to this subchapter by all
lawful means.



§ 131.48  PERSONAL LIABILITY.



   The owner of property on which or adjacent to which work has been
performed under this subchapter shall be personally liable for the cost of
the work pursuant to § 33.17 of this code.



§ 131.49  ASSESSMENT.



   Unpaid charges may be collected pursuant to § 33.18 of this code.



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   ZONING CODE



      151.   SHORELAND MANAGEMENT



      152.   FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT



      153.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



      154.   BUILDING CODE



      155.   SUBSURFACE SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEMS



CHAPTER 150:  ZONING CODE



Section



General Provisions



   150.001   Intent and purpose



   150.002   Definitions



   150.003   Definitions for adult oriented businesses



   150.004   General prohibition of adult oriented businesses



   150.005   Minimum requirements



   150.006   More restrictive provisions to apply



   150.007   Prohibitions



   150.008   Annexation of land



   150.009   Non-conforming uses and structures



   150.010   Buildable lots



   150.011   Accessory buildings



   150.012   Yards and open space



   150.013   Traffic visibility



   150.014   Farming



   150.015   Land reclamation



   150.016   Mining



   150.017   Quasi-public structures



   150.018   Relocation of structures



Administration and Enforcement



   150.030   Zoning administration



   150.031   Duties of the Zoning Administrator



   150.032   Building permit



   150.033   Occupancy certificates



   150.034   Board of Zoning Appeals



   150.035   Variances



   150.036   Conditional uses



   150.037   Interim uses



   150.038   Amendments



   150.039   Fees for zoning applications



Zoning Districts and Map



   150.050   Districts



   150.051   Map



   150.052   Boundaries



R-1 Single-Family Residential District



   150.060   R-1 Single Family Residential District



   150.061   Permitted uses



   150.062   Conditional uses



   150.063   Interim uses



   150.064   Accessory uses



   150.065   Area, height, lot width and yard requirements



   150.066   Landscaping requirements



R-2 Manufactured Home Park District



   150.075   R-2 Manufactured Home Park District



   150.076   Permitted uses



   150.077   Conditional uses



   150.078   Interim uses



   150.079   Accessory uses



   150.080   Area, height, lot width and yard requirements



   150.081   Other requirements



   150.082   Permit/inspection fees



R-3 Multiple Dwelling District



   150.090   R-3 Multiple Dwelling District



   150.091   Permitted uses



   150.092   Conditional uses



   150.093   Interim uses



   150.094   Accessory uses



   150.095   Area, height, lot width and yard requirements



   150.096   Landscaping requirements



R-4 Low Density Residential District



   150.115   R-4 Low Density Residential District



   150.116   Permitted uses



   150.117   Conditional uses



   150.118   Interim uses



   150.119   Accessory uses



   150.120   Area, height, lot width and yard requirements



   150.121   Landscaping requirements



B-1 Central Business District



   150.130   B-1 Central Business District



   150.131   Permitted uses



   150.132   Conditional uses



   150.133   Interim uses



   150.134   Accessory uses



   150.135   Prohibited uses



   150.136   Area, height, lot width and yard requirements



   150.137   Special requirements for properties abutting residential
districts



   150.138   Appearance



B-2 General Business District



   150.145   B-2 General Business District



   150.146   Permitted uses



   150.147   Conditional use



   150.148   Interim uses



   150.149   Accessory uses



   150.150   Prohibited uses



   150.151   Area, height, lot width and yard requirements



   150.152   Special requirements for properties abutting residential
districts



   150.153   Appearance



   150.154   Design standards



I-1 Limited Industrial District



   150.160   I-1 Limited Industrial District



   150.161   Permitted uses



   150.162   Conditional uses



   150.163   Interim uses



   150.164   Accessory uses



   150.165   Prohibited uses



   150.166   Area, height, lot width and yard requirements



   150.167   Special requirements for properties abutting residential
districts



   150.168   Design standards



I-2 General Industrial District



   150.180   I-2 General Industrial District



   150.181   Permitted uses



   150.182   Conditional uses



   150.183   Interim uses



   150.184   Accessory uses



   150.185   Prohibited uses



   150.186   Area, height, lot width and yard requirements



   150.187   Special requirements for properties abutting residential
districts



   150.188   Design standards



Performance Standards



   150.195   Standards for all districts



   150.196   Noise



   150.197   Smoke, etc.



   150.198   Toxic or noxious matter



   150.199   Odors



   150.200   Vibration



   150.201   Glare or heat



   150.202   Explosives



   150.203   Waste material



Signs



   150.210   Purpose, findings and effect



   150.211   Severability



   150.212   Definitions



   150.213   Permits required



   150.214   Application for permit



   150.215   General provisions applicable to all signs



   150.216   Prohibited signs



   150.217   Signs requiring no permit



   150.218   Signs permitted in residential districts



   150.219   Signs permitted in commercial districts



   150.220   Signs permitted in industrial districts



   150.221   Temporary signs



   150.222   Illumination



   150.223   Non-conforming signs



   150.224   Abatement



   150.225   Appeals



   150.226   Variances



   150.227   Substitution clause



Telecommunication Towers and Antennas



   150.240   Purpose and intent



   150.241   Definitions



   150.242   Exempt telecommunication facilities



   150.243   Amateur radio facilities



   150.244   General provisions



   150.245   Zoning districts



   150.246   Setbacks



   150.247   Lighting



   150.248   Design and height requirements



   150.249   Associated equipment



   150.250   Area-wide analysis/proof of need



   150.251   Performance standards



   150.252   Obsolete or unused towers



   150.253   Effect of chapter on existing towers and antennas



   150.254   Additional submittal requirements



   150.255   Tower construction requirements



   150.256   Violations



Planned Unit Developments



   150.270   Planned Unit Development District (PUD)



   150.271   General development standards



   150.272   Design standards



   150.273   Review of the Planned Unit Development



Private Swimming Pools



   150.290   General provisions



   150.291   Permit required



   150.292   Yard and setback requirements



   150.293   Safety fence required



   150.294   Miscellaneous requirements



Special Provisions



   150.500   Purpose of off-street parking and loading requirements



   150.501   Design and maintenance of off-street parking area



   150.502   Joint parking facilities and control of off-street parking



   150.503   Minimum parking requirements



   150.504   Adjustment to off-street parking requirements in the B-1
and B-2 districts



   150.505   Off-street loading and unloading areas



   150.506   Height of structures; special provisions



   150.507   Front yards; special provisions



 



   150.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 150.001  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The Zoning Code is adopted for the purpose of:



   (A)   Protecting the public health, safety, morals, comfort,
convenience, and general welfare.



   (B)   Dividing the city into zones and districts restricting and
regulating therein the location, construction, reconstruction, alternation,
and use of structures and land.



   (C)   Promoting orderly development of the residential, business,
industrial, recreational, and public areas.



   (D)   Providing adequate light, air, and convenience of access to
property.



   (E)   Limiting congestion in the public right-of-way.



   (F)   Preventing overcrowding of land and undue concentration of
structures by regulating the use of the land and buildings and the bulk of
the buildings in relation to the land and buildings surrounding them.



   (G)   Providing for the compatibility of different land uses and the
most appropriate use of land throughout the city.



   (H)   Providing for orderly transitions from one land use to another.



   (I)   Providing a means to accomplish the goals set forth in the
Comprehensive Plan.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of these regulations, the following terms, phrases,
words and their definitions shall have the meaning given in this section.
Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words in the
singular number shall include the plural and words in the plural shall
include the singular.



   ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE.  A use or structure subordinate to and
serving the principal use or structure on the same lot and customarily
incidental thereto.



   AIRPORT or HELIPORT.  Any land, water, or structure which is used or
intended for use for the landing or take-off of aircraft, and any appurtenant
land or structure used or intended for use for airport buildings or other
airport structures or right-of-way.



   ALLEY.  A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of
access to abutting property.



   APARTMENT UNIT.  A room or suite of rooms with cooking facilities
available which is occupied as a residence by a single-family.



   AUTO REDUCTION YARD.  A lot or yard where three (3) or more unlicensed
motor vehicles or the remains thereof are kept for the purpose of
dismantling, sales of parts, sale as scrap, storage or abandonment.



   BASEMENT.  Any floor level below the first story in a building, except
that a floor level in a building having only one (1) floor level shall be
classified as a basement unless such floor level qualifies as a first story
as defined.



   BED AND BREAKFAST INN.  An owner or manager occupied dwelling where
lodging in five (5) or fewer guest rooms and breakfast is provided to the
traveling public by the residential owner or manager for compensation.



   BOARDER.  A person who is given food and lodging by someone in
exchange for a fee.



   BODY ART.  Physical body adornment using, but not limited to, the
following techniques:  body piercing, tattooing, and cosmetic tattooing. 
This definition does not include practices that are considered part of a
medical procedure performed by board certified medical or dental personnel,
such as, but not limited to, implants under the skin.  Such medical
procedures shall not be performed in a body art establishment.  This
ordinance definition shall not include piercing of the outer perimeter or
lobe of the ear using pre-sterilized single use stud and clasp ear piercing
systems.



   BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT.  Any place or premise, whether public or
private, temporary or permanent in nature or location, where the practices of
body art are performed.



   BUILDING.  Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof
which may provide shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, or chattel, and
when said structure is divided by party walls without opening, each portion
of such building so separated shall be deemed a separate building.



   BUILDING HEIGHT.  The vertical distance above a reference datum
measured to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck
line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a
pitched or hipped roof.  The reference datum shall be selected by either of
the following, whichever yields a greater height of building:



      (1)   The elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or
ground surface within a five (5) foot horizontal distance of the exterior
wall of the building when such sidewalk or ground surface is not more than
ten (10) feet above lowest grade.



      (2)   An elevation ten (10) feet higher than the lowest grade
when the sidewalk or ground surface described in (1) above is more than ten
(10) feet above lowest grade.



The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum height of any
segment of the building.



   CAR PORT.  An automobile shelter having one (1) or more sides open.



   CELLAR.  That portion of the building having more than one-half (1/2)
of the floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining
ground.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.  A compilation of goals, policy statements,
standards, programs and maps for guiding the physical, social and economic
development of the city and its environs and includes any unit or part of
such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof.



   CONDOMINIUM.  A form of individual ownership within a multi-family
building with joint responsibility for maintenance and repairs of the common
property.  In a condominium, each unit is owned out-right by its occupant
and each occupant also owns a share of the land and other common property.



   CONVENIENCE STORE. Any retail establishment offering for sale
prepackaged food products, household items, gasoline, and other petroleum
products.



   CURB LEVEL.  The elevation as established by the city, of the curb in
front of the center of the building.  Where no curb level has been
established, the City Engineer shall determine a curb level or its equivalent
for the purpose of this Zoning Code.



   DAY CARE FACILITY – NON-RESIDENTIAL. A non-residential facility,
public or private, which for gain or otherwise regularly provides one (1) or
more persons with care, training, supervision, habitation, rehabilitation, or
developmental guidance on a regular basis, for periods of less than twenty
four (24) hours per day.  Day care facilities include, but are not limited
to: day care centers, day nurseries, nursery schools, daytime activity
centers, day treatment programs, and day services as defined by M.S. §
245.782.



   DAY CARE FACILITY - RESIDENTIAL.  A facility that provides care,
protection and supervision to one (1) or more persons in a private residence
for periods of less than twenty four (24) hours per day for gain or otherwise.



   DWELLING.  A building or one (1) or more portions thereof designed or
intended to be occupied exclusively for residence purposes, but not including
rooms in motels, hotels, nursing homes, boarding houses, nor trailers, tents,
cabins or mobile homes.



   DWELLING - ATTACHED.  A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling
at one (1) or more sides by a party wall or walls.



   DWELLING - DETACHED.  A dwelling which is entirely surrounded by open
space on the same lot.



   DWELLING - MULTIPLE FAMILY.  A residential building containing three
(3) or more dwelling units, designed with more than one (1) dwelling unit
connection to a common corridor or entranceway.



   DWELLING – SINGLE FAMILY. A residential building containing one (1)
dwelling unit.



   DWELLING – TWO FAMILY OR DUPLEX. A residential building containing
two (2) dwelling units.



   EASEMENT.  A grant by an owner of land for a specific use by persons
or agencies other than the owner.



   ESSENTIAL SERVICES.  Underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or
water transmission, or distribution systems; collection, communication,
supply or disposal systems including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers,
pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic
signals, hydrants or other similar equipment and accessories in conjunction
therewith: but not including buildings.



   FAMILY.  An individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood or
marriage or a group of not more than six (6) persons (excluding servants) who
need not be related by blood or marriage living together in a dwelling unit.



   FENCE.  Any partition, structure, wall or gate erected as a divider,
barrier or enclosure and located along the boundary, or within the required
yard.



   FLOODWAY.  The channel of the water-course and those portions of the
adjoining flood plains which are reasonably required to carry and discharge
the regional flood.



   FLOOD FRINGE.  That portion of the flood plain outside of the floodway.



   FLOOD PLAIN.  The areas adjoining a watercourse which have been or
hereafter may be covered by the 100 year flood.



   FLOOD PROOFING.  A combination of structure provisions, changes, or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding primarily for
the reduction or elimination of flood damages to properties, water and
sanitary facilities, structures, and contents of buildings in a flood hazard
area.



   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION.  That elevation which is not less than one
(1) foot above the water surface profile associated with the 100 year flood
as outlined in the city’s Flood Insurance Study, June 1976.



   FLOOR AREA.  The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several
floors of a building including interior balconies, mezzanines, basements and
attached accessory buildings, but excepting that area primarily devoted to
window display, storage, fitting rooms, stairs, escalators, unenclosed
porches, detached accessory buildings utilized for dead storage, heating and
utility rooms, inside off-street parking or loading space. Measurements shall
be made from the outside of the exterior walls.



   FLOOR-LOT AREA RATIO.  The floor-lot area ratio of the building on any
lot is the total floor area divided by the area of the lot. Total floor area
includes both principal and accessory buildings.



   FRONTAGE.  That boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated
public street.



   GARAGE - PRIVATE.  A detached accessory building or portion of the
principal building, including a car port, which is used primarily for storing
passenger vehicles, trailers or one (1) truck of a rated capacity of not more
than one and one-half (1-1/2) ton.



   HAZARDOUS BUILDING / PROPERTY.  Any building or property, which
because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, physical damage, unsanitary
condition, or abandonment, constitutes a fire hazard or a hazard to public
safety or health.



   HOME OCCUPATION.  Any occupation or profession meeting all of the
following requirements:



      (1)   When the activity is clearly secondary to the main use
of the premises and is engaged in only by persons residing in their dwelling.



      (2)   When that occupation is conducted in not more than one
(1) room within the principal structure and does not occupy more than
twenty-five percent (25%) of the gross floor area of any one (1) story.



      (3)   When that activity or occupation does not require the
provisions of additional parking.



      (4)   When evidence of the occupation other than gardening is
not visible from the street.



      (5)   When the principal structure becomes the base of
operation for that occupation using that equipment or machinery which is
usually found in a home; and when not involving the retail sale of products
produced off the site.



      (6)   No accessory building shall be used for such home
occupation.



   HOTEL.  Any building containing six (6) or more guest rooms intended
or designed to be used, or which are used, rented or hired out to be
occupied, or which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests.



   INDUSTRY – GENERAL.  A use engaged in the basic processing and
manufacturing of materials or products predominately from extracted or raw
materials.



   INDUSTRY – LIMITED.  A use engaged in the manufacture, predominately
from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts.



   JUNK YARD.  An area where used, waste, discarded or salvage materials
are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, bailed, cleaned, packed disassembled or
handled, including but not limited to scrap iron and other metals, paper,
rags, rubber products, bottles and lumber. Storage of such material in
conjunction with a permitted manufacturing process when within an enclosed
area or building shall not be included.



   KENNEL.  Any lot or premises or portion thereof on which four (4) or
more dogs and/or cats over six (6) months old are owned, boarded, bred or
offered for sale.  This definition shall not include pet shops, veterinary
clinics, the keeping of farm animals or fowl, commercial stables or other
such uses regulated herein.



   LOT.  A parcel of land occupied or used or intended for occupancy or
use by a use permitted in the Zoning Code, abutting on a public street, and
of sufficient size to provide the yards required by the Zoning Code.



   LOT AREA.  The area of a lot in a horizontal plane bounded by the lot
lines.



   LOT AREA PER FAMILY.  The number of square feet of lot area required
per dwelling unit.



   LOT - CORNER.  A lot situated at the junction of, and abutting on two
(2) or more intersecting streets, or a lot at the point of deflection in
alignment of a continuous street, the interior angle of which does not exceed
one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.



   LOT DEPTH.  The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line
and the rear lot line of a lot.



   LOT LINE.  The property line bounding a lot, except that where any
portion of a lot extends into the public right-of-way, the line of such
public right-of-way shall be the lot line for applying this Zoning Code.



   LOT LINE - FRONT.  That boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or
dedicated public street, and in the case of a corner lot, it shall be the
shortest dimension on a public street. If the dimensions of a corner lot are
equal, the front lot line shall be designated by the owner and filed with the
city.



   LOT LINE - REAR.  That boundary of a lot which is opposite the front
lot line. If the rear lot line is less than ten (10) feet in length, or if
the lot forms a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be a line ten (10)
feet in length within the lot, parallel to, and at the maximum distance from
the front lot line. Corner lots shall have no rear lot line; all boundaries
of a corner lot, with the exception of the front, shall be considered side
lot lines.



   LOT LINE - SIDE.  Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line
or a rear lot line.



   LOT OF RECORD.  Any lot which is one (1) unit of a plat duly approved
and filed prior to the effective date of this code or one (1) unit of an
auditor’s subdivision or a registered land survey, or a parcel of land not
so platted, subdivided or registered, for which a deed, auditor’s
subdivision or registered land survey has been recorded in the office of the
Register of Deeds or the Registrar of Titles for Kanabec County, Minnesota,
prior to September 19, 1963.



   LOT - THROUGH.  A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines abutting
to substantially parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a
through lot, both street lines shall be front lot lines for applying this
Zoning Code.



   LOT WIDTH.  The maximum horizontal distance between the side lot lines
of a lot measured within the first thirty (30) feet of the lot depth.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  Any type of transportable structure or vehicle not
drawn by its own power with permanently attached undercarriage and wheels
which is designed, constructed and equipped for use as a single-family
dwelling on a year-round basis containing the same water supply, waste
disposal and electrical conveniences as immobile housing. Manufactured homes
shall be as defined in M.S. § 327.14, Subd. 2.



   MOTOR COURT, MOTOR HOTEL, or MOTEL.  A parcel of land upon which is
located a building or group of buildings other than a hotel and used
primarily as temporary residence of motorists, tourists or travelers.



   MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL.  A building or area in which freight brought
by motor truck or rail is assembled and/or stored for routing in intra-state
or inter-state shipment by a motor truck.



   MOTOR SERVICE STATION.  A place where gasoline, kerosene or any other
motor fuel or lubricating oil or grease for operating motor vehicles is
offered for sale to the public and deliveries are made directly into motor
vehicles.



   NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES.  Any structure legally existing on the
effective date of the Zoning Code which would not conform to the applicable
regulations if the structure were to be erected under the provisions of the
Zoning Code.



   NON-CONFORMING USE.  Use of land, buildings, or structures legally
existing on the effective date of the Zoning Code which does not comply with
all the regulations of the Zoning Code or any amendments to it, governing the
zoning district in which such use is located.



   NOXIOUS MATTER OR MATERIALS.  Material capable of causing injury to
living organisms by chemical reaction or capable of causing detrimental
effects on the physical or economic well being of individuals.



   OPEN SALES LOT.  Land devoted to the display of goods for sale, rent,
lease, advertising, or trade where such goods are not enclosed within a
building.



   ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK.  A mark delineating the highest water level
which has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence
upon the landscape.



   PARKING AREA – PUBLIC.  An area as a principal use available to the
public, with or without payment of a fee, designed and used for temporary
parking of licensed, operable motor vehicles, which may include outdoor
parking lots or parking structures.



   PARKING SPACE (PARKING STALL) - PRIVATE.  A suitably surfaced and
permanently maintained area on privately owned property either within or
outside of a building of sufficient size to store one standard vehicle.



   PERFORMANCE STANDARD.  Criterion established to control noise, odor,
toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, and glare or
heat generated by or inherent in uses of land or buildings.



   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.  A development of land that is under unified
control and is planned and developed as a whole in a single development
operation or programmed series of development stages.  The development may
include streets, circulation ways, utilities, buildings, open spaces, and
other site features and improvements. It is intended that a Planned Unit
Development will offer a more flexible, creative and efficient approach to
the use of land and be subject to the procedures, standards and regulations
contained in the Zoning Code.



   QUASI-PUBLIC.  The term QUASI-PUBLIC STRUCTURE as used herein shall
include but not be limited to trash containers, bicycle racks, benches,
planting boxes, awnings, flag poles, light standards, stairs, stoops, light
wells, loading wells, docks, fences, signs, and other similar structures.



   RECREATION, COMMERCIAL.  Includes all uses such as tennis courts, ball
fields, picnic areas, and the like that are commonly provided for the public
at parks, playgrounds, community centers, and other sites owned and operated
by a private enterprise for the purpose of providing recreation.



   RECREATION, PUBLIC.  Includes all uses such as tennis courts, ball
fields, picnic areas, and the like that are commonly provided for the public
at parks, playgrounds, community centers, and other sites owned and operated
by a unit of government for the purpose of providing recreation.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  Any vehicle mounted on wheels and for which a
license would be required if used on highways, roads or streets, and so
constructed and designed as to permit occupancy thereof for dwelling or
sleeping purposes and used for recreational purposes.



   RECYCLABLE.  Material that still has useful physical or chemical
properties after serving its original purpose and can, therefore, be reused
or re-manufactured into additional products. Plastic, paper, glass, used oil,
tin, and aluminum cans are examples of recyclable materials.



   RECYCLE.  The process of collecting materials from the waste stream
and separating them by type, remaking them into new products, and marketing
and reusing the materials as new products.



   RECYCLING FACILITY.  Building(s) in which recyclable materials are
collected and/or processed in order to regain material, but shall not include
salvage yards.



   RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES.  A state-licensed and mandated RESIDENTIAL
FACILITY occupied by persons in need of specialized treatment or protection
and resident staff who live together as a single housekeeping unit, usually
for a limited period of time. The services provided and maximum number of
clients served is specified by Minnesota State Statutes, which may be amended
from time to time.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY. An area or strip of land, either public or private, on
which an irrevocable right of passage has been recorded for the use of
vehicles or pedestrians or both.  RIGHT-OF-WAY includes the driving surface
of a street and adjacent boulevard.



   SCREENING. A device or materials used to conceal one (1) element of a
development from other elements or from adjacent or contiguous uses. 
Screening may include one (1) or a combination of the following materials –
walls, berms, plantings, fences.



   SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY.  A building of one (1) level, that
contains varying sizes of individual compartmentalized stalls limited to the
indoor storage of customer’s goods or possessions.



   SETBACK.  The minimum distance between the property line and the line
of the building.



   SHOPPING CENTER.  Any contiguous group of two (2) or more retail
stores or service establishments, comprising ten thousand (10,000) or more
square feet of floor area which provides off-street parking utilized in
common by patrons.



   SHORELAND.  Land located within the following distances from public
water: one thousand (1,000) feet from the ordinary high water mark of a lake,
pond, or flowage, and three hundred (300) feet from a river or stream, or the
landward extent of a flood plain designated by ordinance on such a river or
stream.



   STORY.  That portion of a building included between the upper surface
of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above except that the
topmost story shall be that portion of a building included  between the
upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the
finished floor level directly above a usable or unused under-floor space is
more than six (6) feet above grade as defined herein for more than fifty
percent (50%) of the total perimeter or is more than twelve (12) feet above
grade as defined herein at any point, such as usable or unused under-floor
space shall be considered as a story.



   STORY, FIRST.  The lowest story in a building which qualifies as a
story, as defined herein, except that a floor level in a building having only
one (1) floor level shall be classified as a first story, provided such floor
level is not more than four (4) feet below grade, as defined herein, at any
point.



   STREET.  A public right-of-way not less than forty (40) feet in width
which affords a primary means of access to abutting property.



   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION.  Any change, other than incidental repairs,
which would prolong the life of the supporting members of a building, such as
bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or foundations.



   STRUCTURE.  That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building
of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts
joined together in some definite manner.



   STRUCTURE - NON-CONFORMING.  Any structure which is legally existing
upon the effective date of the Zoning Code which would not conform to the
applicable regulations if the structure were to be erected under the
provisions of the Zoning Code.



   TOWNHOUSE.  A single structure consisting of not less than three (3)
or more than six (6) dwelling units each, with no other dwelling or portion
of other dwelling directly above or below, which each dwelling unit having
direct ground level access to the outdoors and connected to the other
dwelling by a single party wall with no opening.



   USE.  The purpose or activity for which the land, structure, or
building thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is
occupied or maintained.



   USE - CONDITIONAL.  Either a public or private use which, because of
its unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified as a permitted use
and thus requires approval by the City Council of a conditional use permit
which shall contain conditions controlling the use.



   USE - OPEN.  The use of a lot without a building or including a
structure incidental to the open use with a ground floor area equal to five
percent (5%) or less of the area of the lot.



   USE - PERMITTED.  A use which may be lawfully established in a
particular district or districts provided it conforms with all requirements,
regulations, and performance standards of such district.



   VARIANCE.  A modification or variation of the provisions of the Zoning
Code excepting use, as applied to a specific piece of property, where it is
determined that by reason of exceptional circumstances, the strict
enforcement of the official controls would cause unnecessary hardship.



   WAREHOUSING.  The storage of materials or equipment within an enclosed
building as a principal use.



   YARD.  A required open space on a lot, which is unoccupied and
unobstructed by a structure from its lowest ground level to the sky except as
expressly permitted in the Zoning Code. A yard shall extend along a lot line
and at right angles to such lot line to a depth or width specified in the
yard regulations for the district in which such lot is located.



   YARD - FRONT.  A yard extending along the full width of the front lot
line between side lot lines and extending from the abutting front street
right-of-way line to a depth required in the yard regulations for the
district in which such lot is located.



   YARD - REAR.  A yard extending along the full width of the rear lot
line between the side lot lines and extending toward the front lot line for a
depth as specified in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot
is located.



   YARD - SIDE.  A yard extending along a side lot line between the front
and rear yards, having a width as specified in the yard regulations for the
district in which such lot is located.



   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.  Person appointed by the City Council to
administer and enforce the Zoning Code.



   ZONING - DISTRICT.  An area or areas within the limits of the city for
which the regulations and requirements governing use are uniform.



   100 YEAR FLOOD.  A flood which is representative of large floods known
to have occurred, and can be expected to occur on an average frequency of
once every 100 years.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010; Am. Ord. 415, passed 8-21-2012)



§ 150.003  DEFINITIONS FOR ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESSES.



   For the purpose of this Zoning Code, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADULT USES – ACCESSORY.  The offering of goods and/or services which
are not classified as obscene and are classified as adult uses, permitted on
a limited scale, as defined by §§ 150.134 and 150.149, and which are
incidental to the primary activity and goods and/or services offered by the
establishment.  Examples of such items include the sale of adult magazines
and the sale or rental of adult motion pictures as defined in sections listed
above.



   ADULT USES - PRINCIPAL.  The offering of goods and services which are
not classified as obscene which do not meet the definition of accessory adult
uses, including but are not limited to the following:



      (1)   ADULT USE - BODY PAINTING STUDIO.  An establishment or
business which provides the service of applying paint or other substance,
whether transparent or non-transparent, to the body of a patron when such
body is wholly or partially nude in terms of “specified anatomical areas”.



      (2)   ADULT USE - BOOKSTORE.  A building or portion of a
building used for the barter, rental, or sale of items consisting of printed
matter, pictures, slides, records, audio tapes, videotapes, CD’s,
CD-ROMS’s, or motion pictures film if such building or portion of a
building is not open to the public generally but only to one (1) or more
classes of the public excluding any minor by reason of age and if a
substantial or significant portion of items are distinguished and
characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.



      (3)   ADULT USE - CABARET.  A building or portion of a
building used for providing dancing or other live entertainment, is such
building or a portion of a building excludes minors by virtue of age and if
such dancing or other live entertainment is distinguished and characterized
by an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction or description of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.



      (4)   ADULT USE - COMPANIONSHIP ESTABLISHMENT.  A
companionship establishment which excludes minors by reason of age, and which
provides the service of engaging in conversation, talk, or discussion between
an employee of the establishment and a customer, if such service is
distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.



      (5)   ADULT USE - CONVERSATION/RAP PARLOR.  A
conversation/rap parlor which excludes minors by reason of age, and which
provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, or
discussion, if such service is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis
on “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.



      (6)   ADULT USE - HEALTH/SPORT CLUB.  A health/sport club
which excludes minors by reason of age, and if such club is distinguished and
characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas.”



      (7)   ADULT USE - HOTEL OR MOTEL.  Adult hotel or motel means
a hotel or motel from which minors are specifically excluded from patronage
and wherein material is presented which is distinguished and characterized by
an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.



      (8)   ADULT USE - MASSAGE PARLOR, HEALTH CLUB.  A massage
parlor or health club which restricts minors by reason of age, which provides
the services of massage, if such service is distinguished and characterized
by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas.”



      (9)   ADULT USE - MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A building or
portion of a building with a capacity for less than fifty (50) persons used
for presenting material if such building or a portion of a building as a
prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of age, and if such material is
distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas” for observation by patrons
herein.



      (10)   ADULT USE - MODELING STUDIO.  An establishment whose
major business is the provision, to customers, of figure models who are so
provided with the intent or providing sexual stimulation or sexual
gratification to such customers and who engage in “specified anatomical
areas” or display “specified anatomical areas” while being observed,
painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or
otherwise depicted by such customers.



      (11)   ADULT USE - MOTION PICTURE ARCADE.  Any place to which
the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or
electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled or operated still or
motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are
maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one
(1) time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished and
characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.



      (12)   ADULT USE - MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A building or a
portion of a building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons used for
presenting material if such building or a portion of a building as a
prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of age and is such material is
distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas” for observation by patrons
therein.



      (13)   ADULT USE - NOVELTY BUSINESS.  A business which has as
a principal activity the sale of devices which stimulate human genitals or
devices which are designed for sexual stimulation.



      (14)   ADULT USE - SAUNA.  A sauna which excludes minors by
reason of age, and which provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for
the purpose of bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air
as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided by the
sauna is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.



      (15)   ADULT USE - STEAM ROOM/BATHHOUSE FACILITY.  A building
or a portion of a building used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing
room used for the purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation or reducing,
utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent if such
building or portion of a building restricts minors by reason of age and if
the service provided by the steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished
and characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas”.



      (16)   ADULT USE - NONCONFORMING.  As of the date of the
publication of this section, all non-conforming uses shall be terminated and
brought into compliance with the provisions contained herein.



   OBSCENE.  Activities as defined by M.S. § 617.241.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.



      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breast(s) below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; and



      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even
if completely and opaquely covered.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.



      (1)   Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation,
anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical
simulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a
sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a
sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or
conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio,
necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty;



      (2)   Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual
stimulation, arousal, or tumescence;



      (3)   Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral
copulation, coitus, or masturbation;



      (4)   Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, or female breast;



      (5)   Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom
are nude, clad in undergarments, or in sexually revealing costumes, and who
are engaged in activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering,
binding, or physical restraint of any such persons;



      (6)   Erotic or nude touching, fondling, or other
sexually-oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or



      (7)   Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or
anal irrigation.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.004  GENERAL PROHIBITION OF ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESSES.



   Except as allowed as an accessory use in a B-1 or B-2 district pursuant
to §§ 150.133 and 150.148 and except as allowed as a permitted use in an
I-1 district pursuant to § 150.161, no property within the city shall have
an accessory or principal use, as defined herein.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.005  MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.



   In their interpretation and application the provisions of the Zoning
Code shall be held to be the minimum requirements and shall be for the
promotion of the public’s health, safety, and welfare. The provisions shall
be liberally construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed
a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.006  MORE RESTRICTIVE PROVISIONS TO APPLY.



   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of the Zoning Code are
either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions
imposed by any other law, ordinance, statute, resolution, or regulation of
any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher
standards or requirements shall prevail.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.007  PROHIBITIONS.



   No structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or
altered, and no structure or land shall be used for any purpose nor in any
manner which is not in conformity with the Zoning Code.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.008  ANNEXATION OF LAND.



   When land is proposed to be annexed to the city, the Planning
Commission shall hold a public hearing upon the permanent zoning of said
land. The results of the hearing, along with a recommendation, shall be
presented to the Council.  In the event that annexation proceedings become
final before the permanent zoning is determined, the annexed area shall be
placed in the R-4 district and such classification shall be considered as an
interim step pending permanent classification.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.009  NON-CONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES.



   Any structure or use lawfully existing on the effective date of the
Zoning Code may be continued at the size and in a manner of operation
existing upon such date subject to the following regulations:



   (A)   Safe condition.  Nothing in the Zoning Code shall prevent the
placing of a structure in safe condition when said structure is declared
unsafe by the city.



   (B)   Change to conforming use.  When any lawful non-conforming use
of any structure or land in any district has been changed to a conforming
use, it shall not thereafter be changed to any non- conforming use.



   (C)   Damaged structure. When any lawful non-conforming use of any
structure or land in any district is damaged by wind, fire, flood, explosion,
earthquake, war, riot or other similar peril to the extent of greater than
fifty percent (50%) of its market value at the time of destruction and no
building permit has been applied for within one hundred eighty (180) days of
the date of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter. The Zoning Administrator shall be
responsible for making the determination whether a non-conforming use of any
structure or land has been destroyed greater than fifty percent (50%) of it
assessed market value at the time of the destruction. In making this
determination, the Zoning Administrator shall consider the assessed market
value of the entire non-conforming use. This determination shall be reviewed
and approved by the City Administrator.  In the event that a building permit
is applied for within one hundred eighty (180) days of the date of
destruction, the city may impose reasonable conditions upon the building
permit in order to mitigate any newly created impact on adjacent properties.



   (D)   Discontinuance of use.  Whenever a lawful, non-conforming use
of a building, structure, or land is discontinued for a period of six (6)
months, any future use of said building, structure, or land shall be in
conformity with the provisions of the Zoning Code.



   (E)   Maintenance.  Normal maintenance of a building or other
structure containing or related to a lawful non-conforming use is permitted,
including necessary non-structural repairs and incidental alterations which
do not extend or intensify the non-conforming use.



   (F)   Change of use.  A lawful non-conforming use of a structure or
parcel of land may be changed to lessen the nonconformity of use.  Once a
non-conforming structure or parcel of land has been changed, it shall not
thereafter be so altered to increase the  non-conformity.  The Planning
Commission and City Council shall determine if the proposed use is
appropriate, provided that they find the proposed use lessens the
non-conformity.  In permitting such change, the City Council may impose
conditions and safeguards consistent with the purpose and intent of the
Zoning Code.



   (G)   Alterations.  Alterations may be made to a structure or
building containing lawful non-conforming residential units when they will
improve the livability thereof, provided they will not increase the number of
dwelling units.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.010  BUILDABLE LOTS.



   A lot or parcel of land for which a deed has been recorded in the
office of the Kanabec County Recorder upon, or prior to the effective date of
the Zoning Code shall be deemed a buildable lot provided it has frontage on a
public right-of-way and the space requirements for the district in which it
is located can be maintained or adjusted to conform as follows:



   (A)   A lot or parcel of land which is in an R district and which
does not meet the requirements of the Zoning Code as to area, width, or other
open space and adjacent land is not available to extend the lot to meet
zoning requirements, may be utilized for single-family detached dwelling
purposes provided the measurements of such area, width or open space are
within sixty percent (60%) of the requirements of the Zoning Code; but said
lot or parcel shall not be more intensively developed without a variance.



   (B)   One (1) building per lot.  In all residential districts
except R-3 there shall be no more than one (1) principal building per lot.
(See also § 150.011(B))



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.011  ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Floor area restrictions.  No accessory building shall exceed
one thousand (1,000) square feet or the total square footage of floor area of
the principal structure, whichever is less, on a lot up to twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet in size.  If the lot is over twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet, you can add five percent (5%) of the lot area over twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet to the garage, up to a maximum of one thousand
six hundred (1,600) square feet.  This applies to all R-1 and R-4 districts.
The maximum allowable lot coverage of all structures shall be thirty-three
percent (33%).  Attached garages are limited to one thousand (1,000) square
feet.  Plans and specifications for accessory buildings in all districts
must be submitted and approved by the Building Official.



   (B)   Time of construction.  No accessory building or structure
shall be constructed on any lot prior to the time of construction of the
principal building to which it is accessory.



   (C)   Height restrictions.  No accessory building shall exceed the
height of the principal building. However, in no case, shall such accessory
building exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.



   (D)   Proximity to principal building.  An accessory building shall
be considered to be an integral part of the principal building unless it is
six (6) feet or more from the principal building.



   (E)   Appearance.  An accessory building having a floor area
greater than one hundred forty-four (144) square feet shall match and
generally be constructed of the same exterior materials as the principal
building in the lot.



   (F)   One (1) accessory building per principal structure.  Only one
(1) accessory building shall be allowed per principal structure in the R
districts in addition to one (1) utility/storage building per lot.  (See
also § 150.064.)



   (G)   Fish houses.  Storage of no more than two (2) licensed fish
houses shall be allowed per principal structure in the R districts in
addition to those structures allowed by § 150.011 (F).



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.012  YARDS AND OPEN SPACE.



   (A)   Reduction prohibited.  No yard or other open space shall be
reduced in area or dimension so as to make such yard or other open space less
than the minimum required by the Zoning Code, and if the existing yard or
other open space as existing is less than the minimum required, it shall not
be further reduced.



   (B)   Application to only one (1) dwelling or group. No required
yard or other open space allocated to a building or dwelling group shall be
used to satisfy minimum lot area requirements for any other building.



   (C)   Non-encroachments. The following shall not be considered to be
encroachments on yard and setback requirements.



      (1)   Chimneys, flues, fire escapes, bays, leaders, sills,
pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, cornices, eaves, gutters and the
like, provided they do not extend more than one and one-half (1-1/2) feet
into a yard.



      (2)   Fences.  No fence or wall shall be erected, enlarged,
expanded, altered, relocated, maintained or repaired in any yard, unless it
shall first meet the requirements of this section.



         (a)   Construction.



            1.   No residential fence or wall shall be
constructed of any electrically charged element, unless located underground
(for example, invisible or underground pet fencing), or barbed wire.  Areas
utilized for agricultural purposes (for example, pasture or cropland) shall
be exempt from this section.



            2.   No commercial or industrial fence or wall
shall be constructed of any electrically charged element except that barbed
wire or similar security fencing may be used above a height of six and
one-half (6 ½) feet when incorporated with a fence or wall which has been
issued a building permit.



         (b)   Material.



            1.   All fences shall be constructed of either
stone, brick, finished wood, durable vinyl or other durable plastic
materials, ornamental non-corrosive aluminum or iron, or chain link.



            2.   The finished side of the fence, or that side
of the fence without exposed supports or posts, shall face the neighboring
properties or streets.



            3.   Materials such as straight wire fencing,
tarps or snow fence will not be allowed.



         (c)   Maintenance.  Every fence or wall shall be
maintained in a good and safe condition at all times.  Every damaged or
missing element, including slats in slatted chain link fences, of any fence
or wall shall be repaired or replaced immediately.



         (d)   Height.



            1.   Side or rear yards.  No fence or wall
located in a side or rear yard shall be of a height exceeding eight (8) feet,
measured from its top edge to the ground at any point, except as required by
any landscaping or screening requirements of this chapter.



            2.   Front yards.  No fence or wall located in a
front yard shall be of a height exceeding four (4) feet, measured from its
top edge to the ground at any point, except as required by any landscaping or
screening requirements of this chapter.



            3.   Any fence exceeding six (6) feet in height
shall require a building permit.



            4.   Fences used as backstops for municipal /
institutional athletic fields shall be exempt from the height requirements in
this chapter provided a building permit is issued.



         (e)   Setbacks.



            1.   A fence shall be set back at least two (2)
feet from the property line or, upon mutual consent in writing from the
neighboring property owner(s), may be placed on the property line.



            2.   No fence, wall, hedge or other screening
device shall be permitted to encroach on any public right-of-way.



            3.   Fences may be constructed within an
unimproved drainage or utility easement, though future work within the
easement may result in the removal of the fence at the owner's expense.  No
fence shall be located in an improved drainage or utility easement (pond,
utility pipe, etc.).



            4.   No fence shall obstruct the flow of water nor
divert water onto a neighboring property.



            5.   The property owner is responsible for
locating property lines and easements and placing the fence in accordance
with all applicable setbacks.



      (3)   Trees, shrubs, plants, terraces, steps, stoops, or
similar uncovered structures which do not extend above the height of the main
floor level of the principal structure and do not exceed to a distance of
less than four (4) feet from any lot line. Yard lights or security lights or
other sources of light provided the direct source of light does not shine on
or adversely affect the adjacent residential properties.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.013  TRAFFIC VISIBILITY.



   No fences, structures or plantings exceeding thirty-six (36) inches in
height above the center line grade of the street shall be permitted within
twenty-five (25) feet of any street corner formed by the intersection of the
property lines.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.014  FARMING.



   All farms in existence on the effective date of the Zoning Code and all
farms which are brought into the city by annexation shall be a permitted use
where the operator can conduct a farming operation. However, all regulations
contained in this Code shall apply to all changes of the farming operation
which will cause all or a part of the area to become more intensively used or
more urban in character.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.015  LAND RECLAMATION.



   Land reclamation is the reclaiming of land by depositing of material so
as to elevate the grade. Land reclamation shall be permitted only by
conditional use permit in all districts. Any lot or parcel upon which four
hundred (400) cubic yards or more of fill is to be deposited shall be land
reclamation. The permit shall include as a condition thereof a finished grade
plan which will not adversely affect the adjacent land, and as conditions
thereof shall regulate the type of fill permitted, program for rodent
control, plan for fire control and general maintenance of the site, dust
control, controls of vehicular ingress and egress, and for control of
material dispersed from wind or hauling of material to or from the site.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.016  MINING.



   The extraction and incidental processing of sand, gravel, or other
material from the land in the amount of four hundred (400) cubic yards or
more and removal thereof from the site shall be mining. In all districts the
conduct of mining shall be permitted only upon issuance of a conditional use
permit. Such permit shall include, as a condition thereof, a plan for a
finished grade which will not adversely affect the surrounding land or the
development of the site on which the mining is being conducted, a plan for
control of traffic and dust control, and the route of trucks moving to and
from the site.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.017  QUASI-PUBLIC STRUCTURES.



   No quasi-public structure shall be located within the public
right-of-way except by permit. The term QUASI-PUBLIC STRUCTURE as used herein
shall include but not be limited to trash containers, bicycle racks, benches,
planting boxes, awnings, flag poles, light standards, stairs, stoops, light
wells, loading wells, docks, fences, signs and other similar structures.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.018  RELOCATION OF STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Policy.  It is the stated policy of the city to maintain a
harmonious and high standard of development and to protect all areas from
deleterious affects by insuring that both new and relocated structures from
other areas, both from within the city and from outside, shall meet specified
requirements. All relocated structures as stated above must conform to the
State Building Code and shall be permitted in the zoning district where all
necessary specifications as to lot size, set backs, type of use, height
regulations and all other conditions as laid down in the Zoning Code are met.



   (B)   Relocation permit.  All relocations of structures, either
primary or accessory that are over one hundred forty-four (144) square feet,
requiring the use of the public right-of-way, shall require a relocation
permit and a building permit as required by the State Building Code.



      (1)   Application shall be made on forms provided by the city.



      (2)   An application fee and damage deposit as established in
the city fee schedule shall be paid at the time of application.  Exception:
the application fee is waived for structures being moved out of town. 
However, a permit, damage deposit, and proper insurance are still required.
Any building permit fees shall also be paid as required by the State Building
Code.



      (3)   The applicant shall also agree to pay any city/utility
expenses incurred, including, but not limited to: line drops, utility
removals, sign removals, street repair and any other related expenses. A
damage deposit as outlined in the city fee schedule shall be deposited with
the city and shall be kept until fifteen (15) days after the complete
relocation of the structure, or until such time that all expenses incurred by
the city are reimbursed. In the case of high expenses, (as determined by the
City Administrator) the city reserves the right to withhold a relocation
permit until an “estimated cost” of city/utility expenses are paid up
front.



      (4)   For primary structures, proof of liability insurance in
the amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000) and proof of property
damage insurance in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) shall be
provided to the city.  For accessory structures, proof of one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000) liability insurance and ten thousand dollars
($10,000) property damage insurance must be submitted.



      (5)   All applicable zoning, building, health, and fire codes
must be complied with.



      (6)   The applicant shall submit and have a “route of
travel” approved by the city before relocation can begin.  Information
giving the actual “loaded height” of the structure shall be submitted to
the city.



      (7)   All relocated structures shall have new roof covering
(i.e. shingles, etc.) and new siding installed within three (3) months of the
relocation.  The City Council may grant an exemption to the requirement if
the roof covering and/or siding is in “like-new” condition.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 150.030  ZONING ADMINISTRATION.



   The Zoning Code shall be administered and enforced by the Zoning
Administrator, who shall be appointed by the City Council.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.031  DUTIES OF THE ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Zoning Administrator shall enforce the Zoning Code and also shall:



   (A)   Conduct inspections of the buildings and use of land to
determine compliance with the terms of the Zoning Code.



   (B)   Maintain permanent and current records of the Zoning Code,
including but not limited to all maps, amendments, conditional uses,
variances, appeals, and applications thereto.



   (C)   Receive, file, and forward all applications for amendments,
variances, conditional use, or other matters to the Planning Commission and
the City Council.



   (D)   Institute in the name of the city any appropriate actions or
proceedings against a violator as provided by law.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.032  BUILDING PERMIT.



   No structure shall be erected or structurally altered until a building
permit shall have been issued indicating that the existing or proposed
structure and the use of the land comply with the Zoning Code and State
Building Code. No building permits shall be issued until a complete drainage
system has been reviewed by the city.  If deemed appropriate, the City
Building Official may require approval of the drainage system by the City
Engineer. All applications for building permits pertaining to the erection or
major alteration which will affect the outside dimensions of a structure
shall be accompanied by two (2) copies of a plat drawn to scale showing the
actual dimensions of the lot, lots or parcels to be built upon, the
dimensions of the ground and the extensions beyond the outside wall of the
proposed structures to be erected or structurally altered, their location on
the site in relation to the outside boundary and such other information as
may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of these regulations. One (1)
copy of the approved building permit is to be made available on the site
until the issuance of an occupancy permit. On building projects, when the
Building Official and/or the Street Superintendent determine that dirt and
debris will enter the city storm sewer system, an erosion control plan shall
be prepared and followed.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.033  OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATES.



   Occupancy certificates shall be issued in accordance with the
requirements of the State of Minnesota Building Code.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.034  BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.



   (A)   Board of Appeals.  The Planning Commission is constituted as
the Board of Appeals and shall have the duty of hearing all appeals from any
order, requirement, or decision made by the Zoning Official, Planning
Official, or Building Official, and from any interpretation of the text of
the Zoning Code or any determination by the Zoning Administrator as to the
location of the boundary of a zoning district as shown on the official zoning
map. The Board of Appeals shall have the final authority to deny such appeal
after due study and deliberation. Should the Board of Appeals act favorably
on the appeal it shall forward its recommendations to the Council for final
action.



   (B)   Notice.  Notice of hearings shall be mailed to all
appellants. In all cases rendering determination of district boundary lines
or interpretation of the text of the Zoning Code, a notice shall be published
in the official newspaper once at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
Copies of all notices of any public hearings to consider variances,
amendments, or conditional uses under local shoreland management controls
must be sent to the Department of Natural Resources, Division of Waters and
postmarked at least ten (10) days before the hearings. Notices of hearings to
consider proposed subdivision/plats must include copies of the
subdivision/plat. A copy of approved amendments and subdivision/plats, and
final decisions granting variances or conditional uses under local shoreland
management controls must be sent to the Department of Natural Resources,
Division of Waters and postmarked within ten (10) days of final action.



   (C)   The City Council, Planning Commission and city staff shall
have the authority to request additional information from the applicant
concerning the appeal or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at
the expense of the applicant concerning the appeal, said information to be
declared necessary to establish performance conditions in relation to all
pertinent sections of this Zoning Code and all other city codes and
ordinances.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.035  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Authority.  The City Council, in accordance with the
procedures and standards set forth in this section, shall have the authority
to grant variances from the provisions of this chapter in instances where
their strict enforcement would cause undue hardship because of circumstances
unique to the individual property.



   (B)   Purpose.  The variance procedure is intended to provide a
narrowly circumscribed means by which relief may be granted from unforeseen
particular applications of this chapter that create practical difficulties or
particular hardships. 



   (C)   Persons entitled to seek variances.  An application for a
variance may be made by the owner of, or any person having a contractual
interest in, the subject property.



   (D)   Procedure.  The following procedures shall govern application
for variances:



      (1)   Application.  An application for a variance shall be
filed with the Zoning Administrator on the form provided and shall contain
the following information:



         (a)   The applicant’s name, address and proof of
interest in the property;



         (b)   The property owner’s name and address, if
different than the applicant, and the owner’s signed consent to the filing
of the application;



         (c)   The street address and legal description of the
property;



         (d)   The zoning classification and present use of the
property;



         (e)   A statement of the specific provisions of this
chapter from which a variance is sought and the precise variance being sought;



         (f)   A statement of the characteristics of the property
that prevent compliance with the provisions of this chapter;



         (g)   A site plan showing existing lot lines and
dimensions as well as lot area, all easements, all public street and private
right-of-ways bordering and adjacent to the site, the use and location of all
adjacent property;



         (h)   The specific feature or features of the proposed
use, construction or development that require a variance; and



         (i)   Such other information or documentation as the
Zoning Administrator may deem to be necessary or appropriate for a full and
proper consideration and disposition of the application.



      (2)   Fee.  An applicant for a variance shall pay a
nonrefundable filing fee in connection with the submittal of the application
in accordance with a fee schedule as established, from time to time, by the
City Council.



      (3)   Action of the Zoning Administrator. Upon receipt of a
properly completed application for a variance and accompanying documentation,
the Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Planning Commission
the application together with all other documentation made part thereof.



      (4)   Public hearing. Upon receipt of a properly completed
application for a variance, the Planning Commission shall set a date for a
public hearing.



      (5)   Notice. Notice of the public hearing shall be given by
the Zoning Administrator by one (1) publication in one (1) or more newspapers
of general circulation.  Notice shall be published a minimum of ten (10)
days prior to the hearing date and a maximum of thirty (30) days to the
hearing.  Notice shall also be given by first class mail to all owners of
property within three hundred fifty (350) feet of the proposed location of
the variance. The notice shall describe the particular variance and shall
contain a brief description thereof. County assessment records and street
addresses shall be deemed sufficient for the location or certification of
ownership for notification purposes.



      (6)   Action of the Planning Commission. Upon the conclusion
of the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall transmit its
recommendation to the City Council.  The Planning Commission shall either
recommend the granting of the variance, granting the variance subject to
conditions, or denying the variance.  The failure of the Planning Commission
to act within a timeframe that allows the City Council to act within the
mandated sixty (60) days shall be deemed a recommendation for the approval of
the variance.



      (7)   Action of the City Council.  After receipt of the
Planning Commission’s recommendation or its failure to act within thirty
(30) days, the City Council shall either grant the variance with or without
conditions or deny the variance.



   (E)   Standards.  In considering an application for a variance, the
Planning Commission shall recommend the approval of the variance only upon
the finding that the application complies with the standards set forth below.



      (1)   General standard.  No variance shall be granted unless
the applicant is able to establish that conforming to the strict letter of
the provisions of this chapter would create a unique and particular hardship.



      (2)   Unique and particular hardship.  Unique and particular
hardship is defined as the property is exceptional as compared to other
property subject to the same provisions by reason of a unique physical
condition, including the presence of an existing use or structure, whether
conforming or nonconforming; irregular or substandard shape or size;
exceptional topographic features; or other extraordinary physical conditions
peculiar to and inherent in the subject property. The hardship shall amount
to more than a mere inconvenience to the owner and the hardship shall relate
to the physical situation of the lot rather than the personal situation of
the current owner of the property.



      (3)   Not self-created.  The unique physical condition and
hardship shall not be the result of any action or inaction of the property
owner or its predecessors in title.  The unique physical condition shall
have existed at the time of the enactment of the provisions from which a
variance is sought or was created by natural forces or was the result of
governmental action, other than the adoption of this chapter.



      (4)   Denied substantial rights. The carrying out of the
strict letter of the provision from which a variance is sought would deprive
the owner of the subject property of substantial rights commonly enjoyed by
owners of other property subject to the same provisions.



      (5)   Not merely special privilege.  The alleged hardship
shall not include the inability of the owner or occupant to enjoy some
special privilege or additional right not available to owners or occupants of
other properties subject to the same provision. The alleged hardship shall
not include the inability of the owner to realize a greater profit than if
the variance were not granted.



      (6)   No other remedy. There are no means other than the
requested variance by which the alleged hardship can be avoided or remedied
to a degree sufficient to permit a reasonable use of the property.



      (7)   Variance less than requested.  A variance less than or
different from that requested may be granted when the record supports the
applicant’s right to some relief but not to the relief requested.



      (8)   Essential character of the area.  The variance would
not result in development on the property that:



         (a)   Would be materially detrimental or materially
injurious to the enjoyment, use, development or value of property or
improvements permitted in the vicinity;



         (b)   Would materially impair an inadequate supply of
light and air to the properties and improvements within the vicinity;



         (c)   Would substantially increase congestion in the
public streets due to traffic or parking;



         (d)   Would unduly increase the danger of flood or fire;



         (e)   Would unduly tax public utilities and facilities
in the area;



         (f)   Would endanger the public health or safety; and



         (g)   Would not be in harmony with the general and
specific purposes of this chapter and the comprehensive planning policies and
objectives of the city.



   (F)   Conditions on variances. The City Council, upon recommendation
from the Planning Commission, may impose specific conditions and limitations
upon the granting of a variance as are necessary to achieve the purpose and
objectives of this chapter.  The conditions and limitations may include but
are not limited to those concerning the use, construction, character,
location, landscaping, screening, parking and other matters relating to the
purpose and objectives of this chapter and shall be expressly set forth in
the resolution granting the variance. Violation of any such condition or
limitation shall be a violation of this chapter and shall constitute grounds
for revocation of the variance.



   (G)   No presumption of approval. Application for variance does not
constitute an assurance or presumption that such variance will be approved.



   (H)   Effect of approval.  The approval of a proposed variance by
the City Council shall not authorize the development, construction,
reconstruction, alteration or moving of any building or structure, but shall
merely authorize the preparation, filing and processing of application for
the permits or approvals as may be required by the regulation of the city,
including but not limited to a building permit and a certificate of occupancy.



   (I)   Limitations on variances.  Whenever, within one (1) year (or
other designated time period as specified on the variance) after the granting
of a variance and when the terms as specified by the variance have not been
completed, then such variance shall become null and void, unless a request
for extension of time has been granted by the City Council. Such extension
requests shall be in writing and filed with the city at least thirty (30)
days before expiration of the original variance. There shall be no charge for
the filing of such request. Such request may be granted only once.



   (J)   Prohibited variances.  Notwithstanding any other provision of
this section, no variance shall be granted to establish a use not permitted
in the zoning district where the property subject to the application is
located.



   (K)   Effect of denial.



      (1)   Variances may be denied by motion of the City Council
and such motion shall constitute a finding and determination by the City
Council that the standards required for approval do not exist. 



      (2)   No application of a property owner for a variance shall
be considered by the City Council within a six (6) month period following a
denial for such a request, except the City Council may permit a new
application if in its opinion new evidence or a change in circumstances
warrants it.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.036  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Authority.  The City Council, in accordance with the
procedures and standards set forth in this section, may grant conditional use
permits authorizing the development of uses listed as conditional uses in the
regulations applicable to the district in which the specific property is
located.  The City Council also reserves the right to review, modify or
terminate the approval of any conditional use permit.



   (B)   Purpose. The principal objective of this section is to provide
for an orderly arrangement of compatible building and land uses and for the
proper locations of all types of uses required by the city.  To accomplish
this objective, each type and kind of use is classified as permitted in one
(1) or more of the various districts established by this chapter.  However,
in addition to those uses specifically classified and permitted in each
district, there are certain additional uses which may be allowed because of
their unusual characteristics or the service they provide the public. These
conditional uses require particular considerations as to their proper
location in relation to adjacent established or intended uses and the planned
development of the community; therefore, each application will be reviewed on
a case by case basis and will be subject to a public hearing process.



   (C)   Persons entitled to seek conditional use permits.  An
application for a conditional use permit may be made by any governmental
office, department, board or commission or by any person having a contractual
interest in the subject property.



   (D)   Procedure.  The following procedures shall govern application
for conditional use permits:



      (1)   Application.  An application for a conditional use
permit shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on the form provided and
shall contain the following information:



         (a)   The applicant’s name, address and proof of
interest in the property;



         (b)   The property owner’s name and address, if
different than the applicant, and the owner’s signed consent to the filing
of the application;



         (c)   The street address and legal description of the
property;



         (d)   The zoning classification and present use of the
property;



         (e)   A general description of the proposed conditional
use;



         (f)   A site plan conforming to the requirements of this
chapter; and



         (g)   Such other information or documentation as the
Zoning Administrator may deem to be necessary or appropriate for a full and
proper consideration and disposition of the application.



      (2)   Fee. An applicant for a conditional use permit shall pay
a nonrefundable filing fee in connection with the submittal of the
application in accordance with a fee schedule as established, from time to
time, by the City Council.



      (3)   Action of the Zoning Administrator.  Upon receipt of a
properly completed application for a conditional use and accompanying site
plan, the Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Planning
Commission the application together with all other documentation made part
thereof.



      (4)   Public hearing.  Upon receipt of a properly completed
application for a conditional use, the Planning Commission shall set a date
for a public hearing.



      (5)   Notice.  Notice of the public hearing shall be given by
the Zoning Administrator by one (1) publication in one (1) or more newspapers
of general circulation. Notice shall be published a minimum of ten (10) days
prior to the hearing date and a maximum of thirty (30) days to the hearing. 
Notice shall also be given by first class mail to all owners of property
within three hundred fifty (350) feet of the proposed location of the
conditional use. The notice shall describe the particular conditional use and
shall contain a brief description thereof. County assessment records and
street addresses shall be deemed sufficient for the location or certification
of ownership for notification purposes.



      (6)   Action of the Planning Commission. Upon the conclusion
of the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall transmit its
recommendation to the City Council.  The Planning Commission shall either
recommend the granting of the conditional use permit, granting the
conditional use permit subject to conditions, or denying the conditional use
permit. The failure of the Planning Commission to act within a timeframe that
allows the City Council to act within the mandated sixty (60) days shall be
deemed a recommendation for the approval of the conditional use permit.



      (7)   Action of the City Council. After receipt of the
Planning Commission’s recommendation or its failure to act within thirty
(30) days, the City Council shall either approve the conditional use permit
with or without conditions or deny the conditional use permit.



   (E)   Standards.  In considering an application for conditional use
permit, the Planning Commission shall make its recommendation upon the
finding that the application complies with each of the standards set forth
below and, where applicable, any conditional standards for specific uses set
forth in the provisions of a specific zoning district.



      (1)   The use is consistent with the purposes and intent of
the Zoning Code and the purposes and intent of the zoning district in which
the applicant intends to locate the proposed use.



      (2)   The use is in keeping with the Comprehensive Plan and
the policies thereof.



      (3)   The use will not cause undue traffic congestion or
hazards.



      (4)   The use will be adequately served by public utilities
and all other necessary public facilities and services.



      (5)   The structure and the site shall have an appearance that
will not have an adverse effect upon adjacent properties.



      (6)   The use will be sufficiently compatible by distance or
screened from adjacent residentially zoned or used land so that existing
homes will not be depreciated in value and there will be no deterrence to
development of vacant land.



      (7)   The use will not jeopardize the public's health, safety
or general welfare.



   (F)   Sequence of approval of applications for both a conditional
use and a variance.  Whenever the applicant indicates that a variance will
be necessary in connection with the proposed conditional use (other than a
planned unit development), the applicant shall at the time of filing for a
conditional use file an application for a variance with the Planning
Commission.  The applications shall be processed at the same time and
reviewed by the Planning Commission at the same meeting. However, the
Planning Commission shall not take any action on the application for a
variance until the Planning Commission first acts to recommend the granting
of the conditional use permit, granting the conditional use permit subject to
conditions, or denying the conditional use permit.



   (G)   Conditions of conditional uses.



      (1)   The City Council, upon recommendation from the Planning
Commission, may impose specific conditions and limitations concerning the
use, construction, character, location, landscaping, screening, parking and
other matters relating to the purpose and objectives of this chapter upon the
premises benefited by a conditional use. In addition, the City Council may
require a performance guarantee to be submitted to the city in order to
ensure compliance with the terms of approval.



      (2)   The conditions and limitations of approval may be more
restrictive than standards outlined in this chapter but shall not be less
restrictive. The conditions and limitations may be necessary or appropriate
to prevent or minimize adverse effects upon other property and improvements
in the vicinity of the proposed property or on public facilities. The
conditions shall be expressly set forth in the resolution granting the
conditional use permit. Violation of any such condition or limitation shall
be a violation of this chapter and shall constitute grounds for revocation of
the conditional use permit.



   (H)   No presumption of approval.  The listing of a conditional use
within each zoning district does not constitute an assurance or presumption
that such conditional use will be approved. Rather, each proposed conditional
use shall be evaluated on an individual basis in order to determine whether
approval of the conditional use is appropriate at the particular location and
in the particular manner proposed.



   (I)   Effect of approval.  The approval of a proposed conditional
use by the City Council shall not authorize the development, construction,
reconstruction, alteration or moving of any building or structure, but shall
merely authorize the preparation, filing and processing of application for
the permits or approvals as may be required by the regulation of the city,
including but not limited to a building permit and a certificate of occupancy.



   (J)   Limitations on conditional uses.



      (1)   Whenever, within one (1) year (or other designated time
period as specified on the resolution) after the granting of a conditional
use permit and when the terms of the conditional use permit have not been
completed, then such permit shall become null and void, unless a request for
extension of time has been granted by the City Council. Such extension
requests shall be in writing and filed with the city at least thirty (30)
days before expiration of the original permit. There shall be no charge for
the filing of such request. Such request may be granted only once.



      (2)   Except when otherwise provided in the resolution
approving a conditional use, a conditional use shall be deemed to relate to,
and be for the benefit of, the use and lot in question, rather than the owner
or operator of such lot.



   (K)   Effect of denial.



      (1)   Conditional use permits may be denied by motion of the
City Council and such motion shall constitute a finding and determination by
the City Council that the standards required for approval do not exist.



      (2)   No application of a property owner for a conditional use
permit shall be considered by the City Council within a six (6) month period
following a denial for such a request, except the City Council may permit a
new application if in its opinion new evidence or a change in circumstances
warrants it.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.037  INTERIM USES.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose and intent of allowing interim uses is:



      (1)   To allow a use within any zoning district for a limited
period of time that reasonably utilizes the property where it is not
reasonable to utilize it in the manner provided in the Comprehensive Plan;



      (2)   To allow a use that is presently acceptable but that,
with anticipated development or other changes, will not be acceptable in the
future.



   (B)   Application and procedures. The application, public hearing,
public notice and procedure requirements for interim use permits shall be the
same as those for conditional use permits as provided in § 150.036.



   (C)   Standards. The Planning Commission shall recommend an interim
use permit and the City Council shall issue such interim use permit only if
it finds that such use at the proposed location:



      (1)   Meets the standards of a conditional use permit set
forth in § 150.036;



      (2)   Will terminate upon a date or event that can be
identified with certainty;



      (3)   Will not impose, by agreement, additional costs on the
public if it is necessary for the public to take the property in the future;



      (4)   Will be subjected to, by agreement with the property
owner, any conditions that the City Council has deemed appropriate for
permission of the use, including a condition that the property owner will
provide an appropriate financial surety to cover the cost of removing the
interim use and any interim structures upon the expiration of the interim use
permit.



   (D)   Termination.  An interim use permit shall terminate upon the
occurrence of any of the following events, whichever occurs first:



      (1)   The date or event stated in the permit; or



      (2)   A violation of conditions under which the permit was
issued; or



      (3)   A change in the city's Zoning Code which renders the use
non-conforming; or



      (4)   The use has been discontinued for six (6) months.



   (E)   Limitations on interim uses. No more than one (1) request for
extension shall be granted by the City Council. Such extension requests shall
be in writing and filed with the city at least thirty (30) days before
expiration of the original permit. 



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.038  AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   Authority. The text of this chapter and the Official Zoning
Map may be amended from time to time by the passage of an ordinance duly
adopted by the City Council in accordance with procedures set forth herein.



   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide standards
and procedures for making amendments to the text of this chapter and the
Official Zoning Map that are of general significance or application. The
amendment process is not intended to relieve particular hardships nor to
confer special privileges or rights to any person but only to make
adjustments necessary in light of changed conditions or changes in public
policy.



   (C)   Parties entitled to initiate amendments. Amendments to the
text of this chapter and the Official Zoning Map may be initiated by written
petition of any affected property owner, the City Council or the Planning
Commission, provided the petition meets the requirements set forth in this
section.



   (D)   Requirements for amendment petitions.  Petitions for
amendments to this chapter shall be in such form and accompanied by such
information as shall be prescribed, from time to time, by the Planning
Commission and shall contain at the least the following:



      (1)   The petitioner's name, address and interest in the
petition and the name, address and interest in every person, firm,
corporation or government agency represented by the petitioner in the
petition;



      (2)   The precise wording of the proposed amendment, together
with a concise explanation of its presumed effect;



      (3)   A statement containing all the circumstances, factors
and arguments that the petitioner offers in support of the proposed amendment;



      (4)   In the event that the proposed amendment would result in
the rezoning of any property, the following shall be supplied:



         (a)   A statement specifying the names of the owners of
the land proposed to be rezoned;



         (b)   A statement identifying the majority of owners of
the land proposed to be rezoned and being parties to the petition;



         (c)   The street address and legal description of the
land proposed to be rezoned;



         (d)   The present zoning classification and use of the
land proposed to be rezoned;



         (e)   A statement of purpose explaining the reasons for
the rezoning.



   (E)   Fee. An applicant for an amendment shall pay a nonrefundable
filing fee in connection with the submittal of the application in accordance
with a fee schedule as established, from time to time, by the City Council.



   (F)   Standards for amendments.  In making their determination, the
City Council shall consider the following:



      (1)   Whether the proposed amendment is consistent with the
goals, objectives and policies of the Comprehensive Plan, as adopted and
amended from time to time by the City Council;



      (2)   Whether the proposed amendment is compatible with the
overall character of existing development in the immediate vicinity of the
affected property;



      (3)   Whether the proposed amendment will have an adverse
effect on the value of adjacent properties;



      (4)   The adequacy of public facilities and services.



   (G)   Procedure for review and decision of proposed amendments.  A
petition to amend the text of this chapter and the Official Zoning Map shall
be processed in accordance with the following procedures:



      (1)   Public hearing. Upon receipt of a properly completed
application for amendment, the Planning Commission shall set a date for a
public hearing.



      (2)   Notice. Notice of the public hearing shall be given by
the Zoning Administrator by one (1) publication in one (1) or more newspapers
of general circulation.  Notice shall be published a minimum of ten (10)
days prior to the hearing date and a maximum of thirty (30) days to the
hearing.  Notice shall also be given by first class mail to all owners of
property within three hundred fifty (350) feet of the area proposed to be
rezoned or as otherwise provided by state law. County assessment records and
street addresses shall be deemed sufficient for the location or certification
of ownership for notification purposes.



      (3)   Action of the Planning Commission.  Upon receipt of the
petition, including a copy of the proposed text or map changes, the Planning
Commission shall hold a public hearing. The Planning Commission shall
recommend the approval or denial of the proposed amendment, or the approval
of the amendment with modifications, and shall then submit its written
recommendation to the City Council.  The failure of the Planning Commission
to act within a timeframe that allows the City Council to act within the
mandated sixty (60) days shall be deemed a recommendation for approval of the
amendment.



      (4)   Action of the City Council.  After receipt of the
Planning Commission’s recommendation or its failure to act within thirty
(30) days, the City Council shall either adopt or reject the recommendation
or adopt some modification of the recommendation.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.039  FEES FOR ZONING APPLICATIONS.



   Fees are adopted by City Council resolution, from time to time, and are
listed on said resolution.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP



§ 150.050  DISTRICTS.



   The city is hereby divided into the following zoning districts and
groups of districts:



   (A)   “R” Residential Districts:



      (1)   R-1 Single-Family Residential District;



      (2)   R-2 Manufactured Home Park District;



      (3)   R-3 Multiple Dwelling District; and



      (4)   R-4 Low Density Residential District.



   (B)   “B” Business Districts:



      (1)   B-1 Central Business District; and



      (2)   B-2 General Business District.



   (C)   “I” Industrial Districts:



      (1)   I-1 Limited Industrial District; and



      (2)   I-2 General Industrial District.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.051  MAP.



   The boundaries of the above districts are hereby established on that
certain map entitled “Zoning Map of Mora, Minnesota”, which map is the
most recently approved by the City Council and in the office of the City
Clerk at the City Hall, hereinafter referred to as the “zoning map”. 
This map and all of the notations, references and other information shown
thereon shall have the same force and effect as if fully set forth and
described herein.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.052  BOUNDARIES.



   District boundary lines as indicated on said map follow lot lines, the
center lines of streets, alleys or railroads, the center lines of streets or
alleys projected, the center of water courses or the corporate limit lines,
all as they exist upon the effective date of the Zoning Code or amendments
thereto. If district boundary lines do not follow any of the above-described
lines, the district boundary lines are established as drawn on the zoning
map. Where a district boundary line divides a lot of record which was in
single ownership on the effective date of the Zoning Code and places portions
of such lot of record in two (2) or more use districts, any portion of such
lot within fifty (50) feet on either side of such a dividing district
boundary line may be used for any use of either use district; provided,
however, if any portion of such lot shall extend beyond the fifty (50) foot
limitation, the district line as shown shall prevail. Appeals from the Zoning
Administrator’s determination and questions of doubt concerning the exact
location of district boundary lines shall be heard by the Board of Appeals.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



R-1 SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT



§ 150.060  R-1 SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



    The R-1 Single Family Residential District is intended to maintain
existing single-family residential areas and provide for the development of
new single-family residential areas served or to be served with public
sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and water facilities. Unless otherwise
specified, all structures in the R-1 District shall comply with the following
minimum standards:



   (A)   A permanent foundation under the entire structure which
complies with the Minnesota Building Code.



   (B)   The minimum pitch on any shingled roof must be at least
two-twelfths (2/12) or in the case of a flat roof design, a built up roof
assembly to comply with the State Building Code. All roofs must be shingled
or be an A roof assembly.



   (C)   The minimum width and length of the principal structure must
be twenty-four (24) feet for more than fifty percent (50%) of the floor area.
Minimum square footage of the main floor shall be five hundred seventy-six
(576) square feet.



   (D)   Any alterations or additions must be of the same materials,
type of construction, and must have the same appearance as the principal
structure.



   (E)   No building permits shall be issued until a complete drainage
system has been reviewed by the city.  If deemed appropriate, the City
Building Official may require approval of the drainage system by the City
Engineer.



   (F)   All principal structures must have a basement or approved
solid footing wall around the perimeter of the structure or a footing around
the perimeter of the structure designed by a state licensed engineer and
approved by the local building official.



   (G)   Every new single-family dwelling must construct a garage with
a minimum size of two hundred forty (240) square feet. Every new two-family
dwelling must construct one (1) or two (2) garages with a total minimum size
of four hundred eighty (480) square feet. The garage(s) must be constructed
before a final certificate of occupancy will be granted.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.061  PERMITTED USES.



   Within the R-1 Single Family Residential District, no structure or land
shall be used except for one (1) or more of the following uses:



   (A)   Single-family dwellings. One (1) family detached dwellings.



   (B)   Parks and playgrounds. Public parks and playgrounds, community
centers and other recreational facilities operated by governmental agencies.



   (C)   Horticultural uses.  Truck gardening, produce stands and
other horticultural activities provided that only those products grown on the
premises be sold or offered for sale.



   (D)   Day care facilities - Residential. Facility serving up to
fourteen (14) persons.



   (E)   Uses not listed.  Other residential and commercial uses
determined by the Planning Commission and City Council to be of the same
general character as identified permitted and conditional uses and found not
to be detrimental to the general public's health, safety, and welfare. The
use will be placed in the category based upon its compatibility to those uses
listed.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010) Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.062  CONDITIONAL USES.



    Within any R-1 Single Family Residential District, no structure or land
shall be used for the following uses except by conditional use permit:



   (A)   Agricultural uses. Agricultural activities including the
keeping of farm animals or fowl provided no building having farm animals or
fowl be nearer than one hundred (100) feet of a property line.



   (B)   Churches and other places of worship. Church buildings and
areas, schools of religion and similar facilities, including all expansions
of buildings, facilities and ground.



   (C)   Duplex structures.  Two-family dwellings.



   (D)   Country clubs.  Country clubs, golf courses and other private
non-commercial recreation areas and facilities, including swimming pools;
provided that any principal building or swimming pool shall be located not
less than fifty (50) feet from any other lot in an R District.



   (E)   Cemeteries. Cemeteries adjacent to or in extension of existing
cemeteries.



   (F)   Museums. Museums, and other public buildings not permitted as
a principal use.



   (G)   Health care facilities.  Including hospitals, clinics,
nursing homes and other similar health care facilities.



   (H)   Essential service structures.  Essential service structures,
including but not limited to structures such as telephone exchanges,
substations, wells, pumping stations and elevated water storage tanks.



   (I)   Commercial or residential stables.  Stables and riding
academies provided the property upon which the use is located is a minimum of
five (5) acres. One horse is allowed upon the first five (5) acres and an
additional two (2) acres are required for each additional horse.



   (J)   Kennels.  Any lot or premises or portion thereof on which
four (4) or more dogs and/or cats over six (6) months old are owned, boarded,
bred or offered for sale. No more than five (5) dogs and/or cats shall be
allowed by conditional use permit.  (See also Chapter 90)



   (K)   Parking.  Off-street parking when the proposed site of the
off-street parking abuts on a lot which is in the B or I districts and in the
same ownership as the B or I district.



   (L)   Day care facilities - Residential.  Facility serving fifteen
(15) or more persons.  If required, the facility must be state licensed and
meet all state mandated conditions.



   (M)   Temporary buildings. Buildings temporarily located for
purposes of construction on the site for a period of time not to exceed the
construction period.



   (N)   Funeral homes and mortuaries.



   (O)   Outdoor furnaces and boilers, provided the following
conditions are met:



      (1)   The applicant shall submit a site plan, drawn to scale,
showing the location of the proposed outdoor furnace or boiler in relation to
existing structures and property lines as well as proposed screening or
enclosure.



      (2)   Outdoor furnaces and boilers shall only be allowed on
lots five (5) acres in size or greater. If the lot is divided in the future,
so as to be less than five (5) acres, the outdoor furnace shall be removed.



      (3)   Outdoor furnaces and boilers shall be set back a minimum
of fifty (50) feet from all property lines when abutting a residential
district. When the property does not abut a residential district, the furnace
shall comply with minimum setback requirements of the zoning district it is
within.



      (4)   No burning materials shall be stored within five (5)
feet of the principal structure and materials shall be stored in an orderly
fashion.



      (5)   The outdoor furnace or boiler must be enclosed in a
structure or screened with fencing and/or other materials as approved by the
City Council.



      (6)   When the outdoor furnace or boiler is enclosed in a
structure, the structure shall generally match the exterior of the principal
structure.



      (7)   When the outdoor furnace or boiler is enclosed in a
structure, the structure shall not count against the allowable square footage
for future accessory structures, as long as it strictly serves as an
enclosure for the furnace or boiler and the structure does not exceed one
hundred (100) square feet in size.



      (8)   If the outdoor furnace or boiler is to be replaced, it
shall meet the city and/or state requirements in place at that time.



      (9)   The outdoor furnace or boiler shall be UL Listed, or
certified per the State Building Code, and the applicant shall follow all
manufacturer specifications.



      (10)   If the outdoor furnace or boiler is taken out of
service for a period of one (1) year or more, the permit shall become null
and void and the unit and enclosure shall be removed from the property.



   (P)   Community center buildings.  Community center buildings not
operated by a governmental agency.



   (Q)   Bed and breakfast inn, provided the following are adhered to:



      (1)   Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with
the parking requirements of § 150.217.  A minimum of one (1) off-street
parking space per guest room shall be provided in addition to the parking
requirements for the zoning district in which the facility is located.
Off-street parking is to be screened from the surrounding residences.



      (2)   Signs shall be in accordance with the sign requirements
in § 150.213 and meet the requirements for the zoning district that the
business is located within. (Identifying signs to be not more than four (4)
square feet in total, located on the building and consistent with the
character of the building).



      (3)   A maximum of five (5) units may be established in a
structure.



      (4)   A bed and breakfast establishment shall show proof of
inspection or proof of proper operating licenses by the state and/or country.



      (5)   All guest rooms shall be contained within the principal
structure.



      (6)   Dining and other facilities shall not be open to the
public, but shall be used exclusively by the residents and registered guests.



      (7)   The maximum stay for guests shall be fourteen (14) days
within a thirty (30) day period.



      (8)   The inn shall comply with all applicable laws, rules,
and regulations governing its existence and operation, including, but not
limited to, the State Building Code, the State Fire Code, and the State
Health Code.



      (9)   A conditional use permit shall be terminated upon
occurrence for the following:



         (a)   Non-compliance with the provisions of these
provisions.



         (b)   Transfer of ownership of said property from the
owner/operator.



         (c)   The creation of a condition which adversely
affects the health, safety, or general welfare of the city or its residents.



      (10) The owner or operator shall reside on the property or submit
a management plan for approval as part of the conditional use permit.



   (R)   Produce sales. Produce display for the sale of agricultural
products, other than that raised on the site, provided that said display is
located a minimum of ten (10) feet from the front property line.



   (S)   Schools. Public schools and private schools which have a
curriculum equivalent to a public elementary or secondary school, provided no
building is less than fifty (50) feet from any abutting residential lot.



   (T)   Dwellings with a zero (0) lot line.  When dwelling units of a
two-family structure are to be under separate ownership, a zero (0) lot line
may be permitted between the units.  State Building Code and Fire Code
requirements shall be complied with.  Also, minimum lot frontage and lot
area requirements shall be met.



   (U)   Land reclamation. See § 150.015.



   (V)   Mining.  See § 150.016.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.063  INTERIM USES.



   Those other uses which in the opinion of the Planning Commission are
appropriate only on an interim basis, and pursuant to § 150.037.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.064  ACCESSORY USES.



   Within any R-1 Single Family Residential District, the following uses
shall be permitted accessory uses, provided, that only one (1) accessory
building one thousand (1,000) square feet per principal structure be allowed
on lots up to twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. If the lot is over twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet, you can add five percent (5%) of the lot area
over twenty thousand (20,000) square feet to the garage, up to a maximum of
one thousand six hundred (1,600) square feet.  (See also § 150.011)  One
utility/storage building up to a maximum of one hundred forty-four (144)
square feet is allowed.



   (A)   Garages.  Private garage, carport or parking space for
passenger cars and for not more than one (1) one and one-half (1½) ton truck.



   (B)   Boarders. The keeping of not more than two (2) boarders by
resident family.



   (C)   Pools and similar recreational facilities.  Private swimming
pools, tennis courts and other recreational facilities necessary to conduct a
home sporting event.



   (D)   Home occupations as defined by this Zoning Code.



   (E)   Signs as permitted by this Zoning Code.



   (F)   Utility and storage buildings. Lawn, garden and other
buildings used for private storage purposes provided that not more than one
(1) building is located per dwelling unit and the maximum floor area of the
building does not exceed one hundred forty-four (144) square feet.



   (G)   Decorative landscape features. Decorative landscape features
including but not limited to arbors, hedges, walls, shrubs, trees, and
similar features.



   (H)   Essential services. Local service, electrical power lines, gas
utilities, telephone lines and similar essential services.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.065  AREA, HEIGHT, LOT WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   When dwelling units of a two-family or multiple dwelling
structures are to be under separate ownership, zero (0) lot lines will be
permitted between the units. State Building Code requirements for zero (0)
lot lines shall be complied with.



   (B)   Side yard-corner lot. A side yard abutting a street shall not
be less than thirty (30) feet in width.



   (C)   Area, frontage, and yard requirements.  The following
requirements shall be the minimum permitted in this district:



 

Area (ft.)
 
Frontage (ft.)
 
Height (ft.)
 
Front Yard Setback (ft.)
 
Side Yard Setback (ft.)
 
Rear Yard Setback (ft.)





Single family dwelling lots with public sewer:



10,000
 
80
 
30 or 2½ stories, whichever is lesser
 
30
 
8
 
30



Two-family dwelling lots with public sewer:



12,500
 
100
 
30 or 2½ stories, whichever is lesser
 
30
 
8
 
30



Single family dwelling lots without public sewer and water if allowed:



1 acre
 
150
 
30 or 2½ stories, whichever is lesser
 
30
 
8
 
30



Dwellings with zero lot lines with public sewer:



8,750
 
70
 
30 or 2½ stories, whichever is lesser
 
30
 
8
 
30



Utility/storage structures: see § 150.011



 
 
15 or 2 stories, whichever is lesser
 
 
5
 
10



Detached garages: see § 150.011



 
 
 
 
5
 
10



See subdivision § 153.057 for corner lot widths.





 



   (D)   Lots without public sewer - minimum lot area requirement. The
minimum lot area for single family dwellings shall be one (1) acre or larger
as required to accommodate an on-site sewage disposal system. Soil and
percolation tests conducted in accordance with recommended procedures of the
Minnesota Department of Health shall be made to determine whether or not the
lot size as proposed, will meet the minimum standards of health and
sanitation required by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency and the city.



   (E)   Miscellaneous.



      (1)   Frontage for lots without public sewer shall be a
minimum one hundred fifty (150) feet on a public right-of-way.



      (2)   Structures should be placed in such a manner to be able
to subdivide for smaller lot development in the event that public sewer
becomes available.



      (3)   No septic tank, drain field, or drywell shall be less
than twenty (20) feet from a property line. See MHD - most restrictive shall
apply.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.066  LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All exposed ground areas on a lot or parcel surrounding a
principal or accessory structure that are not devoted to drives, sidewalks,
patios or parking lots shall have a minimum of four (4) inches of topsoil and
be covered with sod, seed or other landscaping materials as approved by the
city. 



   (B)   Non-residential uses are subject to the same requirements and
may be subject to additional landscaping as determined by the Planning
Commission and City Council.



   (C)   All required landscaping shall be replaced by the property
owner if vegetation dies or is otherwise removed.  Landscaping may be
located within a utility or drainage easement, but the owner of the property
shall be responsible for any cost associated with removing and replacing said
landscaping if work within the easement requires removal of the landscaping.



   (D)   Existing vegetation, which are of acceptable species, size and
location and are of good quality, may be used to fulfill landscaping
requirements.



   (E)   A landscape deposit, as established by resolution of the City
Council, will be collected at the time of building permit application. The
deposit shall be in the form of cash, letter of credit, or other means as
approved by the city. Said deposit will be released when all required
landscaping is installed. Landscaping must be completed within one (1) year
of building permit issuance or the deposit will be forfeited.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



R-2 MANUFACTURED HOME PARK DISTRICT



§ 150.075  R-2 MANUFACTURED HOME PARK DISTRICT.



   The R-2 Manufactured Home Park District is intended to provide a
district exclusively for manufactured homes served by public sanitary and
storm sewers and water facilities. Every manufactured home park in the R-2
district must conform to all state regulations.  No manufactured home built
before June 15, 1976 shall be permitted on any site within the city unless
said site is part of an approved manufactured home park, and it has a HUD
seal showing it has been inspected.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.076  PERMITTED USES.



   Within the R-2 Manufactured Home Park District, no structures or land
shall be used except for one (1) or more of the following uses:



   (A)   Manufactured homes.  Only units which are connected to
electric, sewer and water utilities shall be allowed as a permitted use.



   (B)   Storm shelter.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.077  CONDITIONAL USES.



   Within any R-2 Manufactured Home Park District, no structure or land
shall be used for the following uses, except by conditional use permit:



   (A)   Permanent residential structures.  Includes residence
connected with management offices.



   (B)   Essential service structures.  Essential service structures
including, but not limited to, buildings such as telephone substation,
pumping station and elevated water storage tanks.



   (C)   Manufactured home sales.  Sales office and display area.



   (D)   Parking.  Off-street parking when the proposed site of the
off-street parking abuts on a lot which is in the B or I districts and in the
same ownership as the B or I district.



   (E)   Service buildings. Laundry facilities, management offices,
repair shops, and storage areas.



   (F)   Recreation facilities.  For exclusive use of mobile home park
residents, indoor and outdoor swimming pools, community center, etc.



   (G)   Land reclamation.  See § 150.015.



   (H)   Mining.  See § 150.016.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.078  INTERIM USES.



   Those other uses which in the opinion of the Planning Commission are
appropriate only on an interim basis, and pursuant to § 150.037.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.079  ACCESSORY USES.



   Within any R-2 Manufactured Home Park District, the following uses
shall be permitted as accessory uses:



   (A)   Car ports.  Car port or parking space for passenger cars.



   (B)   Enclosed entry.  An entry addition consistent with the design
of the manufactured home to which it is attached and not exceeding one
hundred twenty (120) square feet of the manufactured home floor area.



   (C)   Signs as permitted by this Zoning Code.



   (D)   Decorative landscaped features.  Decorative landscape
features including but not limited to, pools, arbors, hedges, walls, shrubs,
trees and similar features.



   (E)   Utility and storage building.  Lawn, garden and other
buildings used for private storage purposes, provided that not more than one
(1) building is located per lot and the maximum floor area of the building
does not exceed one hundred sixty-eight (168) square feet. The structure
shall be located no less than six (6) feet from the home and no less than ten
(10) feet from any adjacent principal structure.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.080  AREA, HEIGHT, LOT WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Side yard-corner lot.  A side yard abutting a public street
shall not be less than thirty (30) feet in width.



   (B)   Area, frontage, and yard requirements. The following
requirements shall be the minimum permitted in this district.



 


Area (sq.ft.)

 
Frontage (ft.)
 
Height (ft.)
 
Front yard setback (ft.)
 
Side yard setback (ft.)
 
Aggregate setback (ft.)
 
Rear yard setback (ft.)


4,000
 
40
 
15 or 2 stories, whichever is lesser
 
20
 
5
 
14
 
10



 



   (C)   Land coverage.  The maximum percentage of the manufactured
home park permitted to be covered by mobile homes and other structures is
thirty-five percent (35%).



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.081  OTHER REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Play area.  A minimum of four hundred (400) square feet per
manufactured home site shall be provided for definable play areas and open
space within the manufactured home park. Such areas of open space and play
areas shall not be areas included in any setback nor shall they include any
areas of less than twenty (20) feet in length or width. In addition, if the
manufactured home park is part of a new subdivision; there shall be a
dedication of land for public recreation and open space uses in accordance
with provisions of the Subdivision Code.



   (B)   Landscape buffer.  Where a mobile home park abuts a
single-family residential area or external street area, there shall be a
minimum of thirty (30) feet between the lot or right-of-way line and any
manufactured home park use; such setback area shall act as a buffer and shall
be landscaped according to a landscape plan to be submitted at the time of
application.



   (C)   Landscaping.



      (1)   The entire manufactured home park shall be landscaped
and there shall be planted or otherwise located one (1) shade tree with a
minimum diameter of two (2) inches on or near each manufactured home site.



      (2)   Manufactured home parks shall be enclosed by a fence or
screen planting so as to provide privacy for the occupants of the park.



   (D)   Street access.  Access to or from a manufactured home park
shall not be permitted into or upon local streets serving single-family
residential areas.



   (E)   Street width.  Streets shall have a minimum width so as to
permit two (2) moving lanes of traffic. Minimum lane width shall be twelve
(12) feet.



   (F)   Street and parking area paving.  Private streets and parking
areas within a manufactured home park shall be hard surfaced to control dust
and drainage according to city standards as specified by the City Engineer.



   (G)   Public utilities.  All utilities supplied by the manufactured
home park shall be underground.  This shall include electricity and
telephone lines.



   (H)   Skirting.  Each manufactured home shall be completely
enclosed with weatherproof skirting.



   (I)   Visitor parking.  Off-street parking for visitors shall be
provided as required by the city.



   (J)   Anchoring.  All manufactured homes shall be anchored in
accordance with the State Building Code.



   (K)   Set-up.  All manufactured homes must be completely set-up and
skirted within thirty (30) days of permit issuance.



   (L)   Address. Each manufactured home shall be clearly marked with
an address designation.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.082  PERMIT/INSPECTION FEES.



   (A)   No manufactured home set up or installed after the effective
date of this Zoning Code shall be occupied prior to obtaining an installation
permit from the City Building Official. Conditions for issuance of such
permit shall be payment of fees and inspection to ensure compliance with
Minnesota State Building Code and this Zoning Code. It shall be the
responsibility of both the manufactured home park owner and the individual
manufactured home owner to obtain the installation permit; however, the cost
of the permit shall be borne by the individual manufactured home owner.



   (B)   Fee to be paid as established by City Council resolution.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



R-3 MULTIPLE DWELLING DISTRICT



§ 150.090  R-3 MULTIPLE DWELLING DISTRICT.



   The R-3 Multiple Dwelling District is intended to provide a district
which allows a broad range of multiple family housing units (townhouses, row
houses, apartments) where properly related to other land uses and
thoroughfares and where such development is consistent with the Comprehensive
Plan. Unless otherwise specified, all structures in the R-3 District shall
comply with the following minimum standards:



   (A)   A permanent foundation under the entire structure which
complies with the Minnesota Building Code.



   (B)   The minimum pitch on any shingled roof must be at least
two-twelfths (2/12) or in the case of a flat roof design, a built up roof
assembly to comply with the State Building Code. All roofs must be shingled
or an A roof assembly.



   (C)   The minimum width and length of the principal structure must
be twenty-four (24) feet for more than fifty percent (50%) of the floor area.
Minimum square footage of the main floor shall be five hundred seventy-six
(576) square feet.



   (D)   Any alterations or additions must be of the same materials,
type of construction, and must have the same appearance as the principal
structure.



   (E)   No building permits shall be issued until a complete drainage
system has been reviewed by the city.  If deemed appropriate, the City
Building Official may require approval of the drainage system by the City
Engineer.



   (F)   All principal structures must have a basement or approved
solid wall footing wall around the perimeter of the structure or a footing
around the perimeter of the structure designed by a state licensed engineer
and approved by the local building official.



   (G)   Every new single-family dwelling must construct a garage with
a minimum size of two hundred forty (240) square feet.  Every new two-family
dwelling must construct one (1) or two (2) garages with a total minimum size
of four hundred eighty (480) square feet.  The garage(s) must be constructed
before a final certificate of occupancy will be granted.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.091  PERMITTED USES.



   Within the R-3 Multiple Dwelling District, no structure or land shall
be used except for one (1) or more of the following uses:



   (A)   Single and two-family dwellings.  Single-family detached
dwelling and two-family dwelling structures.



   (B)   Multiple dwelling structures.  Structures containing not more
than eight (8) dwelling units.



   (C)   Two-family dwellings with a zero (0) lot line. When dwelling
units of a two-family structure are to be under separate ownership, a zero
(0) lot line may be permitted between the units.  State Building Code and
Fire Code requirements shall be complied with.  Also, minimum lot frontage
and lot area requirements shall be met.



   (D)   Day care facilities - Residential. Facility serving up to
fourteen (14) persons.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.092  CONDITIONAL USES.



   Within any R-3 Multiple Dwelling District, no structure or land shall
be used for the following uses except by conditional use permit.



   (A)   Multiple dwelling structures.  Structures containing nine (9)
or more dwelling units.



   (B)   Clubs.  Private clubs and lodges which are not operated for a
profit.



   (C)   Churches and other places of worship.  Church buildings and
areas, schools of religion and similar institutions.



   (D)   Day care facilities - non-residential.



   (E)   Day care facilities - residential.  Facility serving fifteen
(15) or more persons.



   (F)   Nursing homes, rest homes, or homes for the aged.  Provided
the site shall contain at least one thousand (1,000) square feet for each
person to be served.



   (G)   Professional offices.  Offices of persons in the professions:
clinics for human health care, funeral homes, mortuaries and office of civic,
religious or charitable institutions.



   (H)   Studios.  Art studios, interior decoration studios, photo
studios, music studios, and similar activities.



   (I)   Public buildings and essential service structures.  Municipal
and other public buildings used for office purposes, museums, libraries, and
structures containing or providing essential public services.



   (J)   Outdoor furnaces and boilers, provided the following
conditions are met:



      (1)   The applicant shall submit a site plan, drawn to scale,
showing the location of the proposed outdoor furnace or boiler in relation to
existing structures and property lines as well as proposed screening or
enclosure.



      (2)   Outdoor furnaces and boilers shall only be allowed on
lots five (5) acres in size or greater. If the lot is divided in the future,
so as to be less than five (5) acres, the outdoor furnace shall be removed.



      (3)   Outdoor furnaces and boilers shall be set back a minimum
of fifty (50) feet from all property lines when abutting a residential
district. When the property does not abut a residential district, the furnace
shall comply with minimum setback requirements of the zoning district it is
within.



      (4)   No burning materials shall be stored within five (5)
feet of the principle structure and materials shall be stored in an orderly
fashion.



      (5)   The outdoor furnace or boiler must be enclosed in a
structure or screened with fencing and/or other materials as approved by the
City Council.



      (6)   When the outdoor furnace or boiler is enclosed in a
structure, the structure shall generally match the exterior of the principle
structure.



      (7)   When the outdoor furnace or boiler is enclosed in a
structure, the structure shall not count against the allowable square footage
for future accessory structures, as long as it strictly serves as an
enclosure for the furnace or boiler and the structure does not exceed one
hundred (100) square feet in size.



      (8)   If the outdoor furnace or boiler is to be replaced, it
shall meet the city and/or state requirements in place at that time.



      (9)   The outdoor furnace or boiler shall be UL Listed, or
certified per the State Building Code, and the applicant shall follow all
manufacturer specifications.



      (10)   If the outdoor furnace or boiler is taken out of
service for a period of one (1) year or more, the permit shall become null
and void and the unit and enclosure shall be removed from the property.



   (L)   Bed and breakfast inn, provided the following are adhered to:



      (1)   Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with
the parking requirements of § 150.500et seq.  A minimum of one (1)
off-street parking space per guest room shall be provided in addition to the
parking requirements for the zoning district in which the facility is
located. Off-street parking is to be screened from the surrounding residences.



      (2)   Signs shall be in accordance with the sign requirements
in § 150.213 and meet the requirements for the zoning district that the
business is located within. (Identifying signs to be not more than four (4)
square feet in total, located on the building and consistent with the
character of the building).



      (3)   The maximum of five (5) units may be established in a
structure.



      (4)   A bed and breakfast establishment shall show proof of
inspection or proof of proper operating licenses by the state and/or country.



      (5)   All guest rooms shall be contained within the principal
structure.



      (6)   Dining and other facilities shall not be open to the
public, but shall be used exclusively by the residents and registered guests.



      (7)   The maximum stay for guests shall be fourteen (14) days
within a thirty (30) day period.



      (8)   The inn shall comply with all applicable laws, rules,
and regulations governing its existence and operation, including, but not
limited to, the State Building Code, the State Fire Code, and the State
Health Code.



      (9)   A conditional use permit shall be terminated upon
occurrence for the following:



         (a)   Non-compliance with the provisions of these
provisions.



         (b)   Transfer of ownership of said property from the
owner/operator.



         (c)   The creation of a condition which adversely
affects the health, safety, or general welfare of the city or its residents.



      (10)   The owner or operator shall reside on the property or
submit a management plan for approval as part of the conditional use permit.



   (L)   Multiple garages and/or accessory buildings in excess of those
that are allowed by the code.



   (M)   Schools.



   (N)   Self-service storage facility.  The storage facility cannot
result in an adverse impact on adjacent properties by reason of parking
demand, traffic generation, lighting, outdoor activities, fire hazard, safety
hazard, visual blight, incompatibility to the surrounding neighborhood, or
any other adverse impact as determined by the City Council.



      (1)   No on-site sales shall be conducted, other than the
rental of storage spaces.



      (2)   All storage shall be fully enclosed within the storage
structure.



      (3)   No containers of flammable or hazardous materials other
than normal household quantities shall be stored on-site.  Quantities shall
be stored per local code requirements.  Exception: Quantities over the
normal household amounts can be stored if stored per local code and reported
and registered with the local fire department.



   (O)   Land reclamation. See § 150.015.



   (P)   Mining.  See § 150.016.



   (Q)   Residential facilities serving more than six (6) unrelated
persons.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010; Am. Ord. 415, passed 8-21-2012)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.093  INTERIM USES.



    Those other uses which in the opinion of the Planning Commission are
appropriate only on an interim basis, and pursuant to § 150.037.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.094  ACCESSORY USES.



   Within any R-3 Multiple Dwelling District, the following uses shall be
permitted accessory uses:



   (A)   Garages and parking.  Private garages, and off-street parking
space for passenger cars and trucks up to one and one-half (1-1/2) ton
capacity. More than one (1) garage structure requires a conditional use
permit.  (See § 150.092(N))



   (B)   Pools and similar recreational facilities.  Swimming pools
provided such pools are fenced so as to control access, tennis courts, and
other similar recreational facilities which are part of a residential
development and are located not less than fifteen (15) feet from any other
lot in an R district.



   (C)   Utility and storage buildings for one- and two-family
dwellings.  Lawn, garden and other buildings used for private storage
purposes provided that not more than one (1) building is located per dwelling
unit and the maximum floor area of the building does not exceed one hundred
forty-four (144) square feet.



   (D)   Utility and storage buildings for multiple dwellings.  One
(1) building as described in division (C) of this section will be permitted
for each apartment building that is under separate ownership. More than two
(2) utility/storage buildings requires a conditional use permit.  (See §
150.092(N))



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.095  AREA, HEIGHT, LOT WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   When dwelling units of multiple dwelling structures are to be
under separate ownership, zero (0) lot lines will be permitted between the
units. State Building Code requirements for zero (0) lot line shall be
complied with.



   (B)   Area, frontage, and yard requirements.  The following
requirements shall be the minimum permitted in this district:



 

Area
(sq. ft.)
 
Area Per Unit
(sq. ft.)
 
Frontage
(ft.)
 
Height
(ft.)
 
Front Yard Setback (ft.)
 
Side Yard Setback
(ft.)
 
Rear Yard Setback
(ft.)
 
Depth (ft.)




Single family dwelling lots:


10,000
 
10,000
 
80
 
35 or 3 stories, whichever is lesser
 
30
 
8
 
20
 
125


Two-family dwelling lots:


12,500
 
6,250
 
100
 
35 or 3 stories, whichever is lesser
 
30
 
8
 
20
 
125


Two-family dwelling lots with zero lot lines:


17,500
 
8,750
 
140
 
35 or 3 stories, whichever is lesser
 
30
 
8
 
20
 
125


Multiple family dwellings:


As required below
 
100
 
35 or 3 stories, whichever is lesser
 
20
 
10
 
20
 


Utility/storage structures: see § 150.011


 
 
 
20
 
 
5
 
10
 


Detached garages: see § 150.011


 
 
 
20
 
 
5
 
10
 




 



   (C)    Lot area per dwelling unit.



      (1)    The following requirements shall be the minimum
permitted lot area per unit for three (3) or more unit structures.



         Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit



         1 Bedroom Unit - 2,500 square feet



         2 Bedroom Unit - 3,000 square feet



         3 Bedroom Unit - 3,500 square feet



      (2)    The above mentioned requirements shall be the minimum
permitted lot area per unit for three (3) to four (4) unit structures and for
each unit over four (4), the lot area may be reduced by twenty-five percent
(25%).



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.096  LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All exposed ground areas on a lot or parcel surrounding a
principal or accessory structure that are not devoted to drives, sidewalks,
patios or parking lots shall have a minimum of four (4) inches of topsoil and
be covered with sod, seed or other landscaping materials as approved by the
city.



   (B)   Non-residential uses are subject to the same requirements and
may be subject to additional landscaping as determined by the Planning
Commission and City Council.



   (C)   All required landscaping shall be replaced by the property
owner if vegetation dies or is otherwise removed.  Landscaping may be
located within a utility or drainage easement, but the owner of the property
shall be responsible for any cost associated with removing and replacing said
landscaping if work within the easement requires removal of the landscaping.



   (D)   Existing vegetation, which are of acceptable species, size and
location and are of good quality, may be used to fulfill landscaping
requirements.



   (E)   A landscape deposit, as established by resolution of the City
Council, will be collected at the time of building permit application. The
deposit shall be in the form of cash, letter of credit, or other means as
approved by the city. The deposit will be released when all required
landscaping is installed. Landscaping must be completed within one (1) year
of building permit issuance or the deposit will be forfeited.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



R-4 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT



§ 150.115  R-4 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   The R-4 Low Density Residential District is intended to maintain
existing single-family residential areas and provide for the development of
new large lot single-family residential areas served or to be served with
public sanitary sewer, storm sewer and water facilities. Unless otherwise
specified, all structures in the R-4 district shall comply with the following
minimum standards:



   (A)   A permanent foundation under the entire structure which
complies with the State Building Code.



   (B)   The minimum pitch on any shingled roof must be at least
two-twelfths (2/12) or in the case of a flat roof design, a built up roof
assembly to comply with the State Building Code. All roofs must be shingled
or be an A roof assembly.



   (C)   The minimum width of the principal structure must be
thirty-two (32) feet and the length of must be forty (40) feet for more than
fifty percent (50%) of the floor area. The minimum square footage of the main
floor shall be one thousand two hundred eighty (1,280) square feet.



   (D)   Any alterations or additions must be of the same materials,
same type of construction and must have the same appearance as the principal
structure.



   (E)   No building permits shall be issued until a complete drainage
system has been reviewed by the city.  If deemed appropriate, the Building
Official may require approval of the drainage system by the City Engineer.
The cost of the City Engineer’s analysis shall be paid for by the developer.



   (F)   All principal structures must have a basement or approved
solid footing wall around the perimeter of the structure or a footing around
the perimeter of the structure designed by a state licensed engineer and
approved by the local Building Official.



   (G)   Every new single-family dwelling must construct a garage with
a minimum size of four hundred eighty (480) square feet. Every new two-family
dwelling must construct one (1) garage or two (2) garages with a total
minimum size of nine hundred sixty (960) square feet. The garage(s) must be
constructed before a final certificate of occupancy will be granted.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.116  PERMITTED USES.



   Within the R-4 Low Density Residential District, no structure or land
shall be used except for one (1) of the following uses:



   (A)   Single-family detached dwelling.



   (B)   Residential facilities serving six (6) or fewer unrelated
persons.



   (C)   Parks and playgrounds.  Public parks and playgrounds,
community centers and other recreational facilities operated by governmental
agencies.



   (D)   Public buildings.



   (E)   Horticultural uses.  Truck gardening, produce stands and
other horticultural activities provided that only those products grown on the
premises be sold or offered for sale.



   (F)   Day care facilities - residential. Facility serving up to
fourteen (14) persons.



   (G)   Uses not listed.  Other residential and commercial uses as
determined by the Planning Commission and City Council to be of the same
general character as other identified permitted uses and found not to be
detrimental to the general public’s health, safety and welfare.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.117  CONDITIONAL USES.



   Within the R-4 Low Density Residential District, no structure or land
shall be used for the following uses except by conditional use permit:



   (A)   Churches and other places of worship.



   (B)   Duplex structures.



   (C)   Residential facilities serving seven (7) to sixteen (16)
unrelated persons.



   (D)   Private recreation facilities.  Country clubs, golf courses,
swimming pools and other private non-commercial recreation areas and
facilities provided that any principal structure or swimming pool is located
not less than fifty (50) feet from any other property line in a residential
district.



   (E)   Cemeteries.  Cemeteries adjacent to or in extension of an
existing cemetery.



   (F)   Museums.



   (G)   Health care facilities.  Including hospitals, nursing homes
and other similar health care facilities.



   (H)   Essential service structure.  Including structures such as
telephone exchanges, substations, wells, pumping stations and elevated water
storage tanks.



   (I)   Commercial or residential stables. Stables and riding
academies provided the property upon which the use is located is a minimum of
five (5) acres.  One horse is allowed upon the first five (5) acres and an
additional two (2) acres are required for each additional horse.



   (J)   Kennels. Any lot or premises or portion thereof on which four
(4) or more dogs and/or cats over six (6) months old  are owned, boarded,
bred or offered for sale.  No more than five (5) dogs and/or cats shall be
allowed by conditional use permit.  (See also Chapter 90.)



   (K)   Agricultural uses.  Agricultural activities including the
keeping of farm animals or fowl provided no building having farm animals or
fowl be nearer than one hundred (100) feet of a property line.



   (L)   Schools.  Public or private schools which have a curriculum
equivalent to a public elementary or secondary school, provided no building
is less than fifty (50) feet from any abutting residential lot.



   (M)   Day care facilities - residential.  Facility serving fifteen
(15) or more persons.  If required, the facility must be state licensed and
meet all state mandated conditions.



   (N)   Outdoor furnaces and boilers, subject to the following
conditions:



      (1)   The applicant shall submit a site plan, drawn to scale,
showing the location of the proposed outdoor furnace or boiler in relation to
existing structures and property lines as well as proposed screening or
enclosure.



      (2)   Outdoor furnaces and boilers shall only be allowed on
lots five (5) acres in size or greater. If the lot is divided in the future,
so as to be less than five (5) acres, the outdoor furnace shall be removed.



      (3)   Outdoor furnaces and boilers shall be set back a minimum
of fifty (50) feet from all property lines when abutting a residential
district. When the property does not abut a residential district, the furnace
shall comply with minimum setback requirements of the zoning district it is
within.



      (4)   No burning materials shall be stored within five (5)
feet of the principle structure and materials shall be stored in an orderly
fashion.



      (5)   The outdoor furnace or boiler must be enclosed in a
structure or screened with fencing and/or other materials as approved by the
City Council.



      (6)   When the outdoor furnace or boiler is enclosed in a
structure, the structure shall generally match the exterior of the principle
structure.



      (7)   When the outdoor furnace or boiler is enclosed in a
structure, the structure shall not count against the allowable square footage
for future accessory structures, as long as it strictly serves as an
enclosure for the furnace or boiler and the structure does not exceed one
hundred (100) square feet in size.



      (8)   If the outdoor furnace or boiler is to be replaced, it
shall meet the city and/or state requirements in place at that time.



      (9)   The outdoor furnace or boiler shall be UL Listed, or
certified per the State Building Code, and the applicant shall follow all
manufacturer specifications.



      (10)   If the outdoor furnace or boiler is taken out of
service for a period of one (1) year or more, the permit shall become null
and void and the unit and enclosure shall be removed from the property.



   (O)   Bed and breakfast, subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with
the parking requirements of § 150.500.  A minimum of one (1) off-street
parking space per guest room shall be provided in addition to the parking
requirements for the zoning district in which the facility is located.
Off-street parking is to be screened from the surrounding residences;



      (2)   Signs shall be installed in accordance with § 150.213
and shall meet all other requirements of the zoning district which the
business is located in. (Identifying signs to be not more than four (4)
square feet in total and shall be located on the structure consistent with
the character of the structure);



      (3)   A maximum of five (5) units may be established in the
structure;



      (4)   A bed and breakfast establishment shall show proof of
inspection or proof of proper operating licenses by the state and/or county;



      (5)   All guest rooms shall be contained within the principal
structure;



      (6)   Dining and other facilities shall not be open to the
public, but shall be used exclusively by the residents and registered guests;



      (7)   The maximum stay for guests shall be fourteen (14) days
within a thirty (30) day period;



      (8)   The bed and breakfast shall comply with all applicable
laws, rules and regulations governing its existence and operation, including,
but not limited to, the State Building Code, the State Fire Code and the
State Health Code;



      (9)   A conditional use permit shall be terminated upon
occurrence of the following:



         (a)   Non-compliance with the provisions of this Zoning
Code;



         (b)   Transfer of ownership of said property;



         (c)   The creation of a condition which adversely
affects the health, safety or general welfare of the city or its residents.



      (10)   The owner or operator shall reside on the property or
submit a management plan for approval as part of the conditional use permit.



   (P)   Produce sales.  Produce stand for the sale of agricultural
products, other than that raised on the site, provided that the display is
located a minimum of ten (10) feet from the front property line.



   (Q)   Uses not listed.  Other residential and commercial uses as
determined by the Planning Commission and City Council to be of the same
general character as other identified conditional uses and found not to be
detrimental to the general public’s health, safety and welfare.



   (R)   Land reclamation. See § 150.015.



   (S)   Mining.  See § 150.016.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.118  INTERIM USES.



   Interim uses are those other uses which in the opinion of the Planning
Commission are appropriate only on an interim basis, and pursuant to §
150.037.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.119  ACCESSORY USES.



   Within the R-4 Low Density Residential District, the following uses
shall be permitted accessory uses provided, however, that only one (1)
accessory building one thousand six hundred (1,600) square feet in size be
permitted per principal structure in addition to one (1) utility/storage
building with a maximum size of one hundred forty-four (144) square feet. The
size of the accessory structure shall not exceed the footprint of the
principal structure and the exterior shall match the exterior of the
principal structure.



   (A)   Garages.  Private garage, car port or parking space for
passenger vehicles.



   (B)   Boarders.  The keeping of not more than two (2) boarders by
resident family.



   (C)   Pools and similar recreational facilities.  Including private
swimming pools, tennis courts and other recreational facilities necessary to
conduct a home sporting event.



   (D)   Home occupations as defined in § 150.002.



   (E)   Signs as permitted by the Zoning Code.



   (F)   Utility and storage buildings.  Lawn, garden and other
buildings used for private storage purposes provided that not more than one
(1) building is located per dwelling unit and the maximum floor area of the
building does not exceed one hundred forty-four (144) square feet.



   (G)   Decorative landscape features.  Including, but not limited
to, pools, arbors, hedges, walls, shrubs, trees and similar features.



   (H)   Essential services.  Local service, electrical power lines,
gas utilities, telephone lines and similar essential services.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.120  AREA, HEIGHT, LOT WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.



   Within the R-4 Low Density Residential District, no land shall be used,
and no structure shall be constructed or used, except in conformance with the
following requirements:



   (A)   The maximum impervious surface coverage shall be twenty
percent (20%).



   (B)   A side yard abutting a street shall not be less than forty
(40) feet in width.



   (C)   Area, frontage and yard requirements. The following
requirements shall be the minimum permitted in this district:



 


Area

 
Frontage (ft.)
 
Height (ft.)
 
Front Yard Setback (ft.)
 
Side Yard Setback (ft.)
 
Rear Yard Setback (ft.)


Single family dwelling lots with public sewer and water:


1 acre
 
180
 
30 or 2 ½ stories, whichever is lesser
 
40
 
20
 
40


Single family dwelling lots without public sewer and water:


1 acre
 
180
 
30 or 2 ½ stories, whichever is lesser
 
40
 
20
 
40


Two-family dwelling lots:


1 acre
 
240
 
30 or 2 ½ stories, whichever is lesser
 
40
 
40
 
40



 



 


Utility/storage structures: see § 150.011



 
 
15 or 2 stories, whichever is lesser
 
40
 
20
 
40


Agricultural structures and machinery:


 
 
15 or 2 stories, whichever is lesser
 
100
 
100
 
100


Septic tank, drainfield or mound:


 
 
 
40
 
20
 
20



 



   (D)   No septic tank or drain field shall be less than twenty (20)
feet from a property line.



   (E)   No mound system shall be located in the front yard.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.121  LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All exposed ground areas that are not devoted to drives,
sidewalks, patios or parking lots shall have a minimum of four (4) inches of
topsoil and be covered with sod, seed or other landscaping materials as
approved by the city.



   (B)   Non-residential uses are subject to the same requirements and
may be subject to additional landscaping as determined by the Planning
Commission and City Council.



   (C)   All required landscaping shall be replaced by the property
owner if vegetation dies or is otherwise removed. Landscaping may be located
within a utility or drainage easement, but the owner of the property shall be
responsible for any cost associated with removing or replacing said
landscaping if work within the easement requires removal of the landscaping.



   (D)   Existing vegetation, which are of acceptable species, size and
location and are of good quality, may be used to fulfill landscaping
requirements.



   (E)   A landscape deposit, as established by resolution of the City
Council, will be collected at the time of building permit application. The
deposit shall be in the form of cash, letter of credit, or other means as
approved by the city. The deposit will be released when all required
landscaping is installed. Landscaping must be completed within one (1) year
of building permit issuance or the deposit will be forfeited.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



B-1 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT



§ 150.130  B-1 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   The B-1 Central Business District is to provide a pedestrian oriented,
compact center for retail sales, personal services, and professional offices
by grouping compatible businesses and discouraging highway oriented and other
land uses that do not mutually support and complement each other.



   (A)   No building permits shall be issued until a complete drainage
system has been reviewed by the city.  If deemed appropriate, the City
Building Official may require approval of the drainage system by the City
Engineer.



   (B)   All principal structures must have a basement or approved
solid footing wall around the perimeter of the structure or a footing around
the perimeter of the structure designed by a state licensed engineer and
approved by the local building official.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.131  PERMITTED USES.



   Within the B-1 Central Business District no structures or land shall be
used except for one (1) or more of the following uses.



   (A)   Parks, parking lots, etc.  Public parks, parking lots, and
walkways.



   (B)   Retail sales, services, and businesses.  The following retail
sales, services, and businesses:



      (1)   Antique or gift shop;



      (2)   Appliance store;



      (3)   Art and school supplies;



      (4)   Auto accessory store;



      (5)   Bakery goods sales and baking of goods for retail sale
on premises;



      (6)   Banks, loan companies;



      (7)   Barber shop;



      (8)   Bars and taverns;



      (9)   Beauty shop;



      (10)   Bicycle sales and repair;



      (11)   Books, office supplies and stationary store;



      (12)   Candy, ice cream, popcorn, nuts, frozen desserts and
soft drinks, but not of the drive-in type;



      (13)   Camera and photo supplies and studio and film
processing;



      (14)   Carpet and rugs and floor covering;



      (15)   Commercial recreation such as bowling alleys, billiard
halls, etc.;



      (16)   Delicatessen;



      (17)   Drug store;



      (18)   Dry cleaning pick-up stations and laundry pick-up
stations including pressing;



      (19)   Dry goods store;



      (20)   Essential service structures;



      (21)   Electrical and gas appliance store including incidental
repair and assembly but no fabrication or manufacturing;



      (22)   Fraternal organizations and civic clubs;



      (23)   Frozen food store including locker plant;



      (24)   Furniture store including upholstery when conducted as
a secondary use;



      (25)   Grocery store;



      (26)   Offices, administrative, executive, professional,
governmental, medical, research;



      (27)   Florist shop;



      (28)   Printing shops and newspaper offices;



      (29)   Plumbing and heating - showrooms and shops (no outside
storage);



      (30)   Restaurant;



      (31)   Shoe store and repair;



      (32)   Sporting goods;



      (33)   Tailor shop;



      (34)   Theater, not of the drive-in type;



      (35)   Toy store;



      (36)   Variety store;



      (37)   Wearing apparel;



      (38)   Pawn shops and second hand shops;



      (39)   Pet shop or pet grooming, provided no animals are
maintained or displayed outside of the building;



      (40)   Body art establishments;



      (41)   Fitness centers; and



      (42)   Public and semi-public buildings.  Including, but not
limited to, city/town halls, county courthouses and related functions, fire
and police stations, post offices and libraries.



   (C)   Uses not listed.  Other residential and commercial uses
determined by the Planning Commission and City Council to be of the same
general character as identified permitted and conditional uses and found not
to be detrimental to the general public’s health, safety, and welfare. The
use will be placed in the permitted or conditional use category based upon
its compatibility to those uses listed.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.132  CONDITIONAL USES.



   Within the B-1 Central Business District no structure or land shall be
used for the following uses except by conditional use permit:



   (A)   Permanent outdoor sales.



   (B)   Auto service or repair.



   (C)   Auto sales.  Auto sales, when conducted within a building.



   (D)   Farm equipment sales.  Farm machinery sales and service.



   (E)   Multi-family residential structures and residential units that
are above, attached or part of the main structure and are clearly secondary
in nature to the main use.



   (F)   Funeral homes and mortuaries.



   (G)   Veterinary clinics.



   (H)   Kennels.  Any lot or premises or portion thereof on which
four (4) or more dogs and/or cats over six (6) months old are owned, bred,
boarded or offered for sale.  This shall not include pet shops, veterinary
clinics or other such uses regulated herein.



   (I)   Any permitted use in the B-2 district not mentioned as a
permitted use in the B-1 district.



   (J)   Single-family residence.  Provided this apply only to parcels
which abut upon an R-1, R-3 or R-4 district.



   (K)   Halfway house for chemically dependent.



   (L)   Outdoor furnaces and boilers, provided the following
conditions are met:



      (1)   The applicant shall submit a site plan, drawn to scale,
showing the location of the proposed outdoor furnace or boiler in relation to
existing structures and property lines as well as proposed screening or
enclosure.



      (2)   Outdoor furnaces and boilers shall only be allowed on
lots five (5) acres in size or greater. If the lot is divided in the future,
so as to be less than five (5) acres, the outdoor furnace shall be removed.



      (3)   Outdoor furnaces and boilers shall be set back a minimum
of fifty (50) feet from all property lines when abutting a residential
district. When the property does not abut a residential district, the furnace
shall comply with minimum setback requirements of the zoning district it is
within.



      (4)   No burning materials shall be stored within five (5)
feet of the principal structure and materials shall be stored in an orderly
fashion.



      (5)   The outdoor furnace or boiler must be enclosed in a
structure or screened with fencing and/or other materials as approved by the
City Council.



      (6)   When the outdoor furnace or boiler is enclosed in a
structure, the structure shall generally match the exterior of the principal
structure.



      (7)   When the outdoor furnace or boiler is enclosed in a
structure, the structure shall not count against the allowable square footage
for future accessory structures, as long as it strictly serves as an
enclosure for the furnace or boiler and the structure does not exceed one
hundred (100) square feet in size.



      (8)   If the outdoor furnace or boiler is to be replaced, it
shall meet the city and/or state requirements in place at that time.



      (9)   The outdoor furnace or boiler shall be UL Listed, or
certified per the State Building Code, and the applicant shall follow all
manufacturer specifications.



      (10)   If the outdoor furnace or boiler is taken out of
service for a period of one (1) year or more, the permit shall become null
and void and the unit and enclosure shall be removed from the property.



   (M)   Bed and breakfast inn, provided the following are adhered to:



      (1)   Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with
the parking requirements of § 150.500.  A minimum of one (1) off-street
parking space per guest room shall be provided in addition to the parking
requirements for the zoning district in which the facility is located.
Off-street parking is to be screened from the surrounding residences.



      (2)   Signs shall be in accordance with the sign requirements
in § 150.213 and meet the requirements for the zoning district that the
business is located within. (Identifying signs to be not more than four (4)
square feet in total, located on the building and consistent with the
character of the building).



      (3)   A maximum of five (5) units may be established in a
structure.



      (4)   A bed and breakfast establishment shall show proof of
inspection or proof of proper operating licenses by the state and/or country.



      (5)   All guest rooms shall be contained within the principal
structure.



      (6)   Dining and other facilities shall not be open to the
public, but shall be used exclusively by the residents and registered guests.



      (7)   The maximum stay for guests shall be fourteen (14) days
within a thirty (30) day period.



      (8)   The inn shall comply with all applicable laws, rules,
and regulations governing its existence and operation, including, but not
limited to, the State Building Code, the State Fire Code, and the State
Health Code.



      (9)   A conditional use permit shall be terminated upon
occurrence for the following:



         (a)   Non-compliance with the provisions of these
provisions.



         (b)   Transfer of ownership of said property from the
owner/operator.



         (c)   The creation of a condition which adversely
affects the health, safety, or general welfare of the city or its residents.



      (10)   The owner or operator shall reside on the property or
submit a management plan for approval as part of the conditional use permit.



   (N)   Churches and other places of worship.



   (O)   Government buildings.  Including, but not limited to,
city/town/county/state garages, city/town/county/state utility structures and
operations, and jails/correctional facilities. 



   (P)   Health care facilities.  Including hospitals, clinics,
nursing homes and other similar health care facilities.



   (Q)   Schools and related functions.



   (R)   Shopping center.  Any contiguous group of two (2) or more
retail stores or service establishments, comprising ten thousand (10,000) or
more square feet of floor area which provides off-street parking utilized in
common by patrons.



   (S)   Recreational centers.



   (T)   Land reclamation.  See § 150.015.



   (U)   Mining.  See § 150.016.



   (V)   Gas stations.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010; Am. Ord. 453, passed 10-17-2017)  Penalty, see
§ 150.999



§ 150.133  INTERIM USES.



   Interim uses are those other uses which in the opinion of the Planning
Commission are appropriate only on an interim basis, and pursuant to §
150.037.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.134  ACCESSORY USES.



   The following uses shall be permitted accessory uses:



   (A)   Incidental uses.  Any incidental repair or processing
necessary to conduct a permitted principal use, however, such accessory use
shall not occupy more than fifty percent (50%) of the floor area not more
than fifty percent (50%) of the gross man hours required to conduct the
permitted principal use.



   (B)   Adult use - accessory.



      (1)   Adult use accessory shall:



         (a)   Comprise no more than five percent (5%) of the
floor space of the establishment in which it is located.



         (b)   Comprise no more than ten percent (10%) of the
gross receipts of the entire business operation.



         (c)   Not include any activity except the sale or rental
of merchandise.



         (d)   Not include activities classified as obscene as
defined by M.S. § 617.241.



         (e)   Be prohibited in any location used to dispense or
consume alcoholic beverages.



      (2)   Adult use accessory shall be restricted from and
prohibit access to minors by the physical separation of such items from areas
of general public access. Business owners shall make reasonable precaution to
limit access to minors by:



         (a)   Movie rentals.  Display areas shall be restricted
from general view and shall be situated in such fashion as to prohibit access
and visibility to minors, the access of which is in clear view and under the
control of the persons responsible for the operation.



         (b)   Magazines.  Publications classified or qualifying
as adult uses shall not be accessible to minors and shall be covered with a
wrapper or other means to prevent display of any material other than the
publication title.



         (c)   Other use.  Adult uses accessory not specifically
cited in (a) and (b) above shall comply with the intent of this section and
only be allowed as a conditional use.



      (3)   Adult use accessory shall be prohibited from both
internal and external advertising and signing of adult materials and products.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.135  PROHIBITED USES.



   Residential dwelling(s) as a principal use.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.136  AREA, HEIGHT, LOT WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Area, frontage, and yard requirements. The following
requirements shall be the minimum permitted in this district:



 


Area (sq. ft.)

 
Frontage (ft.)
 
Height (ft.)
 
Front Yard Setback (ft.)
 
Side Yard Setback (ft.)
 
Rear Yard Setback (ft.)


None specified
 
None specified
 
None specified
 
0
 
0
 
0 except it shall be 20 when abutting an R district



 



   (B)   No building permits shall be issued until a complete drainage
system has been reviewed by the city. If deemed appropriate, the City
Building Official may require approval of the drainage system by the City
Engineer.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.137  SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PROPERTIES ABUTTING RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS.



   (A)   In addition to the above minimum requirements the owner or
developer of property abutting a residential district shall prepare a Site
Plan showing the ultimate proposed development. The Site Plan drawn to scale
shall, at a minimum, show landscaping, buildings and structures, vehicular
and pedestrian access and enough of the surrounding area to indicate the
relationship of the proposed development to the adjacent residential uses.
The purpose of the Site Plan is to allow an evaluation of how residential
uses adjacent to the subject property will be impacted by the proposed
development or use. The nature of impacts to be considered shall include
appearance, noise, odor, light and fire, traffic, and other hazards.



   (B)   The Site Plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission
for their review and comment. The Planning Commission shall make a
recommendation to the City Council and the City Council upon receiving and
reviewing the Planning Commission’s recommendation, shall make a decision,
whether or not, to approve the Site Plan as a basis for development of the
subject property. The issuance of a building permit or permits concerning
development on the subject property shall be contingent on an approved Site
Plan filed with the city.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.138  APPEARANCE.



   Construction of accessory buildings over one hundred forty-four (144)
square feet and additions to structures on a lot shall match and generally be
constructed of, or exceed, the same exterior materials as the structure being
added to.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



B-2 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT



§ 150.145  B-2 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   The B-2 General Business District is intended to provide a district for
commercial activities that are highway or automobile oriented and for
quasi-industrial and wholesale enterprises that do not need an industrial
setting and have considerable customer contact.



   (A)   No building permits shall be issued until a complete drainage
system has been reviewed by the city.  If deemed appropriate, the City
Building Official may require approval of the drainage system by the City
Engineer.



   (B)   All principal structures must have a basement or approved
solid wall around the perimeter of the structure or a footing around the
perimeter of the structure designed by a state licensed engineer and approved
by the local building official.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.146  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Within the B-2 General Business District no structure or land
shall be used except for one (1) or more of the following uses.



      (1)   Auto repair or service;



      (2)   Auto sales;



      (3)   Armory, exhibition hall, auction hall and stadium;



      (4)   Bars and taverns;



      (5)   Boat and marine sales;



      (6)   Bowling alleys, billiard and pool rooms, and skating
rinks, provided the structure in which the use is conducted shall not be
located less than fifty (50) feet from an R district boundary line;



      (7)   Bakery;



      (8)   Bus terminals and taxi stands;



      (9)   Business or trade school;



      (10)   Building material yard provided it is conducted within
a building or within a fence of such construction as to prevent view from the
public right-of-way;



      (11)   Cabinet and carpentry shops, electrical service,
heating, plumbing, upholstery and air conditioning service shops;



      (12)   Commercial greenhouses;



      (13)   Day care facility;



      (14)   Essential service structures;



      (15)   Farm machinery sales and supplies;



      (16)   Feed store;



      (17)   Fraternal organizations and civic clubs;



      (18)   Garden supply store;



      (19)   Grocery store;



      (20)   Laundry and dry cleaning;



      (21)   Motels, motor hotels, and hotels provided the site
shall contain not less than four hundred (400) square feet of lot area per
unit;



      (22)   Public and semi-public buildings: Including but not
limited to city/town halls, county courthouses and related functions, fire
and police stations, post offices, libraries, and schools and related
functions.



      (23)   Printing shops and newspaper offices;



      (24)   Restaurant;



      (25)   Stone and monument sales;



      (26)   Television and radio stations;



      (27)   Tire and battery sales but not including battery
rebuilding or tire recapping;



      (28)   Warehousing except the storage of inflammable fluids;



      (29)   Wholesale offices and showrooms;



      (30)   Any permitted use in the B-1 district not mentioned as
a permitted use in the B-2 district; and



      (31)   Gas stations.



   (B)   Uses not listed.  Other residential and commercial uses
determined by the Planning Commission and City Council to be of the same
general character as identified permitted and conditional uses and found not
to be detrimental to the general public’s health, safety, and welfare. The
use shall be placed in the permitted or conditional use category based upon
its compatibility to those uses listed.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010; Am. Ord. 453, passed 10-17-2017)  Penalty, see
§ 150.999



§ 150.147  CONDITIONAL USE.



   Within any B-2 General Business District no structure or land shall be
used for the following uses except by conditional use permit:



   (A)   Open sales lot.  Open sales or rental lots. (Other than auto
or boat. See § 150.146)



   (B)   Kennels.  Any lot or premises or portion thereof on which
four (4) or more dogs and/or cats over six (6) months old are owned, bred,
boarded or offered for sale.  This shall not include pet shops, veterinary
clinics or other such uses regulated herein.



   (C)   Veterinary clinics.  Veterinary clinic or animal hospital.



   (D)   Amusements.  Miniature golf course, driving ranges, archery
ranges, go-cart track, trampoline centers and boat landing facilities.



   (E)   Shopping center.  Any contiguous group of two (2) or more
retail stores or service establishments, comprising ten thousand (10,000) or
more square feet of floor area which provides off-street parking utilized in
common by patrons.



   (F)   Drive-ins.  Drive-in restaurant subject to the following
requirements:



      (1)   The entire area shall have a drainage system approved by
the City Engineer.



      (2)   The entire area other than that occupied by structures
or planting shall be surfaced with a material which will control dust and
drainage.



      (3)   A box curb at least six (6) inches above grade shall
separate the public walk from the lot except at approved entrances or exits.



      (4)   A fence of acceptable design not over six (6) feet in
height or less than four (4) feet which is at least fifty percent (50%)
closed, shall be constructed along the property in a R district and such
fence shall be adequately maintained.  The fence shall not be required
within the required front yard.



      (5)   The lighting shall be accomplished in such a way as to
have no direct source of light visible from the public right-of-way or
adjacent land in residential use.



   (G)   Car wash.  Automated car wash facilities.



   (H)   Commercial campgrounds.



   (I)   Night clubs and dance halls.



   (J)   Funeral homes and mortuaries.



   (K)   Multi-family residential structures and residential units that
are above, attached or part of the main structure and are clearly secondary
in nature to the main use.



   (L)   Service stations.



   (M)   Storage building.  One (1) storage building per principal
structure shall be permitted and the maximum floor area shall not exceed one
hundred forty-four (144) square feet.



   (N)   Bed and breakfast inn, provided the following are adhered to:



      (1)   Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with
the parking requirements of § 150.500.  A minimum of one (1) off-street
parking space per guest room shall be provided in addition to the parking
requirements for the zoning district in which the facility is located.
Off-street parking is to be screened from the surrounding residences.



      (2)   Signs shall be in accordance with the sign requirements
in § 150.213 and meet the requirements for the zoning district that the
business is located within. (Identifying signs to be not more than four (4)
square feet in total, located on the building and consistent with the
character of the building).



      (3)   A maximum of five (5) units may be established in a
structure.



      (4)   A bed and breakfast establishment shall show proof of
inspection or proof of proper operating licenses by the state and/or country.



      (5)   All guest rooms shall be contained within the principal
structure.



      (6)   Dining and other facilities shall not be open to the
public, but shall be used exclusively by the residents and registered guests.



      (7)   The maximum stay for guests shall be fourteen (14) days
within a thirty (30) day period.



      (8)   The inn shall comply with all applicable laws, rules,
and regulations governing its existence and operation, including, but not
limited to, the State Building Code, the State Fire Code, and the State
Health Code.



      (9)   A conditional use permit shall be terminated upon
occurrence for the following:



         (a)   Non-compliance with the provisions of these
provisions.



         (b)   Transfer of ownership of said property from the
owner/operator.



         (c)   The creation of a condition which adversely
affects the health, safety, or general welfare of the city or its residents.



      (10)   The owner or operator shall reside on the property or
submit a management plan for approval as part of the conditional use permit.



   (O)   Recreational centers.



   (P)   Self-service storage facility.  The storage facility cannot
result in an adverse impact on adjacent properties by reason of parking
demand, traffic generation, lighting, outdoor activities, fire hazard, safety
hazard, visual blight, incompatibility to the surrounding neighborhood, or
any other adverse impact as determined by the City Council.



      (1)   No on-site sales shall be conducted, other than the
rental of storage spaces.



      (2)   All storage shall be fully enclosed within the storage
structure.



      (3)   No containers of flammable or hazardous materials other
than normal household quantities shall be stored on-site. Quantities shall be
stored per local code requirements. Exception: Quantities over the normal
household amounts can be stored if stored per local code and reported and
registered with the local fire department.



   (Q)   Outdoor furnaces and boilers, provided the following
conditions are met:



      (1)   The applicant shall submit a site plan, drawn to scale,
showing the location of the proposed outdoor furnace or boiler in relation to
existing structures and property lines as well as proposed screening or
enclosure.



      (2)   Outdoor furnaces and boilers shall only be allowed on
lots five (5) acres in size or greater. If the lot is divided in the future,
so as to be less than five (5) acres, the outdoor furnace shall be removed.



      (3)   Outdoor furnaces and boilers shall be set back a minimum
of fifty (50) feet from all property lines when abutting a residential
district. When the property does not abut a residential district, the furnace
shall comply with minimum setback requirements of the zoning district it is
within.



      (4)   No burning materials shall be stored within five (5)
feet of the principal structure and materials shall be stored in an orderly
fashion.



      (5)   The outdoor furnace or boiler must be enclosed in a
structure or screened with fencing and/or other materials as approved by the
City Council.



      (6)   When the outdoor furnace or boiler is enclosed in a
structure, the structure shall generally match the exterior of the principal
structure.



      (7)   When the outdoor furnace or boiler is enclosed in a
structure, the structure shall not count against the allowable square footage
for future accessory structures, as long as it strictly serves as an
enclosure for the furnace or boiler and the structure does not exceed one
hundred (100) square feet in size.



      (8)   If the outdoor furnace or boiler is to be replaced, it
shall meet the city and/or state requirements in place at that time.



      (9)   The outdoor furnace or boiler shall be UL Listed, or
certified per the State Building Code, and the applicant shall follow all
manufacturer specifications.



      (10)   If the outdoor furnace or boiler is taken out of
service for a period of one (1) year or more, the permit shall become null
and void and the unit and enclosure shall be removed from the property.



   (R)   Recycling facility.  Recycling facilities are subject to the
following minimum requirements:



      (1)   All operations shall be conducted within a building or
an enclosed area.



      (2)   Facilities shall comply with all Pollution Control
Agency (PCA) regulations.



      (3)   Facilities taking household hazardous waste materials
must be licensed by  the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA).



      (4)   An MPCA approved recording system shall be maintained
indicating the  type and quantity of recyclables passing through the
facility.



      (5)   A sign, subject to city approval, shall be posted on
premises indicating the  facility name, schedule of days and hours of
operation and prices for use.



      (6)   The recycling facility shall be so situated, operated
and maintained so as to  limit interference with and impact on other
activities and uses in the area.



      (7)   The premises, entrances and exits shall be maintained in
a clean and  orderly manner at all times.



      (8)   All incoming and outgoing traffic shall be controlled by
the property owner  in such a manner as to provide safe and orderly ingress
and egress.



      (9)   All unloading of recyclables from contributing vehicles
shall be conducted  in such a manner as to eliminate odor and litter outside
of the facility.



   (S)   Churches and other places of worship.



   (T)   Land reclamation.  See § 150.015.



   (U)    Mining.  See § 150.016.



   (V)   Health care facilities.  Including hospitals, clinics,
nursing homes and other similar health care facilities.



   (W)   Residential facilities as defined by § 150.002.



   (X)   Welding and fabrication.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010; Am. Ord. 422, passed 5-20-2014; Am. Ord. 435,
passed 6-16-2015)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.148  INTERIM USES.



   Those other uses which in the opinion of the Planning Commission are
appropriate only on an interim basis, and pursuant to § 150.037.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.149  ACCESSORY USES.



   Within any B-2 General Business District, the following uses shall be
permitted accessory uses:



   (A)   Incidental uses.  Any incidental repair or processing
necessary to conduct a permitted principal use, however, such accessory use
shall not occupy more than fifty percent (50%) of the floor area nor require
more than fifty percent (50%) of the gross man hours required to conduct the
permitted use.



   (B)   Adult use - accessory.



      (1)   Adult use accessory shall:



         (a)   Comprise no more than five percent (5%) of the
floor space of the establishment in which it is located.



         (b)   Comprise no more than ten percent (10%) of the
gross receipts of the entire business operation.



         (c)   Not include any activity except the sale or rental
of merchandise.



         (d)   Not include activities classified as obscene as
defined by M.S. § 617.241.



         (e)   Be prohibited in any location used to dispense or
consume alcoholic beverages.



      (2)   Adult use accessory shall be restricted from and
prohibit access to minors by the physical separation of such items from areas
of general public access. Business owners shall make reasonable precaution to
limit access to minors by:



         (a)   Movie rentals.  Display areas shall be restricted
form general view and shall be situated in such fashion as to prohibit access
and visibility to minors, the access of which is in clear view and under the
control of the persons responsible for the operation.



         (b)   Magazines.  Publications classified or qualifying
as adult uses shall not be accessible to minors and shall be covered with a
wrapper or other means to prevent display of any material other than the
publication title.



         (c)   Other use.  Adult uses accessory not specifically
cited in (a) and (b) above shall comply with the intent of this section and
only be allowed as a conditional use.



      (3)   Adult use accessory shall be prohibited from both
internal and external advertising and signing of adult materials and products.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.150  PROHIBITED USES.



   Residential dwelling(s) as a principal use.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.151  AREA, HEIGHT, LOT WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Area, frontage, and yard requirements.  The following
requirements shall be the minimum permitted in this district:



 


Area (sq. ft.)

 
Frontage (sq. ft.)
 
Height (ft.)
 
Front Yard Setback (ft.)
 
Side Yard Setback (ft.)
 
Rear Yard Setback (ft.)


Principal structures:


9,000
 
75
 
30 or 3 stories, whichever is lesser
 
20
 
Same as the R district when abutting an R district
 
0 except it shall be 20 when abutting an R district


Accessory structures:


 
 
15
 
 
 



 



   (B)   No building permits shall be issued until a complete drainage
system has been reviewed by the city.  If deemed appropriate, the City
Building Official may require approval of the drainage system by the City
Engineer.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.152  SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PROPERTIES ABUTTING RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS.



   (A)   In addition to the above minimum requirements, the owner or
developer of property abutting a residential district shall prepare a Site
Plan showing the ultimate proposed development. The Site Plan drawn to scale
shall, at a minimum, show landscaping, buildings and structures, vehicular
and pedestrian access and enough of the surrounding area to indicate the
relationship of the proposed development to the adjacent residential uses.
The purpose of the Site Plan is to allow an evaluation of how residential
uses adjacent to the subject property will be impacted by the proposed
development or use. The nature of impacts to be considered shall include
appearance, noise, odor, light and fire, traffic, and other hazards.



   (B)   The Site Plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission
for their review and comment. The Planning Commission shall make a
recommendation to the City Council and the City Council upon receiving and
reviewing the Planning Commission’s recommendation, shall make a decision
whether or not to approve the Site Plan as a basis for development of the
subject property. The issuance of a building permit or permits concerning
development on the subject property shall be contingent on an approved Site
Plan filed with the city.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.153  APPEARANCE.



   Construction of accessory buildings over one hundred forty-four (144)
square feet and additions to structures on a lot shall match and generally be
constructed of, or exceed, the same exterior materials as the structure being
added to.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.154  DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   In addition to all other minimum requirements, the owner or
developer of property within the B-2 District shall be required to construct
all new buildings in the following manner.



      (1)   Exterior surfaces of all walls abutting a street or
residential district shall be brick, rock face brick, cementitious siding,
stone, decorative concrete block, glass, log, cedar, architectural metal
siding, stucco, synthetic stucco, or cast in place and/or precast panels.



      (2)   Under no circumstances shall sheet plywood, sheet metal,
corrugated metal, or unfinished concrete block be deemed acceptable as
exterior wall material on walls abutting a street or on walls abutting a
residential district.



      (3)   Other materials may be allowed upon site plan approval
by the City Council.



   (B)   These requirements shall not apply to building additions,
unless the addition is fifty percent (50%) or greater in floor area than the
existing building. In such case, all new and existing exterior surfaces of
walls abutting a street or residential district shall meet the requirements
of § 150.152.



   (C)   These requirements shall not apply to residential structures
located in the B-2 District, unless the structures are used for
non-residential purposes.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



I-1 LIMITED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT



§ 150.160  I-1 LIMITED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



   The I-1 Limited Industrial District is intended to provide a district
for the conduct of manufacturing and general warehousing under high standards
of appearance and conditions where all noise, vibrations, and glare produced
on the premises is confined thereto. Industrial activities generating smoke,
fumes or noxious odors detectable beyond the limits of their premises will be
prohibited from this district.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.161  PERMITTED USES.



   Within the I-1 Limited Industrial District no structure or land shall
be used except for one (1) or more of the following uses:



   (A)   Automotive repair and parts.



   (B)   Builder’s or contractor’s yards, building material and
lumber sales or rental yards, farm machinery sales, feed sales, dirt, sand,
gravel and rock sales, provided any such operations are enclosed by a solid
wall or fence not less than six (6) feet in height and that such use is
located not less than one hundred (100) feet from all R district boundaries.



   (C)   Bus or truck storage or maintenance shops.



   (D)   Grain elevators.



   (E)   Wholesaling and warehousing.



   (F)   Motor freight terminals.



   (G)   Manufacturing.  The conducting of any of the following
operations or the processing or fabrication of any of the following articles
or products:



      (1)   Bag, carpet, and rag cleaning; provided necessary
equipment is installed and operated for the effective precipitation in or
recovery of dust;



      (2)   Bakery goods;



      (3)   Beds, bedsprings and mattresses;



      (4)   Belting and chain conveyors;



      (5)   Bicycles and toys;



      (6)   Boat building or repair;



      (7)   Camera and photographic supplies;



      (8)   Canvas and canvas products;



      (9)   Ceramic products manufacturing, using kilns fired only
by electricity or gas;



      (10)   Cork and cork products;



      (11)   Drugs, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals and toiletries;



      (12)   Electric motors, generators, transformers, and other
controls, including rebuilding;



      (13)   Engraving and printing;



      (14)   Felt manufacturing products;



      (15)   Food products – production, canning or packaging;



      (16)   Glass, cellophane, leather, feathers, fur, precious or
semi-precious metals, hair, horn paper, plastic, shell, wax, wood, and yarn
products, provided they are produced from previously prepared materials;



      (17)   Heating, washing, cooling, drying, cleaning,
television, and radio appliances, including sheet metal work, ornamental
iron, welding, and stamping;



      (18)   Ice manufacturing, cold storage plants, bottling works;



      (19)   Machined, welded, stamped, extruded and forged parts;



      (20)   Metal polishing;



      (21)   Milk products - creameries, dairy plants, ice cream
plants, subject to City Engineer approval that sanitary waste facilities are
available;



      (22)   Mill work - cabinet shop;



      (23)   Musical instruments;



      (24)   Paper products - boxes, bags, envelopes, etc.;



      (25)   Rubber, plastics and synthetic rubber products;



      (26)   Shoes and boots;



      (27)   Signs;



      (28)   Sporting equipment; and



      (29)   Tools, hardware and small metal products.



   (H)   Adult uses.  As defined in this Zoning Code, subject to the
following provisions:



      (1)   Activities classified as obscene as defined by M.S. §
617.241 are not permitted and are prohibited.



      (2)   Shall be prohibited from locating in any place which is
also used to dispense or consume alcoholic beverages.



      (3)   Adult use - permitted.  Shall be located at least four
hundred (400) radial feet, as measured in a straight line for the closest
point of the property line of the building upon which the adult use permitted
is located to the property line of:



         (a)   Residentially zoned property or residential uses;



         (b)   Business zoned property or business uses;



         (c)   From any township line;



         (d)   A licensed day care center;



         (e)   A public or private education facility classified
as an elementary, junior high, or senior high;



         (f)   A public library;



         (g)   A public park, site, or trail;



         (h)   Another adult permitted use;



         (i)   Churches; and



         (j)   An on or off sale liquor, wine, or beer
establishment.



      (4)   Adult use - permitted, shall adhere to the following
signing regulations, in addition to other regulations for this district:



         (a)   Sign messages shall be generic in nature and shall
only identify the type of business which is being conducted.



         (b)   Shall not contain material classified as
advertising.



         (c)   Shall not display a sign containing
representational depictions of an adult nature or graphic descriptions of an
adult theme.



      (5)   Adult use - permitted shall be prohibited at any public
show, movie, caravan, circus, carnival, theatrical, or other performance or
exhibition presented to the general public where minors are permitted.



      (6)   Adult use - permitted, shall be closed between the hours
of 11:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. the following day.



      (7)   The premises on which a permitted adult use is
constructed or operated shall be so constructed or operated to:



         (a)   Completely cover the windows and doors of its
operation with an opaque covering to prevent off-site viewing of its
merchandise or operations.



         (b)   Have all entrances, except for emergency fire
exits which are not usable to patrons to enter the business, visible form the
public right-of-way.



         (c)   Be so designed that management of the
establishment and any law enforcement personnel can observe all patrons while
they have access to any merchandise offered for sale or viewing, including,
but not limited to books, magazines, photographs, videotapes, or any other
person or materials.



         (d)   Have the exterior of the premises illuminated in a
manner adequate to observe the location, activities, and identity of all
persons on the exterior premises.



         (e)   Be so designed that all rooms, stalls, or other
areas used by patrons have at least one (1) side open to public view, and be
so lighted as to afford full visibility from an adjacent public room.



         (f)   Partitions between public rooms shall be free of
all apertures and holes.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.162  CONDITIONAL USES.



   Within any I-1 Industrial District no structures or land shall be used
for the following uses except by conditional use permit.



   (A)   Research laboratories.



   (B)   Public utility structures.



   (C)   Airports.



   (D)   Inflammable fluid storage.



   (E)   Heat treating or plating.



   (F)   Flour or grain mills.



   (G)   Distilleries and blending facilities.



   (H)   Outdoor furnaces and boilers, provided the following
conditions are met:



      (1)   The applicant shall submit a site plan, drawn to scale,
showing the location of the proposed outdoor furnace or boiler in relation to
existing structures and property lines as well as proposed screening or
enclosure.



      (2)   Outdoor furnaces and boilers shall only be allowed on
lots five (5) acres in size or greater. If the lot is divided in the future,
so as to be less than five (5) acres, the outdoor furnace shall be removed.



      (3)   Outdoor furnaces and boilers shall be set back a minimum
of fifty (50) feet from all property lines when abutting a residential
district. When the property does not abut a residential district, the furnace
shall comply with minimum setback requirements of the zoning district it is
within.



      (4)   No burning materials shall be stored within five (5)
feet of the principal structure and materials shall be stored in an orderly
fashion.



      (5)   The outdoor furnace or boiler must be enclosed in a
structure or screened with fencing and/or other materials as approved by the
City Council.



      (6)   When the outdoor furnace or boiler is enclosed in a
structure, the structure shall generally match the exterior of the principal
structure.



      (7)   When the outdoor furnace or boiler is enclosed in a
structure, the structure shall not count against the allowable square footage
for future accessory structures, as long as it strictly serves as an
enclosure for the furnace or boiler and the structure does not exceed one
hundred (100) square feet in size.



      (8)   If the outdoor furnace or boiler is to be replaced, it
shall meet the city and/or state requirements in place at that time.



      (9)   The outdoor furnace or boiler shall be UL Listed, or
certified per the State Building Code, and the applicant shall follow all
manufacturer specifications.



      (10)   If the outdoor furnace or boiler is taken out of
service for a period of one (1) year or more, the permit shall become null
and void and the unit and enclosure shall be removed from the property.



   (I)   Any permitted or conditional use that is over fifty percent
(50%) lot coverage. (See also § 150.185(D))



   (J)   Recycling Facility.  Subject to the following minimum
requirements:



      (1)   All operations shall be conducted within a building or
an enclosed area.



      (2)   Facilities shall comply with all Pollution Control
Agency (PCA) regulations.



      (3)   Facilities taking household hazardous waste materials
must be licensed by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA).



      (4)   An MPCA approved recording system shall be maintained
indicating the type and quantity of recyclables passing through the facility.



      (5)   A sign, subject to city approval, shall be posted on
premises indicating the facility name, schedule of days and hours of
operation and prices for use.



      (6)   The recycling facility shall be so situated, operated
and maintained so as to  limit interference with and impact on other
activities and uses in the area.



      (7)   The premises, entrances and exits shall be maintained in
a clean and  orderly manner at all times.



      (8)   All incoming and outgoing traffic shall be controlled by
the property owner  in such a manner as to provide safe and orderly ingress
and egress.



      (9)   All unloading of recyclables from contributing vehicles
shall be conducted  in such a manner as to eliminate odor and litter outside
of the facility.



   (K)   Land reclamation.  See § 150.015.



   (L)   Mining.  See § 150.016.



   (M)   Display and sale of recreational vehicles.



   (N)   Storage and repair of carnival equipment.



   (O)   Unattended fueling facility.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010; Am. Ord. 440, passed 8-18-2015)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.163  INTERIM USES.



   Those other uses which in the opinion of the Planning Commission are
appropriate only on an interim basis, and pursuant to § 150.037.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.164  ACCESSORY USES.



   Within any I-1 Industrial District no accessory structure or use of
land shall be used except for one (1) or more of the following uses.



   (A)   Incidental uses.  Any incidental structures or uses necessary
to conduct a permitted principal use.



   (B)   Off-street parking.



   (C)   Self-serve and automated car/truck wash facilities.



   (D)   Self-serve pet wash facilities.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010; Am. Ord. 417, passed 2-19-2013)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.165  PROHIBITED USES.



   (A)   Uses not listed.  Other commercial and industrial uses
determined by the Planning Commission and City Council to be of the same
general character as identified permitted and conditional uses and found not
to be detrimental to the general public’s health, safety, and welfare. The
use will be placed in the category based upon its compatibility to those uses
listed.



   (B)   Residential.  Residential structures and related residential
uses such as schools, hospitals, churches, boarding houses, hotels and
similar businesses related to residential use, shall not be permitted except
for security reasons in relation to a principal use.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.166  AREA, HEIGHT, LOT WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Side yards.  Side yards abutting a public street shall not be
less than thirty (30) feet of which at least ten (10) feet bordering the
streets shall be landscaped including, as a minimum, trees planted not more
than twenty (20) feet apart. Whenever a railroad right-of-way abuts a lot
along the side or rear, no side or rear yard shall be required abutting the
right-of-way.



   (B)   Abutting R district.  Whenever an I district abuts an R
district, the required setback shall be fifty (50) feet.



   (C)   Floor-lot area ratio.  The floor-lot area ration within the
I-1 district shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) lot coverage with the
exception that a conditional use permit may be issued for lot coverage over
fifty percent (50%).



   (D)   Area, frontage, and yard requirements. The following
requirements shall be the minimum permitted in this district:



 


Area (ft.)

 
Frontage (ft.)
 
Height (ft.)
 
Front Yard Setback (ft.)
 
Interior Side Yard Setback (ft.)
 
Rear Yard Setback (ft.)


40,000
 
150
 
45 or 3 stories, whichever is lesser
 
50
 
30/15
 
20



 



   (E)   Landscaping requirements.  The front yard may be used for
parking except that ten (10) feet bordering the public right-of-way shall be
landscaped to a design approved by the city.



   (F)   No building permits shall be issued until a complete drainage
system has been reviewed by the city.  If deemed appropriate, the City
Building Official may require approval of the drainage system by the City
Engineer.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.167  SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PROPERTIES ABUTTING RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS.



   (A)   In addition to the above minimum requirements, the owner or
developer of property abutting a residential district shall prepare a Site
Plan showing the ultimate proposed development. The Site Plan drawn to scale
shall, at a minimum, show landscaping, buildings and structures, vehicular
and pedestrian access and enough of the surrounding area to indicate the
relationship of the proposed development to the adjacent residential uses.
The purpose of the Site Plan is to allow an evaluation of how residential
uses adjacent to the subject property will be impacted by the proposed
development or use. The nature of impacts to be considered shall include
appearance, noise, odor, and light and fire, traffic, and other hazards.



   (B)   The Site Plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission
for their review and comment. The Planning Commission shall make a
recommendation to the City Council and the City Council upon receiving and
reviewing the Planning Commission’s recommendation, shall make a decision
whether or not to approve the Site Plan as a basis for development of the
subject property. The issuance of a building permit or permits concerning
development on the subject property shall be contingent on an approved Site
Plan filed with the city.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.168  DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   In addition to all other minimum requirements, the owner or
developer of industrial property shall be required to construct all new
primary and accessory buildings in the following manner:



      (1)   Major exterior surfaces on all walls abutting a street
shall be brick, rock face brick, cementitious siding, stone, decorative
concrete block, glass, commercial grade metal siding, stucco, synthetic
stucco or cast in place and/or precast panels.



      (2)   Under no circumstances shall sheet plywood, sheet metal,
galvanized metal, unfinished concrete block, asbestos or iron be deemed
acceptable as exterior wall material on walls abutting a street.



      (3)   Other materials may be allowed upon site plan approval
by the city.



   (B)   These requirements shall not apply to building additions
unless said addition is greater in floor area than the existing building. 
Further, if and when the combined area of all additions exceed the original
footprint of the building, all major exterior surfaces abutting a street must
be constructed with approved construction materials, including the original
building.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



I-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT



§ 150.180  I-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



   The I-2 General Industrial District is intended to provide a district
which will accommodate a wide range of manufacturing activities and will
generally be separated from residential districts by either a B or I-1
district.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.181  PERMITTED USES.



   Within the I-2 Industrial District no structure or land shall be used
except for one (1) or more of the following uses.



   (A)   I-1 uses, those uses permitted in § 150.161.



   (B)   Concrete block plant, concrete mixing plant, asphalt mixing
plant.



   (C)   Heat treating plant.



   (D)   Stone, marble and granite grinding and cutting.



   (E)   Manufacture of housing (manufactured homes and prefabricated
structures).



   (F)   Manufacture of farm equipment and machinery.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.182  CONDITIONAL USES.



   Within any I-2 General Industrial District, no structure or land shall
be used for the following uses except by conditional use permit.



   (A)   Explosives.  Activities involving the storage or
manufacturing of material or products which decompose by detonation.



   (B)   Acid manufacturing.



   (C)   Research laboratories, including potential hazards of fire,
explosion.



   (D)   Public utility structures.



   (E)   Airports.



   (F)   Automobile reduction yard.



   (G)   Inflammable fluid storage.



   (H)   Brewing or distilling liquors.



   (I)   Enameling, lacquering or jopanning.



   (J)   Flour or grain mill.



   (K)   Boiler shops, machine shops and similar operations where
hammers or presses of twenty (20) tons rated capacity are used or employment
is over twenty-five (25) persons.



   (L)   Junk yards.



   (M)   Animal rendering plants.



   (N)   Live animal sales.



   (O)   Refuse dumps.



   (P)   Slaughter houses and packing plants.



   (Q)   Outdoor furnaces and boilers, provided the following
conditions are met:



      (1)   The applicant shall submit a site plan, drawn to scale,
showing the location of the proposed outdoor furnace or boiler in relation to
existing structures and property lines as well as proposed screening or
enclosure.



      (2)   Outdoor furnaces and boilers shall only be allowed on
lots five (5) acres in size or greater. If the lot is divided in the future,
so as to be less than five (5) acres, the outdoor furnace shall be removed.



      (3)   Outdoor furnaces and boilers shall be set back a minimum
of fifty (50) feet from all property lines when abutting a residential
district. When the property does not abut a residential district, the furnace
shall comply with minimum setback requirements of the zoning district it is
within.



      (4)   No burning materials shall be stored within five (5)
feet of the principal structure and materials shall be stored in an orderly
fashion.



      (5)   The outdoor furnace or boiler must be enclosed in a
structure or screened with fencing and/or other materials as approved by the
City Council.



      (6)   When the outdoor furnace or boiler is enclosed in a
structure, the structure shall generally match the exterior of the principal
structure.



      (7)   When the outdoor furnace or boiler is enclosed in a
structure, the structure shall not count against the allowable square footage
for future accessory structures, as long as it strictly serves as an
enclosure for the furnace or boiler and the structure does not exceed one
hundred (100) square feet in size.



      (8)   If the outdoor furnace or boiler is to be replaced, it
shall meet the city and/or state requirements in place at that time.



      (9)   The outdoor furnace or boiler shall be UL Listed, or
certified per the State Building Code, and the applicant shall follow all
manufacturer specifications.



      (10)   If the outdoor furnace or boiler is taken out of
service for a period of one (1) year or more, the permit shall become null
and void and the unit and enclosure shall be removed from the property.



   (R)   Any permitted or conditional use that is over fifty percent
(50%) lot coverage. (See also § 150.186(D))



   (S)   Recycling Facility.  Subject to the following minimum
requirements:



      (1)   All operations shall be conducted within a building or
an enclosed area.



      (2)   Facilities shall comply with all Pollution Control
Agency (PCA) regulations.



      (3)   Facilities taking household hazardous waste materials
must be licensed by  the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA).



      (4)   An MPCA approved recording system shall be maintained
indicating the type and quantity of recyclables passing through the facility.



      (5)   A sign, subject to city approval, shall be posted on
premises indicating the facility name, schedule of days and hours of
operation and prices for use.



      (6)   The recycling facility shall be so situated, operated
and maintained so as to limit interference with and impact on other
activities and uses in the area.



      (7)   The premises, entrances and exits shall be maintained in
a clean and orderly manner at all times.



      (8)   All incoming and outgoing traffic shall be controlled by
the property owner  in such a manner as to provide safe and orderly ingress
and egress.



      (9)   All unloading of recyclables from contributing vehicles
shall be conducted in such a manner as to eliminate odor and litter outside
of the facility.



   (T)   Land reclamation.  See § 150.015.



   (U)   Mining.  See § 150.016.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.183  INTERIM USES.



    Those other uses which in the opinion of the Planning Commission are
appropriate only on an interim basis, and pursuant to § 150.037.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.184  ACCESSORY USES.



   Within any I-2 Industrial District no accessory structure or use of
land shall be used except for one (1) or more of the following uses.



   (A)   Incidental uses.  Any incidental structures or use necessary
to conduct a permitted principal use including residential structures for
security when related to a principal use.



   (B)   Off-street parking.  As regulated by this Zoning Code.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.185  PROHIBITED USES.



   The following uses are prohibited in the I-2 Industrial District.



   (A)   Uses not listed.  Other commercial and industrial uses
determined by the Planning Commission and City Council to be of the same
general character as identified permitted and conditional uses and found not
to be detrimental to the general public’s health, safety, and welfare. The
use will be placed in the category based upon its compatibility to those uses
listed.



   (B)   Residential.  Residential structures and related residential
uses such as schools, hospitals, churches, boarding houses, hotels and
similar businesses related to residential use, shall not be permitted except
for security reasons in relation to a principal use.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.186  AREA, HEIGHT, LOT WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Side yards.  Side yards abutting a street shall not be less
than thirty (30) feet. Whenever a railroad right-of-way abuts a lot along the
side or rear, no side or rear yard shall be required abutting the
right-of-way.



   (B)   Abutting R district.  Whenever an I district abuts an R
district, the required setback shall be fifty (50) feet.



   (C)   Floor-lot area ratio.  The floor-lot area ratio within the
I-2 district shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) lot coverage with the
exception that a conditional use permit may be issued for lot coverage over
fifty percent (50%).



   (D)   Landscaping required.  The front yard may be used for parking
and loading and unloading, except that ten (10) feet bordering the public
right-of-way shall be landscaped to a design approved by the city.



   (E)   Area, frontage, and yard requirements.  The following
requirements shall be the minimum permitted in this district:



 


Area (ft.)

 
Frontage (ft.)
 
Height (ft.)
 
Front Yard Setback (ft.)
 
Interior Side Yard Setback (ft.)
 
Rear Yard Setback (ft.)


40,000
 
150
 
45 or 3 stories, whichever is lesser
 
50
 
30/15
 
20



 



   (F)   No building permits shall be issued until a complete drainage
system has been reviewed by the city.  If deemed appropriate, the City
Building Official may require approval of the drainage system by the City
Engineer.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.187  SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PROPERTIES ABUTTING RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS.



   (A)   In addition to the above minimum requirements, the owner or
developer of property abutting a residential district shall prepare a Site
Plan showing the ultimate proposed development.  The Site Plan drawn to
scale shall, at a minimum, show landscaping, buildings and structures,
vehicular and pedestrian access and enough of the surrounding area to
indicate the relationship of the proposed development to the adjacent
residential uses. The purpose of the Site Plan is to allow an evaluation of
how residential uses adjacent to the subject property will be impacted by the
proposed development or use. The nature of the impacts to be considered shall
include appearance, noise, odor, light, fire, traffic, and other hazards.



   (B)   The Site Plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission
for their review and comment. The Planning Commission shall make a
recommendation to the City Council and the City Council upon receiving and
reviewing the Planning Commission’s recommendation, shall make a decision
whether or not to approve the Site Plan as a basis for development of the
subject property. The issuance of a building permit or permits concerning
development on the subject property shall be contingent on an approved Site
Plan filed with the city.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.188  DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   In addition to all other minimum requirements, the owner or
developer of industrial property shall be required to construct all new
primary and accessory buildings in the following manner:



      (1)   Major exterior surfaces on all walls abutting a street
shall be brick, rock face brick, cementitious siding, stone, decorative
concrete block, glass, commercial grade metal siding, stucco, synthetic
stucco or cast in place and/or precast panels.



      (2)   Under no circumstances shall sheet plywood, sheet metal,
galvanized metal, unfinished concrete block, asbestos or iron be deemed
acceptable as exterior wall material on walls abutting a street.



      (3)   Other materials may be allowed upon site plan approval
by the city.



   (B)   These requirements shall not apply to building additions
unless said addition is greater in floor area than the existing building.
Further, if and when the combined area of all additions exceed the original
footprint of the building, all major exterior surfaces abutting a street must
be constructed with approved construction materials, including the original
building.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



PERFORMANCE STANDARDS



§ 150.195  STANDARDS FOR ALL DISTRICTS.



   The guiding of urban development so as to bring about a compatible
relationship of uses depends upon certain standards being maintained.
Permitted uses, uses by conditional permit and accessory uses in the various
districts shall conform to the following standards. These standards apply in
all districts.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.196  NOISE.



   Any use established shall be so operated that no noise resulting from
said use is perceptible beyond the boundaries of the lot line of the site on
which such use is located. This standard shall not apply to incidental
traffic, parking, loading, construction, or maintenance operations.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.197  SMOKE, ETC.



   All uses shall be so operated as to control the emission of smoke or
particulate matter to the degree that it is not detrimental to or shall
endanger the public health, safety, comfort, or general welfare of the
public.  For purpose of determining when the degree of smoke is
unsatisfactory, the Ringelmann Chart published and used by the United States
Bureau of Mines shall be employed. The emission of smoke shall not be of a
density greater than No. 2 in the Ringelmann Chart.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.198  TOXIC OR NOXIOUS MATTER.



   All use shall be so operated as not to discharge across the boundaries
of the lot or through percolation into the subsoil beyond the boundaries of
the lot wherein such use is located, toxic or noxious matter in such
concentration as to be detectable or to endanger the public heath, safety,
comfort or welfare, or cause injury to damage to property or business.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.199  ODORS.



   All uses shall be so operated as to prevent the emission of odorous
matter in such qualities as to be readily detectable at any point beyond the
lot line of the site on which such use is located.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.200  VIBRATION.



   Any use requiring an operation producing an intense heat or light
transmission shall be performed with the necessary shielding to prevent such
heat or light from being detectable at the lot line of the site on which the
use is located.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.201  GLARE OR HEAT.



   Any use requiring an operation producing an intense heat or light
transmission shall be performed with the necessary shielding to prevent such
heat or light from being detectable at the lot line of the site on which the
use is located.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.202  EXPLOSIVES.



   Any use requiring the storage, utilization, or manufacturing of
products which would decompose by detonation shall be located not less than
four hundred (400) feet from any R district line.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.203  WASTE MATERIAL.



   Waste material shall not be washed into the public storm sewer system
nor the sanitary sewer system without first having received a permit to do so
from the city.  If said permit is not granted, a method of disposal shall be
devised which will not require continuous land acquisition for permanent
operation and will not cause a detrimental effect to the adjacent land.
Should the waste be of a solid form rather than fluid, the storage area shall
be so located and fenced as to be removed from public view.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



SIGNS



§ 150.210  PURPOSE, FINDINGS AND EFFECT.



   (A)   Purpose and intent. It is not the purpose or intent of this
subchapter to regulate the message displayed on any sign; nor is it the
purpose or intent of this subchapter to regulate any building design or any
display not defined as a sign, or any sign which cannot be viewed from
outside a building. The purpose and intent of this subchapter is to:



      (1)   Regulate the number, location, size, type, illumination
and other physical characteristics of signs within the city in order to
promote the public health, safety and welfare;



      (2)   Maintain, enhance and improve the aesthetic environment
of the city by preventing visual clutter harmful to the appearance of the
community;



      (3)   Improve the visual appearance of the city while
providing for effective means of communication, consistent with
constitutional guarantees and the city’s goals of public safety and
aesthetics; and



      (4)   Provide for fair and consistent enforcement of the sign
regulations set forth herein under the zoning authority of the city.



   (B)   Findings. The City Council hereby finds as follows:



      (1)   Exterior signs have a substantial impact on the
character and quality of the environment;



      (2)   Signs provide an important medium through which
individuals may convey a variety of messages;



      (3)   Signs can create traffic hazards, aesthetic concerns and
detriments to property values, thereby threatening the public health, safety
and welfare; and



      (4)   The city’s zoning regulations include the regulation
of signs in an effort to promote the economic viability of the business
community, while protecting the city and its citizens from a proliferation of
signs of a type, size, location and character that would adversely impact
upon the aesthetics of the community and threaten the health, safety and
welfare of the community. The regulation of the physical characteristics of
signs within the city has had a positive impact on traffic safety and the
appearance of the community.



   (C)   Effect. A sign may be erected, mounted, displayed or
maintained in the city if it is in conformance with the provisions of these
regulations. The effect of this subchapter, as more specifically set forth
herein, is to:



      (1)   Allow a variety of sign types in commercial and
industrial zones, and a more limited variety of signs in other zones, subject
to the standards set forth in this subchapter;



      (2)   Allow certain small, unobtrusive signs incidental to the
principal use of a site in all zones when in compliance with the requirements
of this subchapter;



      (3)   Prohibit signs whose location, size, type, illumination
or other physical characteristics negatively affect the environment, and
where the communication can be accomplished by means having a lesser impact
on the environment and the public health, safety and welfare; and



      (4)   Provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this
subchapter.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010; Am. Ord. 419, passed 12-17-2013; Am. Ord. 452,
passed 10-17-2017)



§ 150.211  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, subsections, sentence, clause or phrase of this
subchapter is for any reason held to be invalid, the decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this subchapter. The City
Council hereby declares that it would have adopted the subchapter in each
section, subsections, sentence or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact
that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases is
declared invalid.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010; Am. Ord. 419, passed 12-17-2013; Am. Ord. 452,
passed 10-17-2017)



§ 150.212  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this Zoning Code and other applicable ordinances,
certain words and terms are defined as follows.



   ABANDONED SIGN.  Any sign and/or its supporting sign structure which
remains without a message or whose display surface remains blank for a period
of six (6) months or more, or any sign which pertains to a time, event or
purpose which no longer applies, shall be deemed to have been abandoned.
Signs applicable to a business temporarily suspended because of a change in
ownership or management of the business shall not be deemed abandoned unless
the property remains vacant for a period of six (6) months or more. Any sign
remaining after demolition of a principal structure shall be deemed to be
abandoned. Signs which are present because of being legally established
nonconforming signs or signs which have required a conditional use permit or
variance shall also be subject to the definition of ABANDONED SIGN.



   ADDRESS SIGN.  A sign communicating street address only, whether
script or in numerical form. Address numbers shall be a minimum of four (4)
inches in height.



   AREA IDENTIFICATION SIGN.  A wall or monument sign which identifies
the name of a residential development consisting of ten (10) or more lots, a
multiple residential development consisting of two (2) or more primary
structures, multi-family dwelling groups of six (6) or more units; a
religious or public institution; or, any integrated combination of the above.
The sign shall be limited only to the identification of the development or
institution.



   ARTIFICIAL LIGHT.  Illumination resulting from internal or external
artificial light sources, including glare and reflected light by-products of
artificial light.



   BANNER SIGN.  A temporary sign typically made of cloth, plastic or
vinyl materials. BANNER SIGNS shall not be considered permanent signage.



   BENCH SIGN.  A sign affixed to a sitting bench.



   BILLBOARD.  Any permanent sign that identifies or communicates a
commercial or non-commercial message which does not relate in its subject
matter to the premises on which it is located. A BILLBOARD shall be
considered either a freestanding or pylon sign, shall meet the respective
area and height requirements as regulated herein, and shall be limited to two
(2) sides.



   CANOPY/MARQUEE/AWNING SIGN.  Any message or identification affixed to
a projection or extension of a building or structure, erected in such a
manner as to provide a shelter or cover over the approach to any entrance of
a store, building or place of assembly.



   COMMERCIAL SPEECH SIGN.  Speech or graphics advertising a business,
profession, commodity, service or entertainment.



   CONSTRUCTION SIGN.  A sign placed at a construction site identifying
the project or the name of the architect, engineer, contractor, financier, or
other involved parties.



   DIRECTIONAL SIGN.  A sign erected on public or private property which
bears the address and/or name of a business, institution, church or other use
or activity plus directional arrows or information on location.



   DIRECTORY SIGN.  An exterior informational wall sign which does not
exceed four (4) square feet and identifies the names of businesses served by
a common public entrance in a shopping center.



   DYNAMIC DISPLAY.  Any characteristics of a sign that appear to have
movement or that appear to change, caused by any method other than physically
removing and replacing the sign or its components, whether the apparent
movement or change is in the display, the sign structure itself, or any other
component of the sign. This includes a display that incorporates a technology
or method allowing the sign face to change the image without having to
physically or mechanically replace the sign face or its components. This also
includes any rotating, revolving, moving, flashing, blinking or animated
display, and any display that incorporates rotating panels, LED lights
manipulated through digital input, “digital ink”, or any other method or
technology that allows the sign face to present a series of images or
displays.



   FREESTANDING SIGN.  A self-supporting sign and sign structure, both of
which are not more than twelve (12) feet in height. The sign shall be limited
in area to a maximum of thirty-five (35) square feet on each face.



   GOVERNMENT SIGN.  A sign erected by a unit of government.



   GROSS SURFACE AREA OF SIGN.  The entire area in square feet within a
single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the complete
message of any sign, which limits shall include the surface on which the
message is affixed, unless the individual letters of the message re-affixed
directly to the surface of a wall, in which case the maximum height and width
shall apply. Such permits shall not include any structural elements lying
outside the limits of the sign surface which do not form an integral part of
the sign message, except where the sign structure is held by the Zoning
Administrator to be larger than required for structural strength.



   INFORMATIONAL SIGN.  Any sign giving information to employees,
visitors or delivery vehicles, but containing no advertising or
identification.



   INSTITUTIONAL SIGN.  A sign or bulletin board which identifies the
name or other characteristics of a public, semi-public, or private
institution on the site where the sign is located. Institutions shall include
churches, schools, city buildings, and other non-profit and charitable
organizations.



   INTEGRAL SIGN.  A sign carrying the name of a building, its date of
erection, monumental citations, commemorative tablets and the like when
carved into stone, concrete or similar material or made bronze, aluminum or
other permanent type of construction, and made an integral part of the
structure.



   MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF SIGN.  The vertical distance measured from the
nearest finished grade to the highest limit of such sign.



   MINIMUM HEIGHT OF SIGN.  The vertical distance measured from the
nearest finished grade to the lower limit of such sign.



   MONUMENT SIGN.  A sign whose base and structure is positioned
primarily on the ground and is typically solid from grade to the top of the
structure. MONUMENT SIGNS shall not exceed thirty six (36) square feet in
area and not more than six (6) feet in height.



   NON-COMMERCIAL SPEECH.  Dissemination of messages not classified as
commercial speech, which include, but are not limited to, messages concerning
political, religious, social, ideological, public service and informational
topics.



   NONCONFORMING SIGN.



      (1)   LEGAL.  A sign which lawfully existed at the time of
the passage of this zoning code or amendment thereto, but which does not
conform with the regulations of this zoning code.



      (2)   ILLEGAL.  A sign which was constructed after the
passage of this zoning code or amendments thereto, and does not conform with
the regulations of this zoning code.



   OFF-PREMISE SIGN.  A commercial speech sign advertising a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered elsewhere
other than upon the property on which the sign is located.



   ON-PREMISE SIGN.  A commercial speech sign advertising a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered upon the
property on which the sign is located.



   PORTABLE SIGN.  A sign so designed as to be movable from one (1)
location to another and which is not permanently attached to the ground or
structure, such as portable or wheeled signs, or signs on parked vehicles
where the sign is the primary use of the vehicle.



   PROJECTING SIGN.  Any sign that projects more than twelve (12) inches
out over the front edge of the roof structure and/or the face of the building
at a perpendicular angle to the building.



   PYLON SIGN.  A self-supporting sign and sign structure, both of which
are not more than thirty-five (35) feet in height. The sign shall be limited
in area to a maximum of two hundred (200) square feet per face.



   REAL ESTATE SIGN.  Any sign pertaining to the sale, lease or rental of
land or buildings. Such signs may only be placed upon the land or buildings
being advertised for sale, lease or rental.



   ROOF SIGN.  Any sign erected, constructed or attached, wholly or in
part, upon or over the roof of a building. The sign shall be limited in area
to a maximum of fifty (50) square feet per face and a maximum of two (2) sign
faces.



   SHOPPING CENTER.  Any contiguous group of two (2) or more retail
stores or service establishments, comprising ten thousand (10,000) or more
square feet of floor area, which provides off-street parking utilized in
common by patrons.



   SHOPPING CENTER IDENTIFICATION SIGN.  A monument, freestanding or
pylon sign and sign structure adjacent to an arterial street, which is
limited to thirty-five (35) feet in height. The sign shall be limited in area
to a maximum of two hundred (200) square feet.



   SIGN.  Any letter, word or symbol, poster, picture, statuary, reading
matter or representation in the nature of advertisement, announcement,
message or visual communication, whether painted, posted, printed, affixed or
constructed, including all associated brackets, braces, supports, wires and
structures, which is displayed for informational or communicative purposes.



   SIGN FACE.  The surface of the sign upon, against, or through which
the message of the sign is exhibited.



   SIGN STRUCTURE.  The framework and all associated brackets, braces,
supports, wires and structures used to display an advertisement,
announcement, message or visual communication.



   TEMPORARY SIGN.  A non-permanent sign affixed, erected or displayed on
a parcel for a limited period of time, not to exceed ninety (90) days per
improved parcel.



   TOTAL ALLOWABLE SIGN AREA.  The maximum allowable gross surface area
in square feet of a sign or signs. The maximum number of signs cannot be
arranged and integrated as to create a surface area in excess of the
requirements.



   TRAFFIC SIGN.  A sign erected by a governmental unit for the purpose
of directing or guiding traffic.



   WALL SIGN.  A single-faced sign affixed directly to or painted on, or
otherwise inscribed on an exterior wall or window of any building, and
projecting no more than twelve (12) inches.



   WINDOW SIGN.  Any building sign, pictures, symbol, or combination
thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity, business,
commodity, event, sale, or service, that is placed inside a window or upon
the window panes or glass, and is visible from the exterior of the window.
Such sign requires no permit and shall not be counted towards the total
allowable sign area.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010; Am. Ord. 419, passed 12-17-2013; Am. Ord. 452,
passed 10-17-2017)



§ 150.213  PERMITS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful for any person
to erect, alter or relocate within the city any sign as defined in this
subchapter without first obtaining a permit to do so, and making payment of
the permit fee and surcharge.



   (B)   Those persons wishing to maintain or repair signs may do so
without a permit when the maintenance does not alter the location or size of
the existing sign.



   (C)   Those persons wishing to replace sign components (i.e., sign
face(s), structure) may do so after first obtaining a permit. Permits for
replacement of sign components shall not be subject to a permit fee or
surcharge, so long as the work does not alter the location or size of the
existing sign.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010; Am. Ord. 419, passed 12-17-2013; Am. Ord. 452,
passed 10-17-2017)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.214  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   Each application for a permit under this subchapter shall be submitted
to the Zoning Administrator, and shall include a permit fee as established by
City Council resolution, and surcharge based upon the valuation of the sign.
Temporary sign permit applications shall also include a permit fee as
established by City Council resolution, but are exempt from the surcharge.
Each application shall state or have attached thereto the following
information.



   (A)   Name, address, and telephone number of person for whom sign is
being erected. Name of person, firm, corporation or association erecting
structure.



   (B)   A complete description of the sign and a sketch showing its
size, manner of construction and such other information as shall be necessary
to inform the Zoning Administrator of the kind, size, material and
construction of the sign, including the proposed location of the sign and the
location of building, structure or lot to which, or upon which the sign is to
be attached or erected.



   (C)   Position of the sign and other advertising structures in
relation to nearby buildings or structures, and lighting details.



   (D)   At the request of the Zoning Administrator/Building Official,
two (2) drawings of the plans and specifications, and method of construction
and attachment to the building or in the ground, any and all additional
information as deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator/Building
Inspector.



   (E)   The Zoning Administrator/Building Official may waive
requirements for technical information specified above where such information
is not necessary to the determination of compliance.



   (F)   If a sign authorized by permit has not been installed within
six (6) months after the date of issuance, the permit shall become null and
void.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010; Am. Ord. 419, passed 12-17-2013)



§ 150.215  GENERAL PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL SIGNS.



   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder and of the
owner and/or lessee of the property and structure upon which any sign is
located to:



      (1)   Keep the ground around any sign free of weeds and litter;



      (2)   All signs shall be maintained and kept in a safe
condition by the owner. A sign shall be repainted if its paint begins to
fade, chip or color;



      (3)   Immediately repair or remove any sign or sign structure
which becomes unsafe, in a state of disrepair, insecure or a menace to the
public following written notice of such condition from the city;



      (4)   All signs shall comply with maintenance sections of the
Minnesota State Building Code as may be amended; and



      (5)   When electrical signs are installed, the installation
shall be subject to the State Building Code and/or Electrical Code as may be
amended.



   (B)   No sign or sign structure shall be placed on or protrude over
the public right-of-way, except wall (maximum protrusion twelve (12) inches),
canopy, awning, and marquee signs. Any sign affixed to the top side of a
canopy/awning/marquee shall not exceed twelve (12) inches in height.
Canopy/awning/marquee structures and signs shall be set back three (3) feet
from the curb line. Exception: schools and churches, upon approval of the
Public Works Director and Zoning Administrator, may request that the city
install a directional sign on a city right-of-way. Sign to be paid for by the
church or school. Limit of two (2) per church or school. No face sign shall
be larger than two (2) feet, six (6) inches in any dimension, and shall be no
more than six and one-quarter (6.25) square feet in area. The bottom of the
sign shall be a minimum of seven (7) feet above grade at the curb line, and
shall be located so as not to interfere with public roads and street signs
and they shall maintain a safe site distance at street intersections. Signs
must be properly maintained and may be removed by the Public Works Director
if they are damaged or in violation of any part of this zoning code. The cost
of sign replacement shall be paid by the church or school.



   (C)   All signs located over public right-of-ways or over public or
private access routes shall be located a minimum of eight (8) feet over
walking surfaces, and seventeen (17) feet, four (4) inches over
vehicle-related access routes.



   (D)   The temporary use of portable signs and similar devices shall
require a permit. The permit shall be prominently displayed during the period
of validity.



   (E)   All height restrictions on signs shall include height of sign
structure, and shall be measured from nearest finished grade.



   (F)   The top edge of a wall sign shall not extend above the mean
level of the roof, except where there is a mansard roof, in which case the
sign shall then not exceed the height of the mansard.



   (G)   Where a building contains more than one (1) business, the
allowable sign area for any single business is its portion of the gross
square footage of the building applied as a percentage to the allowable sign
area of the entire building.



   (H)   Signs are allowable as an accessory use in all districts
except where prohibited by this subchapter.



   (I)   Any business closing its doors for business or permanently
going out of business must remove signage within ninety (90) days of the
closure of the business.



   (J)   All conforming signs and sign structures not used by a tenant
or owner shall be removed by the owner of the premises after six (6) months
of non-use.



   (K)   Signage shall be subject to zoning code § 150.013 (Traffic
Visibility).



   (L)   A sign shall be allowed as a principal use in the B-2 (General
Business) District. This provision shall not include temporary signs as
defined and regulated herein.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010; Am. Ord. 419, passed 12-17-2013: Am. Ord. 452,
passed 10-17-2017)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.216  PROHIBITED SIGNS.



   The following signs are hereby prohibited:



   (A)   Signs that by reason of position, shape or color would
interfere with the proper function of a traffic sign, signal or be misleading
to vehicular or pedestrian traffic;



   (B)   Signs within a public right-of-way or easement, except for
signs installed by governmental units or as otherwise permitted by this
subchapter;



   (C)   Signs that resemble any official marker erected by a
governmental agency or that display such words as “stop” or “danger”
which are not erected by legal authority;



   (D)   Signs tacked, posted, or otherwise affixed to trees, fences,
poles or other structures not considered to be sign structures;



   (E)   Roof signs, except in the B-1 (Central Business) District;



   (F)   Signs painted or attached to vehicles where the vehicle is
parked on public or private property and not intended to be moved;



   (G)   Portable signs, except by temporary permit granted by the
Zoning Administrator;



   (H)   The following signs larger than nine (9) square feet in area
are prohibited: memorial signs or tablets, integral signs, names of buildings
and date of erection when cut into any masonry surface, or when constructed
of bronze or other noncombustible material and attached to the building; and



   (I)   Lighter than air, inflatable devices, other than balloons,
utilized primarily to draw attention to an object, product, place, activity,
person, institution, organization or business are prohibited within all
zoning districts, except for the B-2 (General Business) District.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010; Am. Ord. 419, passed 12-17-2013; Am. Ord. 452,
passed 10-17-2017)



§ 150.217  SIGNS REQUIRING NO PERMIT.



   The following signs shall be permitted without a permit.



   (A)   Non-commercial speech signs as defined herein.



      (1)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this subchapter,
all signs of any size containing non-commercial speech may be posted from
forty-six (46) days before the state primary in a state general election year
until ten (10) days following the state general election, and thirteen (13)
weeks prior to any special election until ten (10) days following the special
election. Such signs shall only be installed with the permission of the
property owner or lessee.



      (2)   One (1) non-commercial speech sign is allowed on each
property outside of the above specified time period in excess of and in
addition to the sign limitations of this subchapter.



   (B)   Directional signs located on, above or beside entrances or
exits to buildings or driveways, which direct pedestrians, such as
“Employees Entrance”, “Exit Only”, “Rest Rooms”, provided that
such signs are no more than four (4) square feet in area.



   (C)   Temporary signs denoting the architect, engineer or
contractor, when placed upon work under construction, provided each such sign
is not more than thirty-two (32) square feet in area, and removed upon
completion of construction. Construction signs shall not be erected before
issuance of a building permit or remain after issuance of certificate of
occupancy. Construction signs shall be confined to the site of the
construction, alteration or repair. One (1) sign shall be permitted for each
major street the project abuts.



   (D)   Integral signs as defined herein.



   (E)   Informational signs as defined herein.



   (F)   Real estate signs. Signs must be removed within fourteen (14)
days of the closing or rental of property. Signs may not measure more than
sixteen (16) square feet in residential districts, or more than thirty-two
(32) square feet in all other districts. There shall be only one (1) sign per
premise. Properties with more than one (1) street frontage are allowed a
maximum of two (2) signs. Such signs shall not be less than five (5) feet
from the right-of-way line unless flat against the structure.



   (G)   Flags, badges or insignias of any government, governmental
agency or any civic, religious, fraternal or similar organization.



   (H)   Rummage/garage sale signs.



   (I)   Window signs as defined herein.



   (J)   Public signs, street signs, warning signs or signs of public
service companies for the purpose of safety.



   (K)   Lighter than air, inflatable devices utilized primarily to
draw attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution,
organization or business shall only be allowed in the B-2 (General Business)
District.



   (L)   Bench signs as defined herein. City Council approval is
required prior to sign installation if the bench is located within a public
right-of-way or easement.



   (M)   Ball field, score board, and park advertising. Such signs
shall be permitted in all districts subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   Advertising signs shall require City Council approval
prior to sign installation;



      (2)   Signs shall be placed in such a way so as to minimize
the greatest possible extent of exposure to adjacent residential properties
and public right-of-ways; and



      (3)   Signs shall not be illuminated when not in use for ball
games or other activities.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010; Am. Ord. 419, passed 12-17-2013; Am. Ord. 452,
passed 10-17-2017)



§ 150.218  SIGNS PERMITTED IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   The following signs shall be allowed in the R-1 (Single Family
Residential) and R-4 (Low Density Residential) Districts.



      (1)   One (1) address sign shall be required for each
principal building. Such sign requires no permit and shall not count towards
the total allowable sign area.



      (2)   One (1) nameplate or professional identification sign
not exceeding four (4)  square feet in area. Such sign requires no permit.



      (3)   Residential developments consisting of ten (10) or more
lots may install a monument area identification sign. The number of
residential development identification signs shall be based on the number of
entrances to the development from arterial and collector streets as
determined by the Zoning Administrator. Such signs shall not exceed thirty
six (36) square feet in area per face or six (6) feet in height and no sign
shall be so constructed as to have more than two (2) sign faces. The location
of such signs requires administrative approval from the city.



      (4)   Non-residential uses of residential property may be
allowed area identification signs as follows:



         (a)   One (1) wall sign not exceeding thirty-two (32)
square feet is allowed per street frontage, except that religious uses and
public institutions may be allowed one (1) wall sign not exceeding
seventy-five (75) square feet per street frontage. Religious uses and public
institutions containing more than one (1) principal structure or entity may
be allowed one (1) wall sign not exceeding seventy-five (75) square feet per
structure or entity per street frontage.



         (b)   One (1) monument sign shall be permitted per
street frontage for each improved property regardless of how many separate
non-residential uses are located on said property.



      (5)   All signs shall be setback a minimum of five (5) feet
from any property line, and no sign shall exceed six (6) feet in height, as
measured from the nearest finished grade to the highest limit of the sign.



      (6)   Signage shall be subject to zoning code § 150.013
(Traffic Visibility).



   (B)   The following signs shall be allowed in the R-2 (Manufactured
Home Park) District.



      (1)   One (1) address sign shall be required for each
principal building. Such sign requires no permit and shall not count towards
the total allowable sign area.



      (2)   Each manufactured home park may install up to a maximum
of two (2) monument or free-standing area identification signs. Such signs
shall comply with individual height and area requirements as defined herein
and no sign shall be so constructed as to have more than two (2) sign faces.
The location of such signs requires administrative approval from the city.



      (3)   Signage shall be subject to zoning code § 150.013
(Traffic Visibility).



   (C)   The following signs shall be allowed in the R-3 (Multiple
Dwelling) District.



      (1)   One (1) address sign shall be required for each
principal building. Such sign requires no permit and shall not count towards
the total allowable sign area.



      (2)   One (1) nameplate or professional identification sign
not exceeding four (4) square feet in area. Such sign requires no permit.



      (3)   One (1) wall or canopy/marquee/awning sign for each
multi-family dwelling structure containing nine (9) or more units. Such sign
shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area.



      (4)   Multi-family dwelling structures containing nine (9) or
more units and residential developments consisting of ten (10) or more lots
may install a monument area identification sign. The number of residential
development area identification signs shall be based on the number of
entrances to the development from arterial and collector streets as
determined by the Zoning Administrator. Such signs shall not exceed
thirty-six (36) square feet in area per face or six (6) feet in height and no
sign shall be so constructed as to have more than two (2) sign faces. The
location of such signs requires administrative approval from the city.



      (5)   Non-residential uses of residential property may be
allowed signs as follows:



         (a)   One (1) wall sign not exceeding thirty-two (32)
square feet is allowed per street frontage, except that religious uses and
public institutions may be allowed one (1) wall sign not exceeding
seventy-five (75) square feet per street frontage. Religious uses and public
institutions containing more than one principal structure or entity may be
allowed one (1) wall sign not exceeding seventy-five (75) square feet per
structure or entity per street frontage.



         (b)   One (1) monument sign shall be permitted per
street frontage for each improved property regardless of how many separate
non-residential uses are located on said property.



      (6)   All signs shall be setback a minimum of five (5) feet
from any property line and no sign shall exceed six (6) feet in height as
measured from the nearest finished grade to the highest limit of said sign.



      (7)   Signage shall be subject to zoning code § 150.013
(Traffic Visibility.)



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010; Am. Ord. 419, passed 12-17-2013; Am. Ord. 452,
passed 10-17-2017)



§ 150.219  SIGNS PERMITTED IN COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   The following signs shall be allowed in the B-1 (Central
Business) District.



      (1)   One (1) address sign shall be required for each
principal building. Such sign requires no permit and shall not count towards
the total allowable sign area.



      (2)   Any combination of wall, monument, freestanding or
canopy/marquee/awning signs as follows:



         (a)   No individual business shall place more than four
(4) wall signs on the principal building in which it is located;



         (b)   One (1) monument or freestanding sign shall be
permitted per street frontage for each improved property, regardless of how
many separate businesses are located on the property. Such signs shall comply
with individual height and area requirements as defined herein, and shall be
allowed a zero (0) foot setback from all property lines, except it shall be
twenty (20) feet from any property line abutting an R district;



         (c)   Canopy/marquee/awning signs as regulated herein.
Only the portions of the canopy/marquee/awning with lettering or logos shall
be counted towards the total allowable sign area;



         (d)   One (1) roof sign shall be permitted per building
regardless of how many separate businesses are located within the building.
Such signs shall comply with area requirements as defined herein.



      (3)   The total allowable sign area for properties within the
B-1 District shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total gross
silhouette area of the front wall of the principal building, except that
properties with more than one (1) street frontage (including alleys) shall be
permitted a total allowable sign area not to exceed twenty percent (20%) of
the total gross silhouette area for each wall abutting a street frontage.



      (4)   The total allowable sign area for each business
occupying a portion of a building shall correspond to its portion of the
gross square footage of the building applied as a percentage to the total
allowable sign area of the entire building.



      (5)   The GROSS SILHOUETTE shall be defined as that area
within an outline drawing of the front of the building or storefront as may
be applicable.



      (6)   In no case shall an individual sign exceed one hundred
(100) square feet in area, nor shall two (2) or more signs be so arranged or
integrated as to cause an advertising surface over two hundred (200) square
feet in area.



      (7)   Gasoline pump island canopies shall be allowed three (3)
signs in addition to those otherwise permitted on the principal structure.
Canopy signs shall not exceed ten (10) feet in length or twenty (20) square
feet in area each, and shall not be placed on the same side of the canopy.
Such signs shall not count towards the total allowable sign area.



      (8)   One (1) sidewalk sign (sandwich board) shall be
permitted on a public or private sidewalk as follows:



         (a)   Signage shall not obstruct free pedestrian passage
on the sidewalk or create a safety hazard as determined by the Zoning
Administrator. Further, a minimum of four (4) feet of sidewalk, as measured
from the curb, shall remain free of signage;



         (b)   Signage shall not exceed ten (10) square feet in
area per side and shall have a maximum of two (2) sides;



         (c)   Signage shall be located immediately in front of
the place of business or along the primary pedestrian sidewalk for a business
or business complex. Under no circumstance shall the signage be placed in the
middle of a sidewalk or adjacent to the curb;



         (d)   Signage shall be maintained in a neat and orderly
fashion;



         (e)   Signage shall be subject to zoning code § 150.013
(Traffic Visibility);



         (f)   Signage within the public right-of-way shall be
removed from the sidewalk at the end of each business day;



         (g)   Signage may be removed by the city if it
interferes with any city activity (i.e., snow removal, maintenance, safety);



         (h)   Any injury or damage caused by the placement of
the sign in the public right-of-way shall be the sole liability and
responsibility of the business owner and/or the owner of the sign; and



         (i)   Signage shall be allowed without a permit and
shall not count towards the total allowable sign area.



      (9)   Dynamic display signs are permitted subject to the
following regulations:



         (a)   The message may change no more often than every
eight (8) seconds;



         (b)   The message must not continuously scroll or flash
but shall remain constant for a minimum of eight (8) seconds; and



         (c)   The sign must be designed so as not to direct rays
of light onto public right-of-way or adjacent property thereby creating a
nuisance and potential safety hazard.



      (10)   Signage shall be subject to zoning code § 150.013
(Traffic Visibility).



   (B)   The following signs shall be allowed in the B-2 (General
Business) District.



      (1)   One (1) address sign shall be required for each
principal building. Such sign requires no permit and shall not count towards
the total allowable sign area.



      (2)   Any combination of wall, monument, freestanding, pylon
and canopy/marquee/awning (as regulated below) signs as follows:



         (a)   No individual business shall place more than four
(4) wall signs on the principal building in which it is located, except that
businesses with two (2) or more street frontages shall be allowed a maximum
of five (5) wall signs;



         (b)   One (1) monument, freestanding and pylon sign
shall be permitted per street frontage for each improved property regardless
of how many separate businesses are located on the property. Such signs shall
comply with individual height and area requirements as defined herein, and
shall be setback a minimum of three (3) feet from all property lines; and/or



         (c)   Canopy/marquee/awning signs as regulated herein.
Only the portions of the canopy/marquee/awning with lettering or logos shall
be counted towards the total allowable sign area.



      (3)   The total allowable sign area for properties within the
B-2 District shall be seven hundred (700) square feet.



      (4)   The total allowable sign area for each business
occupying a portion of a building shall correspond to its portion of the
gross square footage of the building applied as a percentage to the total
allowable sign area of the entire building.



      (5)   The GROSS SILHOUETTE shall be defined as that area
within an outline drawing of the front of the building or storefront as may
be applicable.



      (6)   In no case shall an individual sign exceed two hundred
(200) square feet in area, nor shall two (2) or more signs be so arranged or
integrated as to cause an advertising surface over two hundred (200) square
feet in area.



      (7)   Gasoline pump island canopies shall be allowed a maximum
of three (3) signs in addition to those otherwise permitted on the principal
structure. Canopy signs shall not exceed ten (10) feet in length or twenty
(20) square feet in area each, and shall not be placed on the same side of
the canopy. Such signs shall not count towards the total allowable sign area.



      (8)   Establishments having a drive-through lane shall be
allowed a maximum of two (2) on-site menu boards in addition to those signs
otherwise permitted on the property. Each menu board shall be limited to
fifty (50) square feet in area.



      (9)   Independent of the total allowable sign area for
individual businesses, shopping centers shall be allowed one (1) shopping
center identification sign, not to exceed two hundred (200) square feet in
area or thirty-five (35) feet in height. Such signs shall be limited to
locations adjacent to major entrances abutting arterial streets.



      (10)   Dynamic display signs are permitted, subject to the
following regulations:



         (a)   The message may change no more often than every
eight (8) seconds;



         (b)   The message must not continuously scroll or flash,
but shall remain constant for a minimum of eight (8) seconds; and



         (c)   The sign must be designed so as not to direct rays
of light onto public right-of-way or adjacent property thereby creating a
nuisance and potential safety hazard.



      (11)   Signage shall be subject to zoning code § 150.013
(Traffic Visibility).



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010; Am. Ord. 419, passed 12-17-2013; Am. Ord. 452,
passed 10-17-2017)



§ 150.220  SIGNS PERMITTED IN INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.



   The following signs shall be allowed in the I-1 (Limited Industrial)
and I-2 (General Industrial) Districts.



   (A)   One (1) address sign shall be required for each principal
building. Such sign requires no permit and shall not count towards the total
allowable sign area.



   (B)   Any combination of wall, monument, freestanding, pylon and
canopy/marquee/awning signs as follows:



      (1)   No individual business shall place more than two (2)
wall signs on the principal building in which it is located, except that
businesses with two (2) or more street frontages shall be allowed a maximum
of three (3) wall signs;



      (2)   One (1) monument, freestanding and pylon sign shall be
permitted per street frontage for each improved property regardless of how
many separate businesses are located on the property. Such signs shall comply
with individual height and area requirements as defined herein, and shall be
setback a minimum of ten (10) feet from all property lines; and



      (3)   Canopy/marquee/awning signs as regulated herein. Only
the portions of the canopy/marquee/awning with lettering or logos shall be
counted towards the total allowable sign area.



   (C)   The total allowable sign area for properties within the I-1
and I-2 Districts shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total gross
silhouette area of the front wall of the principal building, except that
properties with more that one (1) street frontage shall be permitted a total
allowable sign area not to exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total gross
silhouette area for each wall abutting a street frontage.



   (D)   The total allowable sign area for each business occupying a
portion of a building shall correspond to its portion of the gross square
footage of the building applied as a percentage to the total allowable sign
area of the entire building.



   (E)   The GROSS SILHOUETTE shall be defined as that area within an
outline drawing of the front of the building or storefront as may be
applicable.



   (F)   In no case shall an individual sign exceed two hundred (200)
square feet in area, nor shall two (2) or more signs be so arranged or
integrated as to cause an advertising surface over two hundred (200) square
feet in area.



   (G)   Permanent signs in the industrial districts shall be set back
at least ten (10) feet from a public right-of-way, except in the case of a
street that does not meet the requirements or § 153.049 of the subdivision
code, regulating street design. In such case, permanent signs shall be set
back ten (10) feet from the recommended right-of-way for the type of road
classified in § 153.049 of the subdivision code.



   (H)   Dynamic display signs are permitted subject to the following
regulations:



      (1)   The message may change no more often than every eight
(8) seconds;



      (2)   The message must not continuously scroll or flash but
shall remain constant for a minimum of eight (8) seconds; and



      (3)   The sign must be designed so as not to direct rays of
light onto public right-of- way or adjacent property thereby creating a
nuisance and potential safety hazard.



   (I)   Signage shall be subject to zoning code § 150.013 (Traffic
Visibility).



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010; Am. Ord. 419, passed 12-17-2013; Am. Ord. 452,
passed 10-17-2017)



§ 150.221  TEMPORARY SIGNS.



   Temporary signs shall be allowed within all commercial and industrial
districts in excess of and in addition to the sign limitations of this
subchapter, as well as in the R-1, R-3 and R-4 residential districts  when
the use is non-residential. The following provisions shall apply.



   (A)   Each application for a temporary sign permit under this
section shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator and shall include a
permit fee as established by City Council resolution.



   (B)   No more than two (2) temporary signs shall be allowed on any
parcel at any given time.



   (C)   Temporary sign permits shall expire ninety (90) days from the
date of issuance.



   (D)   Temporary signs shall only be permitted on private property or
by City Council approval if located on public property or right-of-way.



   (E)   Signage shall be subject to zoning code § 150.013 (Traffic
Visibility).



   (F)   Each temporary sign is limited to sixty-four (64) square feet
in area per sign face, and shall have no more than two (2) sign faces.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010; Am. Ord. 419, passed 12-17-2013; Am. Ord. 452,
passed 10-17-2017)



§ 150.222  ILLUMINATION.



   External illumination of signs shall be so constructed and maintained
that the source of light is not visible from the public right-of-way or
adjacent residential property.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010; Am. Ord. 419, passed 12-17-2013; Am. Ord. 452,
passed 10-17-2017)



§ 150.223  NON-CONFORMING SIGNS.



   (A)   All signs, except temporary signs, existing upon the effective
date of this subchapter shall be allowed to continue in the manner of
operation providing there is no change in use. Temporary signs may only
continue with a temporary permit.



   (B)   Any sign erected before the passage of this subchapter shall
not be rebuilt, moved to a new location on the affected property or altered,
except for the changing of movable parts of signs designed for changes or the
repainting of display matter for maintenance purposes, without being brought
into compliance with the requirements of this subchapter.



   (C)   Any sign in violation of this subchapter may be subject to
confiscation. Confiscated signs shall be held by the city for ten (10)
business days and, if not reclaimed by the owner, the signs shall be disposed
of.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010; Am. Ord. 419, passed 12-17-2013; Am. Ord. 452,
passed 10-17-2017)



§ 150.224  ABATEMENT.



   If the Zoning Administrator finds that any sign has been erected
without the necessary permit(s) or any sign is being maintained in violation
of any provision of this subchapter, he or she may give written notice of
such violation to the sign installer, to the permit holder and/or to the
owner, lessee or manager of the property. If after receiving the notice such
person fails to remove or alter the sign so as to comply with the provisions
of this subchapter, the sign shall be deemed to be a nuisance and may be
abated by the city. The cost of such reasonable attorney’s fees may be
levied as a special assessment against the property upon which the sign is
located.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010; Am. Ord. 419, passed 12-17-2013; Am. Ord. 452,
passed 10-17-2017)



§ 150.225  APPEALS.



   An applicant for a sign permit or a permit holder may appeal any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning
Administrator/Building Official in the enforcement of this subchapter, by
filing a letter of appeal with the Zoning Administrator, requesting a hearing
before the Planning Commission and the City Council. The Planning Commission
shall make a recommendation to the City Council regarding the appeal, and the
City Council shall decide all such appeals.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010; Am. Ord. 419, passed 12-17-2013; Am. Ord. 452,
passed 10-17-2017)



§ 150.226  VARIANCES.



   The Planning Commission shall hear and make recommendations to the City
Council on all requests for variances. The City Council shall decide all
requests for variances from the literal provisions of this subchapter. The
Council may approve such a variance upon a finding that the variance meets
each of the following criteria, although it shall not be required to do so.



   (A)   There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or
conditions applying to the property and/or structure(s) in question, which
circumstances or conditions do not apply generally to their property and/or
structures.



   (B)   The variance is necessary for the preservation of substantial
property rights of the applicant.



   (C)   Under the circumstances of the particular situation, the
variance will not adversely affect the health, safety, or general welfare of
residents of the surrounding area or of the community as a whole.



   (D)   The variance will not conflict with the Comprehensive Plan.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010; Am. Ord. 419, passed 12-17-2013; Am. Ord. 452,
passed 10-17-2017)



§ 150.227  SUBSTITUTION CLAUSE.



   The owner of any sign otherwise allowed by this subchapter may
substitute a non-commercial speech sign in lieu of any other commercial
speech sign or other non-commercial speech sign. The purpose of  this
provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over
non-commercial speech, or favoring of any particular non-commercial speech
over any other non-commercial speech. This provision prevails over any more
specific provision to the contrary.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010; Am. Ord. 419, passed 12-17-2013; Am. Ord. 452,
passed 10-17-2017)



TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNAS



§ 150.240  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   The city desires placement of towers to allow for the best
telecommunication abilities of its citizens and businesses, but also to limit
the number of towers by supporting collocation of carriers on a
telecommunications antenna or tower. The city desires that towers not be
placed on environmentally sensitive areas.



   (B)   In order to accommodate the communication needs of residents
and businesses while protecting the public health, safety, and general
welfare of the community, the City Council finds that these regulations are
necessary in order to:



      (1)   Facilitate provision of wireless communications services
to the residents and businesses of the city;



      (2)   Minimize adverse visual effects of towers through
careful design and siting standards;



      (3)   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower
failure through structural standards and setback requirements; and



      (4)   Maximize the use of existing and approved towers and
buildings to accommodate new wireless telecommunication antennas in order to
reduce the number of towers needed to serve the community. This includes the
co-locating of telecommunication carriers.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.241  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter and other applicable ordinances certain
words and terms are defined as follows:



   ANTENNA.  Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting
or radiating electromagnetic waves, including but not limited to directional
antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes, and satellite dishes, and
omni-directional antennas, such as whip antennas.



   COMMERCIAL RECEIVING AND/OR TRANSMITTING ANTENNA. Any antenna erected
for the commercial use of the information.



   COMMERCIAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE FACILITY.  A facility
that transmits and/or receives electromagnetic signals. It includes antennas,
microwave dishes, horns, and other types of equipment for the transmission or
receipt of such signals, telecommunication towers or similar structures
supporting said equipment, equipment buildings, parking areas, and other
accessory development and related equipment.



   COMMERCIAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES.  Licensed commercial
wireless telecommunication services including cellular, personal
communications services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced
specialized mobilized (ESMR), paging, and similar services that are marketed
to the general public.



   EQUIPMENT BUILDING, SHELTER OR CABINET  A building or cabinet used by
telecommunication providers to house equipment for a facility.



   FALL ZONE.  The distance equal to the height of the telecommunication
tower or antenna.



   LATTICE TOWER.  A self-supporting structure, erected on the ground,
which consists of metal strips or bars to support antennas and related
equipment.



   MONOPOLE.  A wireless communication facility, which consists of a
monopolar structure, erected on the ground to support wireless communication
antennas and connecting appurtenances.



   PRIVATE RECEIVING AND/OR TRANSMITTING ANTENNA.  Any antenna erected
for the non-commercial use of the information.



   PUBLIC UTILITY.  Persons, corporations, or governments supplying gas,
electric, transportation, water, sewer, or land line telephone service to the
general public. For the purpose of this subchapter, commercial wireless
communication service facilities shall not be considered public utility uses,
and are defined separately.



   RELATED EQUIPMENT.  All equipment ancillary to the transmission and
reception of voice and data radio frequencies. Such equipment may include,
but is not limited to, cable, conduit and connectors.



   STRUCTURE RIDGELINE.  The line along the top of a roof or top of a
structure, if it has no roof.



   TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY.  A facility that transmits and/or receives
electromagnetic signals. It includes antennas, microwave dishes, horns, and
other types of equipment for the transmission or receipt of such signals,
telecommunication towers or similar structures supporting said equipment,
equipment buildings, parking areas, other accessory development and related
equipment.



   TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY - CO-LOCATED.  A telecommunication facility
comprised of a single telecommunication tower or building supporting one or
more antennas, dishes, or similar devices owned or used by more than one
public or private entity.



   TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY - COMMERCIAL.  A telecommunication facility
that is operated primarily for a business purpose or purposes.



   TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY - MULTIPLE USER.  A telecommunication
facility comprised of multiple telecommunication towers or buildings
supporting one (1) or more antennas owned or used by more than one (1) public
or private entity, excluding research and development industries with
antennas to serve internal uses only.



   TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY - NON-COMMERCIAL.  A telecommunication
facility that is operated solely for a non-business purpose.



   TELECOMMUNICATION TOWER.  Any ground or roof mounted pole, spire,
structure, or combination thereof taller than fifteen (15) feet in height,
including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, and masts, intended
primarily for the purpose of mounting an antenna, meteorological device, or
similar apparatus above grade.



   TOWER.  Any pole, wire, structure or combination thereof, including
support lines, cables, wires, braces and masts intended primarily for the
purpose of mounting antenna or to serve as an antenna.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.242  EXEMPT TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES.



   The following are exempt from the regulations contained in this
subchapter, with the exception that any telecommunication tower or antenna
taller than fifteen (15) feet in height shall require the issuance of a
building permit prior to installation/construction.



   (A)   A single round or building mounted receive-only radio or
television antenna including any mast, for the sole use of the resident
occupying a residential parcel on which the radio or television antenna is
located, with an antenna height not exceeding thirty-five (35) feet as
measured from grade.



   (B)   A ground or building mounted citizens band radio antenna
including any mast, if the height (post and antenna) does not exceed
thirty-five (35) feet as measured from grade.



   (C)   A citizens band radio antenna, ground, building, or tower
mounted antenna operated by a federally licensed amateur radio operator as
part of the Amateur Radio Service, existing at the time of the adoption of
this subchapter.



   (D)   A ground or building mounted receive only radio or television
satellite dish antenna (TVRO) provided the dish is not located in the front
yard of the parcel in which it is located and provided the height of the dish
does not exceed three (3) feet above the height of the ridgeline of the
primary structure on the parcel.



   (E)   A ground or building mounted digital satellite link panel for
high speed internet usage provided that the device is not located in the
front yard of the parcel in which it is located and provided the height of
the dish does not exceed three (3) feet above the height of the ridgeline of
the primary structure on the parcel.



   (F)   City owned and operated towers supporting receive and/or
transmit antennas, including supporting structures, for all public safety and
service purposes, existing at the time of the adoption of this subchapter.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.243  AMATEUR RADIO FACILITIES.



   (A)   In accordance with the Federal Communications Commission’s
preemptive ruling PRB 1, towers erected for the primary purpose of supporting
amateur radio antennas may exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height within
residential zoning districts. Such towers are subject to the site plan review
process prior to installation. It shall be the responsibility of the
applicant to provide the technical information necessary to demonstrate that
the proposed height is necessary to successfully engage in effective amateur
radio communications at the proposed location. Towers which exceed
thirty-five (35) feet in height when fully extended but are collapsible to
thirty-five (35) feet or less in height are exempt from the site plan review
process.



   (B)   Towers supporting amateur radio antennas in residential zoning
districts and conforming to all applicable provisions of this subchapter
shall be allowed in the front, rear or side yards; however, the fall zone
must not overlay on any primary residential structure of an abutting property
or public right-of-way.



§ 150.244  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Towers and antennas shall be regulated and permitted pursuant
to this subchapter and shall not be regulated or permitted as essential
service structures, public utilities or private utilities.



   (B)   No new or existing telecommunications service shall interfere
with public safety telecommunications, or private telecommunications,
including but not limited to, radio, television and personal communications,
in accordance with rules and regulations of the Federal Communications
Commission.



   (C)   Towers shall not encroach upon any easements.



   (D)   No commercial messages shall be placed on towers or antennas.
The use of any portion of a tower for signs other than warning or equipment
information signs is prohibited, except for one (1) identification sign not
exceeding six (6) square feet in area.



   (E)   Towers and antennas shall be installed according to
manufacturer’s specifications.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.245  ZONING DISTRICTS.



   (A)   The city will allow telecommunication towers and antennas on
city-owned land, areas zoned Central Business (B-1), General Business (B-2),
Limited Industrial (I-1), and General Industrial (I-2) with a conditional use
permit and a site plan. Towers in these locations will be allowed in the rear
and side yards only.



   (B)   In residential zoning districts, the city will allow
commercial telecommunication towers taller than thirty-five (35) feet in
height with a conditional use permit and site plan only if all other options
are exhausted. No variance on setbacks is allowed in these districts and the
towers shall only be allowed in rear and side yards.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.246  SETBACKS.



   Towers shall meet the setback requirements for principle structures of
the underlying zoning district. Setbacks equal to the height of the tower
shall be established on sites that are adjacent to churches, schools, gas
stations, and residential districts. Associated equipment must meet all
applicable zoning setbacks.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.247  LIGHTING.



   Towers shall not be illuminated by artificial means and shall not
display strobe lights unless such lighting is specifically required by the
Federal Aviation Administration or other federal or state authority for a
particular tower. When incorporated into the approved design of the tower,
light fixtures to illuminate ball fields, parking lots, or similar areas may
be attached to the tower.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.248  DESIGN AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Antennas and towers shall be designed to blend into the
surrounding environment, including locating antennas on roofs of buildings,
on the walls of buildings, or on city-owned property, through the use of
color and camouflaging architectural treatment, except in instances where the
color is dictated by federal or state authorities such as the Federal
Aviation Administration. Antenna and tower finish and paint shall be
maintained in good condition, free from rust, graffiti, peeling paint or
other blemish.



   (B)   Maximum height is limited to one hundred fifty (150) feet
above the ground upon which the antenna is placed. The City Council may allow
towers up to two hundred (200) feet in height if the applicant can
demonstrate that based upon the topography of the site and surrounding area,
siting of the antenna, antenna design, surrounding tree cover and structures
and/or through the use of screening, that off-site views of the tower will be
minimized.



   (C)   Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum
extent possible.



   (D)   The base of the tower and any accessory structures shall be
landscaped.



   (E)   All towers shall be provided with security fencing to prevent
unauthorized entry.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.249  ASSOCIATED EQUIPMENT.



   Ground equipment associated with a tower or wireless telecommunications
facility shall be screened by vegetative or other screening compatible with
the surrounding environment if deemed necessary by the City Council. When
associated ground equipment is housed in a building or structure, that
building or structure shall not exceed seven hundred fifty (750) square feet
in area or twelve (12) feet in height. All such buildings or structures shall
be architecturally designed to blend in with the surrounding environment and
shall meet the minimum setback requirements of the underlying zoning district.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.250  AREA-WIDE ANALYSIS/PROOF OF NEED.



   The applicant shall demonstrate by providing a coverage/interference
analysis and capacity analysis that the location of the tower as proposed is
necessary to meet the frequency reuse and spacing needs of the wireless
telecommunication facilities and to provide adequate coverage and capacity to
areas which cannot be adequately served by locating the tower in a less
restrictive district.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.251  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   (A)   Any proposed commercial wireless telecommunication service
tower shall be designed, structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to
accommodate both the applicant’s antennas and comparable antennas for at
least two (2) additional users if the tower is over one hundred (100) feet in
height or for at least one (1) additional user if the tower is between sixty
(60) and ninety-nine point nine (99.9) feet in height. Towers must be
designed to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to
accept antennas mounted at varying heights.



   (B)   Co-location requirements. All commercial wireless
telecommunication towers erected, constructed, or located within the city
shall comply with the following requirements. A proposal for a new commercial
wireless telecommunication service tower shall not be approved unless the
City Council finds that the telecommunications equipment planned for the
proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved tower or
building within a one (1) mile search radius (one half (1/2) mile for towers
under one hundred twenty (120) feet in height) of the proposed tower due to
one (1) or more of the following reasons:



      (1)   The planned equipment would exceed the structural
capacity of the existing or approved tower or building, as documented by a
qualified and licensed professional engineer, and the existing or approved
tower cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate planned or
equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost;



      (2)   The planned equipment would cause interference
materially impacting the usability of other existing or planned equipment at
the tower or building as documented by a qualified and licensed professional
engineer and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.



      (3)   Existing or approved towers and building within the
search radius cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary
to function reasonable as documented by a qualified and licensed professional
engineer; and/or



      (4)   Other unforeseen reasons that make it infeasible to
locate the planned telecommunications equipment upon an existing or approved
tower or building.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.252  OBSOLETE OR UNUSED TOWERS.



   (A)   Abandoned or unused towers or portions of towers shall be
removed as follows: all abandoned or unused towers and associated facilities
shall be removed within twelve (12) months of the cessation of operations at
the site unless the City Council approves a time extension. A copy of the
relevant portions of a signed lease which requires the applicant to remove
the tower and associated facilities upon cessation of operations at the site
shall be submitted at the time of application. In the event that a tower is
not removed with twelve (12) months of the cessation of operations at a site,
the tower and associated facilities may be removed by the city and the costs
of removal assessed against the property.



   (B)   Unused portions of towers above a manufactured connection
shall be removed within six (6) months of the time of antenna relocation. The
replacement of portions of a tower previously removed requires the issuance
of a new conditional use permit.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.253  EFFECT OF CHAPTER ON EXISTING TOWERS AND ANTENNAS.



   Antennas and towers in the city as of the publishing of this subchapter
which do not conform to or comply with this subchapter are subject to the
following provisions:



   (A)   Towers may continue in use for the purpose now used and as now
existing but may not be replaced or structurally altered without complying in
all respects with this subchapter; and



   (B)   If such towers are hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any
reason or cause whatsoever, the tower may be repaired and restored to its
former use, location and physical dimensions upon obtaining a building permit
without otherwise complying with this subchapter; provided, however, that if
the cost of repairing the tower to the former use, location and physical
dimensions would exceed the cost of a new tower of like kind and quality,
then the tower may not be repaired or restored, except in full compliance
with this subchapter.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.254  ADDITIONAL SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.



   In addition to the information required elsewhere in this subchapter,
applications for commercial wireless telecommunication towers and antennas
shall include the following supplemental information.



   (A)   A report from a qualified professional engineer licensed by
the State of Minnesota which:



      (1)   Describes the tower height and design including a cross
section and elevation;



      (2)   Documents the height above grade for all potential
mounting positions for co-located antennas and the minimum separation
distances between antennas;



      (3)   Describes the tower’s capacity, including the number
and type of antennas that it can accommodate;



      (4)   Documents what steps the applicant will take to avoid
interference with established public safety telecommunications;



      (5)   Includes an engineer’s stamp and registration number;



      (6)   A site plan clearly indicating a fall-zone equal to the
height of the tower / antenna; and



      (7)   Includes other information necessary to evaluate the
request.



   (B)   For all commercial wireless telecommunication service towers,
a letter of intent committing the tower owner and his or her successors to
allow the shared use of the tower if an additional user agrees in writing to
meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use.



   (C)   Before the issuance of a building permit, the following
supplemental information shall be submitted:



      (1)   Proof that the proposed tower complies with regulations
administered by the Federal Aviation Administration, the Federal
Communications Commission and the Municipal Airport Zoning Code; and



      (2)   A report from a qualified professional engineer licensed
by the State of Minnesota which demonstrates the tower’s compliance with
the aforementioned structural and electrical standards.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.255  TOWER CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.



   Any commercial or non-commercial telecommunication tower or antenna
taller than fifteen (15) feet in height shall require the issuance of a
building permit prior to construction.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.256  VIOLATIONS.



   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this subchapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS



§ 150.270  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (PUD).



   (A)   Purpose and intent.  It is the purpose of this subchapter to
provide for the grouping of lots and/or buildings within a development as an
integrated, coordinated unit which allows for greater development flexibility
through the removal of the detailed restrictions of conventional zoning. 
This subchapter allows for greater freedom, imagination and flexibility in
site design and layout as well as promotes the preservation of natural
features, the conservation and efficient use of land, and the creation of
additional open spaces than is possible under the more restrictive
application of the zoning code. The diversification and variation in the
relationship of uses, structures, open spaces, natural features and public
amenities in the development is conceived and implemented as a comprehensive
and cohesive unified project.  Developments utilizing the regulations, as
set forth in this subchapter, shall be in substantial compliance with the
basic intent of the zoning code and shall meet the policies and goals
outlined in the comprehensive plan.  Planned Unit Developments are
recognized as serving the public interest, through the provision of specific
features or characteristics within the development.  Through proper planning
and design, each Planned Unit Development should include features which are
in compliance with the following objectives:



      (1)   To promote a development pattern that is in harmony with
the intent, policies and goals as outlined within the comprehensive plan.



      (2)   To encourage innovation and diversification within
residential developments that meet the growing demands for different housing
options at all economic levels.



      (3)   To provide higher quality standards of site and building
design within developments which are architecturally and environmentally
innovative and to achieve better utilization of land than is possible through
the strict application of zoning and subdivision regulations.



      (4)   To conserve the natural amenities of the land through
the preservation and enhancement of site characteristics such as natural
topography, woodland areas, scenic views, steep slopes, wetlands, creeks,
lakes, natural habitats, geological features and to prevent soil erosion.



      (5)   To permit the mixing of land uses within the development
that may not otherwise be accomplished through the rules and regulations of
the zoning code.



      (6)   To preserve and enhance open spaces, which provide
scenic enjoyment, active and passive recreational uses, natural habitat
protection and community identity.



      (7)   To reduce improvement costs through a more efficient use
of land and a smaller network of utilities and streets than is possible
through the application of standards contained in conventional subdivision
regulations.



      (8)   To promote a more creative and efficient approach to
land use within the city, while at the same time protecting and promoting the
health, safety, comfort, aesthetics, economic viability and general welfare
of the city.



      (9)   To encourage development that will utilize energy and
environmental designs that will promote water efficiency, energy efficiency,
air quality, construction waste management and resource reuse, sustainable
building and site design and construction, and innovative green building
principles.



   (B)   Benefit.  The proposed Planned Unit Development shall
accomplish a majority of the purposes and shall meet the design criteria as
set forth within this subchapter.  Any proposed Planned Unit Development
shall not be simply for the enhanced economic gain of the applicant and it
shall be the applicant’s responsibility to demonstrate compliance with this
requirement.  Written documentation addressing this matter shall be made
part of the Planned Unit Development application.



   (C)   Areas covered. 



      (1)   The Planned Unit Development District may be applied
within any zone.



      (2)   Any or all contiguous land owned by the applicant shall
be included in a Planned Unit Development when necessary to meet the purpose
of this district.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.271  GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   Comprehensive plan consistency.  The proposed Planned Unit
Development shall be consistent with the policies and goals of the
comprehensive plan and the comprehensive plan land use map.



   (B)   Zoning district regulations.



      (1)   A single use Planned Unit Development is a development
consisting solely of one (1) of the following use categories:  residential,
commercial or industrial.  Uses allowed in a single use Planned Unit
Development shall be limited to the permitted, conditional and accessory uses
allowed in the underlying zone. 



      (2)   A mixed-use Planned Unit Development is a development
consisting of any combination of residential, commercial or industrial
uses.  Uses allowed in a mixed use Planned Unit Development may consist of
uses consistent with those uses allowed as permitted, conditional or
accessory uses in the underlying district and/or a similar use zoning
district.  The City Council may place more restrictive conditions on the
mixture of uses within a Planned Unit Development to ensure preservation of
the public health, safety and welfare; compliance with the intent of this
subchapter; and, that land uses occurring within the Planned Unit
Development, and between the Planned Unit Development and the surrounding
land uses, do not conflict.



      (3)   The Planned Unit Development District is a floating zone
designated within the zoning code and not pre-designated on the zoning map. 
It shall only be designated on the zoning map at such time as the City
Council reviews and approves the final development plan for the Planned Unit
Development and an ordinance rezoning the property to Planned Unit
Development.  At such time, the Planned Unit Development District is
considered an amendment to the zoning map.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.272  DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, applicable
underlying zoning district requirements, other than land use restrictions
described in § 150.271 above, are superseded by the approval of a final
development plan for Planned Unit Development by the City Council. The final
development plan establishes the requirements for Planned Unit Developments
and shall govern and take precedence over underlying zoning district
provisions except where the final development plan is silent as to a specific
provision.



   (B)   Minimum lot requirements.



      (1)   Area, setback and height requirements that apply to the
underlying zoning district shall be considered guidelines and may be departed
from in the approval of the Planned Unit Development, except that building
setbacks from all property lines which form the perimeter of the Planned Unit
Development shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet.



      (2)   No building/structure shall be located less than twenty
(20) feet from the back of curb along local streets; no less than thirty (30)
feet along collector streets; and, no less than fifty (50) feet along major
thoroughfares.



   (C)   All Planned Unit Developments shall contain a minimum of five
(5) acres of contiguous land, unless the city finds that a tract which
contains less than five (5) acres of land is suitable as a Planned Unit
Development by virtue of unusual condition(s).  If the proposed development
contains less than five (5) acres, the applicant must demonstrate the
existence of one (1) or more of the following:



      (1)   Environmental features exist on the site which will be
preserved through the Planned Unit Development process.



      (2)   The subject site is adjacent to an existing Planned Unit
Development and the Planned Unit Development process will provide additional
compatibility between the Planned Unit Developments.



      (3)   The property is located in a transitional area between
two (2) different land uses or on a collector or major thoroughfare as
identified in the comprehensive plan, thus justifying the need for varying
types of uses.



   (D)   The net density of a Planned Unit Development shall correspond
to the density regulations of the underlying zoning district as designated on
the official zoning map.  The City Council may consider a density transfer
if the applicant is able to demonstrate such a need.  A density transfer may
be considered by the City Council in order to encourage the protection of
natural resources; to enhance tree preservation; to allow limited development
in an area with unusual building characteristics due to subsoil
characteristics; or, to encourage creative land use. A density transfer may
also be considered whereby lot sizes smaller than those normally required in
the underlying district will be permitted on the developable land in return
for leaving the natural resource areas open from development.



   (E)  In addition to public sites and open space dedication
requirements as provided within Chapter 153 (Subdivision Regulations), a
Planned Unit Development shall provide at least fifteen percent (15%) of the
project area as open space. Open space is a landscaped area or areas
available for the common use of and is accessible by all residents or
occupants of the buildings within the Planned Unit Development.  Open space
shall be calculated on a net basis which excludes private yards, public
rights-of-way, private streets from back of curb to back of curb or any areas
within an easement.  Dedicated public sites and open space shall not be used
in calculating open space for a Planned Unit Development.  The applicant
shall be required to submit an open space plan illustrating the use and/or
function of the open space area or areas.  The open space plan shall include
any proposed improvements and/or design of the open space area. 



   (F)   All Planned Unit Developments shall have municipal sewer and
water service available.



   (G)   No design standards shall be modified in any way which
violates or compromises the fire and safety codes of the city.



   (H)   Subdivision review under the subdivision regulations shall be
carried out simultaneously with the review of the Planned Unit Development. 
The plans required under this section shall be submitted in addition to or in
a form which will satisfy the requirements of the subdivision regulations for
preliminary and final plat approvals.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.273  REVIEW OF THE PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   Pre-application conference. Prior to filing an application for
a Planned Unit Development, the applicant of the proposed development shall
arrange a conference with city staff.  The primary purpose of the
pre-application conference shall be to provide the applicant with an
opportunity to gather information and obtain guidance from the city as to the
general suitability of the proposed Planned Unit Development prior to
incurring substantial expenses in the preparation of plans, surveys, formal
review and other necessary data.



   (B)   Concept plan review. 



      (1)   Purpose.  In order to receive more formal guidance in
the design and layout of a proposed Planned Unit Development, prior to the
submission of a formal application, an applicant shall submit a concept plan
for review and comment by the Planning Commission and City Council.  Such
concept plan shall show the basic intent and the general nature of the entire
development. 



      (2)   Application.  In order for the review to be most
beneficial to the applicant, the concept plan shall contain such specific
information as requested by the city, to include:



         (a)   Application for concept plan review accompanied by
application fee.



         (b)   A cover letter describing the project, any
anticipated variations and how the project complies with the city's
comprehensive plan.



         (c)   A sketch of the project area, including size of
the development; proposed land uses and their approximate location within the
development; surrounding land uses; existing and proposed public
right-of-way; and unique, problematic or desirable features of the site.



         (d)   Ownership of the property and identity of the
developer.



         (e)   A general description of how adverse impacts on
other property will be mitigated.



         (f)   Any other information that the Zoning
Administrator determines will be helpful in reviewing the proposed
development.



      (3)   Review process.  The Planning Commission shall review
the concept plan, informally, and make recommendations to be forwarded to the
City Council.  The City Council shall advise the applicant of any changes,
modifications or issues that should be addressed prior to the filing of the
general development plan. Such review does not constitute preliminary
approval of the Planned Unit Development as all comments and decisions are
non-binding.



   (C)   General development plan. 



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of the general development plan
is to provide a specific and particular plan upon which the Planning
Commission shall make its recommendation and the City Council shall base its
decision for approval or denial.



      (2)   Application.  Within six (6) months of the City
Council’s review of the concept plan, or an extension deadline as approved
by the City Council, the petitioner(s) shall file an application for the
general development plan.  The general development plan shall be in
substantial conformance to the approved concept plan.  The application shall
be processed similar to that of a preliminary plat.



      (3)   Plan submittal.  General development plan submittals
shall include the following:



         (a)   Application for general development plan
accompanied by application fee and deposit.



         (b)   Any requests with appropriate applications for
implementation of the proposed Planned Unit Development (i.e., rezoning) and
respective application fees.



         (c)   A survey of the site prepared by a registered
surveyor showing site size, property boundaries and legal description.



         (d)   Proof of ownership or authorization.  The
applicant shall supply proof of title for the property subject of the
application, such as a title commitment or other documentation deemed
acceptable by the city and, as applicable, supply documented authorization
from the owner(s) of the property in question to proceed with the requested
application.



         (e)   Plans and written narrative describing the
following:



            1.   Buildings. The location, size, use and
arrangement of all buildings within the development; to include height in
stories or feet and total square feet of ground area coverage and floor area.
Existing buildings which will remain on-site shall also be shown.



            2.   Architectural plans. Preliminary
architectural plans indicating use, floor plans, elevations and exterior wall
finishes of proposed buildings.



            3.   Natural resource analysis.  Identify
existing vegetation areas consisting of forest and wood lots as well as
wetlands and wetland vegetation; the geology, slope, soil and groundwater
characteristics of the site; existing lakes, streams, ponds, drainage swales,
runoff setting areas and floodplains must be identified; and, analysis of the
relationship of the proposed use of the existing natural conditions as listed
above.



            4.   Areas of use.  A tabulation calculating the
approximate gross square footage of commercial and/or industrial floor space,
if such uses are provided.



            5.   Traffic circulation.  Location, dimensions
and number of driveway entrances, curb cuts, parking stalls, loading spaces
and access drives.  All other circulation elements, such as bike and
pedestrian ways; and the total site coverage of these elements shall be
included.



            6.   Public and private open space plan. 
Location, designation and total area proposed to be conveyed or dedicated for
public or private (those areas only available to residents within the Planned
Unit Development) open space, including parks, playgrounds, school sites or
recreational facilities.  The plan shall include any proposed improvements
and/or design of the open space areas.



            7.   Landscaping plan.  A detailed landscaping
plan including the type, size and quality of all existing and proposed
plantings.



            8.   Phasing plan.  A plan indicating the timing
and phasing of the development by geographic area.



            9.   Any additional information as requested by
city staff, the Planning Commission or the City Council as necessary to
conduct a full review of the proposed Planned Unit Development.



      (4)   Review process.



         (a)   Review and action by city staff. Upon receipt of
the completed application for a general development plan, city staff shall
refer such information to other appropriate city staff members and official
bodies for review and recommendation.



         (b)   Public hearing. The Planning Commission shall hold
a public hearing on the Planned Unit Development general development plan.
Property owners within three hundred fifty (350) feet shall be notified,
although failure of any property owner to receive notice shall not invalidate
the proceedings.  The Planning Commission shall make findings and
recommendation to the City Council.



         (c)   City Council action.  The City Council shall
review the Planning Commission’s report and recommendation and grant
approval, resubmit the plan to the Planning Commission for further
consideration of specified items or deny the general development plan.  The
City Council may impose such conditions as part of the approval of a general
development plan as it deems necessary in order to ensure consistency with
the comprehensive plan and this section.



         (d)   Additional expenses.  In addition to the
aforementioned application fee and deposit, the applicant shall pay all
expenses incurred by the City Engineer and City Attorney for their services
in the review of the Planned Unit Development.  City staff will attempt to
provide the applicant with estimates of such expenses.



         (e)   Expiration of general development plan.



            1.   The petitioner shall submit, within one (1)
year from the date of City Council approval, a final development plan. In any
case where the applicant fails to file a final development plan, to proceed
with development in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter and the
approved general development plan, such approval shall be considered null and
void.



            2.   Upon application by the petitioner, the City
Council at its discretion may extend, for not more than one (1) year, the
filing deadline for any final development plan, when for good cause shown
such an extension is necessary.  In any case where the general development
plan approval expires, the City Council may adopt a resolution repealing the
general development plan approval. Any portion of the general development
plan that has not received final development plan approval will revert back
to the previous zoning designation.



         (f)   Zoning enactment.  A rezoning of a parcel of land
to Planned Unit Development shall not become effective until such time as the
City Council approves an ordinance reflecting said amendment, which shall
take place at the time the City Council approves the general development plan.



         (g)   Platting of a Planned Unit Development. In the
event that a Planned Unit Development is to be subdivided into lots or
parcels for the purpose of separate ownership, such Planned Unit Development
shall be platted under the platting procedures of the city's subdivision
ordinance and the related requirements of the city. The preliminary plat
shall be processed in conjunction with the development stage plan as outlined
in subsection (C) of this chapter.  A separate action on the final plat
shall be processed before the City Council prior to or in conjunction with
the final stage of the Planned Unit Development.



   (D)   Final development plan.



      (1)   Purpose.  The final development plan shall serve as a
complete, thorough and permanent public record of the planned unit
development and manner in which it is to be developed. The final development
plan shall serve in conjunction with other provisions of the city code as the
land use regulation applicable to the Planned Unit Development.



      (2)   Application.  Within one (1) year of general
development plan approval, or an extension deadline as approved by the City
Council, the petitioner(s) shall file an application for the final
development plan for all or a portion of the Planned Unit Development.  The
final development plan shall be reviewed for consistency with the general
development plan. It shall incorporate all prior approved plans and all
approved modifications thereof resulting from the Planned Unit Development
process. The final development plan is intended only to add detail to, and to
put in final form, the information contained in the general development plan.
The application shall be processed similar to that of a final plat.



      (3)   Plan submittal.  Final development plan submittals
shall include but not be limited to the following:



         (a)   Application for final development plan accompanied
by application fee.



         (b)   Current abstract of title or a registered property
certificate along with any unrecorded documents and an opinion of title
prepared by the applicant’s attorney.



         (c)   Final plat drawings for recording.



         (d)   Final site, landscaping and natural resource
evaluation plans.



         (e)   Final lighting, signage and parking plans.



         (f)   All certificates, seals and signatures required
for the dedication of land and recordation of documents.



         (g)   Staging plan, if the Planned Unit Development is
to be developed in multiple phases.  Such plan shall include a phasing plan
indicating the time frame for construction of the various elements within the
entire development.



         (h)   Any other plans, agreements or specifications as
deemed necessary by city staff to review the proposed final development plan.



         (i)   If a plat is required as part of the plan, a final
plat and final engineering plans and specifications for streets, utilities
and other public improvements, together with a development agreement for the
installation of such improvements and financial guarantees for the completion
of such improvements in accordance with the requirements of the city’s
subdivision ordinance.



      (4)   Review process.



         (a)   Review and action by city staff.  Upon receipt of
the completed application for a final development plan, city staff shall
refer such information to other appropriate city staff members and official
bodies for review and recommendation.



         (b)   City Council action. The City Council shall review
the final development plan submittal and grant approval, resubmit the plans
to the Planning Commission for further consideration of specified items or
deny the final development plan in accordance with the requirements of M.S.
§ 15.99. 



            1.   Denial of the final development plan for a
Planned Unit Development shall be accompanied by written findings of fact by
the City Council, to include any supporting data set forth that shows the
reasons for the denial in terms of the ways in which the proposed use fails
to meet the standards, purposes and intents of this article and the
comprehensive plan.



            2.   If an application for final development plan
for a Planned Unit Development has been considered and denied by the City
Council, a similar application for a Planned Unit Development affecting the
same property shall not be considered again by the Planning Commission or
City Council for at least one (1) year from the date of the final development
plan denial.



            3.   If the application for final development plan
for a Planned Unit Development is approved by the City Council, the terms of
the Planned Unit Development shall be embodied in a Planned Unit Development
agreement and such other documentation as the city shall deem necessary and
desirable.  The City Council may impose such conditions as part of the
approval of a final development plan as it deems necessary in order to ensure
consistency with the comprehensive plan and this section.



         (c)   Additional expenses.  In addition to the
aforementioned application fee, the applicant shall pay all expenses incurred
by the City Engineer and City Attorney for their services in the review of
the Planned Unit Development. City staff will attempt to provide the
applicant with estimates of such expenses.



         (d)   Recording the final development plan.



            1.   Upon approval of the final development plan
by the City Council, the City Clerk shall record the final development plan,
development agreement and all other pertinent documents with the County
Register of Deeds or Register of Titles within ninety (90) days after the
date of approval.  Fees associated with the recording of the final
development plan will be charged back to the applicant.



            2.   Failure of the applicant to comply and submit
the necessary items for the recording of the final development plan by the
city shall be cause for revoking the city's approval and the final
development plan shall be considered null and void, unless the applicant
requests an extension in writing and receives approval from the City Council.



         (e)   Expiration of final development plan.  Within one
(1) year after the approval of the final development plan for Planned Unit
Development, or such shorter/longer time as may be established by the
approved development schedule, construction shall commence in accordance with
such approved plan.  Failure to commence construction within such period
shall automatically render void the Planned Unit Development, unless an
extension has been granted by the City Council.  In such case, the City
Council shall adopt a resolution repealing the Planned Unit Development and
the Planned Unit Development approvals, thus re-establishing the original
zoning classification and all other provisions applicable to the site.



         (f)   Extension requests.  The City Council may approve
up to two (2) extensions for a term not to exceed one (1) additional year for
each extension.



         (g)   Building and other permits.  Except as otherwise
expressly provided within the ordinance, upon receiving notice from the city
that the approved final development plan for Planned Unit Development has
been recorded and upon application of the applicant pursuant to the
applicable ordinance of the city, the Building Official and other appropriate
city officials may issue permits to the applicant for development,
construction and any other work to be completed within the development.



         (h)   Evaluation of the Planned Unit Development.
Following the approval of the final development plan for Planned Unit
Development, the Zoning Administrator shall review all permits issued and
construction undertaken and compare the actual development with the approved
final development plan. If the Zoning Administrator finds that the
development is not proceeding in accordance with approved plans, he or she
shall immediately notify the City Council.  Within thirty (30) days of such
notice, the City Council shall either by ordinance revoke the Planned Unit
Development approval, and the land shall be governed by the regulations
applicable in the zoning district in which it is located; or shall take such
steps as necessary to compel compliance with the final development plan as
approved; or shall require the landowner or applicant to seek an amendment to
the final development plan.



   (E)   Changes in the Planned Unit Development.  The Planned Unit
Development  shall be developed according to the approved and recorded final
development plan and all supporting data. The recorded final plat and
supporting data together with all recorded amendments shall be binding on the
applicants, their successors, grantees and assigns. If a change is proposed
for any aspect of an approved Planned Unit Development, such change requests
shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for review.  The Zoning
Administrator shall determine if the change is minor or major.



      (1)   Minor changes.  The City Council may approve minor
changes without a public hearing provided that the final development plan
Remains consistent with the spirit and intent of the general development plan
or a previously approved final development plan.  The modification shall not:



         (a)   Change the general character of the Planned Unit
Development;



         (b)   Cause substantial relocation of principal or
accessory structures;



         (c)   Cause a substantial relocation or reduction of
parking, loading or recreation areas;



         (d)   Cause a substantial relocation of traffic
facilities and circulation systems;



         (e)   Increase the impervious surface coverage of
buildings and parking areas;



         (f)   Increase the gross floor area of buildings, the
number of dwelling units or the net density of the site; or



         (g)   Reduce the amount of approved open space,
landscaping, screening or natural resource amenities to be located within the
development.



      (2)   Major changes. If the requested change is determined by
the Zoning Administrator to be major or substantial or would represent a
significant departure from the general development plan or previously
approved final development plan, it shall result in the formal abandonment
and the subsequent refilling of a new application for Planned Unit
Development.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS



§ 150.290  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Private swimming pools are regulated by this chapter and are
defined as follows:  Any below ground enclosure, designed or intended or
used for the containment of water, having both a depth exceeding twenty four
(24) inches and a capacity exceeding five thousand (5,000) gallons which is
designed, intended or used for swimming, wading or other recreational use by
the owner or tenant of the property upon which the pool is constructed or by
their family or invited guests.



   (B)   It is not the purpose or intent of this chapter to regulate
above ground swimming pools, temporary swimming pools (which includes but is
not limited to plastic or inflatable “kiddie” pools) or private spas
(which includes but is not limited to hot tubs, whirlpools, hydrotherapy
pools and therapeutic pools).



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.291  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No swimming pool, as defined by § 150.290(A), shall be
constructed or established and no such pool construction shall be commenced
without first obtaining a building permit.



   (B)   The building permit application shall include the following
information:



      (1)   Complete plans and specifications for the construction
of the pool;



      (2)   A site plan showing the location of all structures on
the property, including the house, garage, fences, trees, overhead or
underground wiring, utility easements, sewage systems and other significant
improvements or natural features;



      (3)   The proposed location of pumps, filters, electrical
power source (if applicable), flushing and drainage outlets and other
operational features;



      (4)   The location and specifications of protective fencing.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.292  YARD AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.



   Private swimming pools shall be constructed so as to avoid hazard or
damage to the occupants of the subject property or the occupants of adjacent
property and shall meet the following minimum requirements:



   (A)   Underground or overhead utilities shall be located in
conformance with the National Electrical Code.



   (B)   No pool shall be located within any private easement, public
or private utility easement, drainage way, marsh or other location in which
it will represent a threat to the natural environment.



   (C)   In areas zoned or used for residential purposes, pools as
defined by § 150.290(A) are prohibited in the front yard and shall not be
located within thirty (30) feet of any property line, nor within ten (10)
feet of any principal structure or accessory buildings except accessory
buildings without frost footings.  No mechanical equipment shall be located
closer than thirty (30) feet to any property line.



   (D)   No portion of any swimming pool or appurtenances thereto shall
be located less than ten (10) feet to any portion of a sewage disposal line
or sewage treatment system, nor shall any water supply line for a swimming
pool be less than fifteen (15) feet to any portion of the sewage treatment
system.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.293  SAFETY FENCE REQUIRED.



   Outdoor swimming pools, as defined by § 150.290(A), shall be
adequately fenced to prevent uncontrolled access from the street or adjacent
property.



   (A)   Construction requirements.  A safety fence of at least five
(5) feet in height as measured from ground level shall completely enclose the
pool.  All openings or points of entry shall be equipped with self-closing
and self-latching gates or doors.  All gates or doors shall have a latch
which is no less than four (4) feet above the ground level and which shall be
so constructed and so placed as to be inaccessible to small children.  All
gates and doors shall be latched when the pool is not in use or is unattended
by an adult with demonstrated swimming ability. Any opening between the
bottom of the fence and the ground level shall not exceed two (2) inches and
fence openings shall not exceed four (4) inches. Safety fences shall be
constructed of materials with minimum spaces between the materials so as to
inhibit the climbing thereof by any person.



   (B)   Temporary fence. No person shall introduce or cause to be
introduced any water to a depth of more than twenty four (24) inches into the
shallowest portion of any swimming pool newly constructed or being
constructed until such time as the Building Official authorizes the filling
of such pool with water.  Such authorization shall be withheld until, as a
minimum, the permitee has caused such pool to be completely enclosed by a
swimming pool construction fence.  Said construction fence shall:



      (1)   Be of snow fence like or similar design and be securely
anchored in place;



      (2)   Be constructed with its base flush to the ground;



      (3)   Be at least four (4) feet in height and have supportive
posts placed no more than eight (8) feet apart; and



      (4)   Remain in place until a permanent fence completely
enclosing the swimming pool is installed. The permanent fence must be
installed within thirty (30) days of pool completion.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.294  MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All back-flushing water or pool drainage water shall be
directed onto the property of the owner or onto approved drainage ways.
Drainage onto public or private streets or other public or private drainage
ways shall require a permit from the Utilities Superintendent.



   (B)   Any outdoor lighting of the pool shall not be permitted to
spill or shine upon adjacent properties.



   (C)   All electrical installations shall comply with the State
Electrical Code.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



SPECIAL PROVISIONS



§ 150.500  PURPOSE OF OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS.



   Regulation of off-street parking and loading spaces in the zoning code
is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public right-of-way and so to
promote the safety and general welfare of the public by establishing minimum
requirements for off-street parking, loading and unloading from motor
vehicles in accordance with the utilization of various parcels of land and
structures. All applications for an occupancy certificate shall be
accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale and dimensioned indicating the
location of off-street parking and loading spaces in compliance with the
following requirements:



   (A)   Exempted.  Buildings or structures for which a permit has
been issued prior to the effective date of the zoning code, but for which
work has not been completed, shall be exempt from the stated parking
requirements if the structure or building is completed within six (6) months
after the above stated date.



   (B)   Existing parking not to be reduced.  Existing off-street
parking spaces and loading spaces on the effective date of the zoning code
shall not be reduced in number unless said number exceeds the requirements
set forth herein for a similar new use.



   (C)   Damaged or destroyed buildings. Should a building, structure
or use in existence on the effective date of the zoning code be damaged or
destroyed by fire or other cause, it may be reestablished except that in
doing so any off-street parking or loading which existed must be retained and
should plans be effected for enlarging the floor area, seating capacity or
other facilities which would affect the parking or loading requirements, the
parking lot or loading area shall be enlarged accordingly.



   (D)   Yards.  Parking areas in B-2 districts shall be set back from
all property lines a minimum of five (5) feet or as allowed per site plan
approval. Other parking areas in other districts shall be subject to front
yard setback requirements in accordance with the district in which the use is
so located.



   (E)   Floor area.  The term FLOOR AREA for the purpose of
calculating the number of off-street parking spaces shall mean the sum of all
floor areas in a building as calculated from the outside dimensions of the
building. It shall not include areas used primarily for non-public purposes
such as storage, incidental repair, offices of building management or
maintenance, toilets or rest rooms, utilities, or dressing, fitting, or
alteration rooms.



   (F)   Benches in places of public assembly. In stadiums, sport
arenas, churches, and other places of public assembly in which patrons or
spectators occupy benches, pews, or other similar seating facilities, each
twenty-two (22) inches of such seating facilities shall be counted as one (1)
seat for the purpose of determining requirements for off-street parking
facilities under the zoning code.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.501  DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE OF OFF-STREET PARKING AREA.



   (A)   Access. Parking areas shall be designed so as to provide
adequate means of access to a public alley or street. Such driveway access
shall not exceed twenty-four (24) feet in width for residential districts and
for other districts shall be allowed pursuant to site plan approval by the
city. Properties within residential districts shall be limited to two (2)
accesses and a minimum of six (6) feet is required between accesses. 
Accesses shall be located so as to cause the least interference with traffic
movement and shall be no closer than two (2) feet from side lot lines, except
for those properties with an approved zero (0) foot lot line.



   (B)   Size of parking spaces. Each parking space shall be not less
than nine (9) feet wide and nineteen (19) feet in length exclusive of an
adequately designed system of access drives.



   (C)   Drive aisles.  Drive aisles shall be no less than twenty six
(26) feet in width.



   (D)   Fractional spaces.  When the determining of the number of
off-street parking spaces results in a fraction, each fraction of one-half
(1/2) or more shall constitute another space.



   (E)   Signs.  No signs shall be located in any parking area except
as necessary for orderly operation of traffic movement.



   (F)   Surfacing.  All new parking areas and driveways shall be hard
surfaced in order to control dust and drainage. Allowable surfacing materials
include bituminous, concrete, or other materials as approved by the Public
Works Director. Parking areas designed for fewer than three (3) vehicles
shall be exempt from the hard surfacing requirement; however, all parking
areas and driveways shall be hard surfaced a minimum of fifty (50) feet as
measured from the nearest edge of the public roadway. If the public roadway
is not hard surfaced, the driveway need not be hard surfaced until such time
that the property owner is given notice to do so by the city. Notice will be
given by the city within thirty (30) days of the public roadway being hard
surfaced.  The notice shall specify a required completion date which shall
not be less than three (3) months nor more than one (1) year from the date of
the notice. At any time that a property owner installs a new garage, adds on
to an existing garage or replaces a garage, the hard surfacing requirement
shall be enforced.  Plans for surfacing and drainage are subject to city
review and approval. A surfacing deposit, in an amount set forth by the City
Council from time to time, shall be paid to the city at the time of building
permit issuance for any property owner developing a vacant property,
installing a new garage, adding on to an existing garage or replacing an old
garage. The payment shall be made in the form of cash, letter of credit, or
other means as approved by the city.  Upon completion of the hard surfacing,
the deposit shall be refunded. Surfacing shall be completed within one (1)
year of building permit issuance or the deposit shall be forfeited.



   (G)   Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street
parking area shall be so designed and arranged as to reflect the light away
from adjacent property.



   (H)   Curbing and landscaping.  All open off-street parking areas
designed to have head-in parking along the property line shall provide a
bumper curb not less than three (3) feet from the side property line or guard
of normal bumper height not less than one (1) foot from the side property
line. When said area is for six (6) spaces or more, a curb or fence not over
six (6) feet in height shall be erected along the front yard set back line
with grass or planting occupying the space between the sidewalk and curb or
fence.



   (I)   Fence required.  When a required off-street parking area for
six (6) or more vehicles is located adjacent to an R district a fence of
adequate design, not over six (6) feet in height nor less than three and
one-half (3-1/2) feet in height, shall be erected along the R district
property line. Landscaping techniques approved by the city may be used to
accomplish a buffer in lieu of fencing between the parking lot and the R
district.



   (J)   Maintenance of off-street parking space.  It shall be the
joint responsibility of the operator and owner of the principal use, uses or
building to maintain, in a neat and adequate manner, the parking area, access
ways, landscaping and required fences.



   (K)   R districts.  Required off-street parking spaces/areas in the
R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 districts shall be on the same lot as the principal
building.



   (L)   Commercial vehicle parking.  Off-street parking facilities
accessory to residential use shall be utilized solely for the parking of
passenger automobiles or one (1) truck not to exceed one and one-half (1-1/2)
ton capacity for each dwelling unit. Under no circumstance shall required
parking facilities accessory to residential structures be used for the
storage of commercial vehicles or for the parking of automobiles belonging to
the employees, owners, tenants or customers of business or manufacturing
establishments.



   (M)   Prohibited use of parking area.  Required off-street parking
space in any district shall not be utilized for open storage of goods or for
the storage of recreational vehicles and campers and vehicles which are
inoperable or for sale or rent.



   (N)   Recreational vehicle parking.  Off street parking facilities
utilized for recreational vehicles, including but not limited to RVs, campers
and boats, shall have an improved, durable surface.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.502  JOINT PARKING FACILITIES AND CONTROL OF OFF-STREET PARKING.



   (A)   Joint parking facilities. Off-street parking facilities for a
combination of mixed buildings, structures or uses may be provided
collectively in any business or industrial district where separate parking
facilities for each separate building, structure or use would be difficult to
achieve, provided that the total number of spaces shall equal the sum of the
separate requirements of each use and the maximum distance between any
parking space and any principal use is not more than three hundred (300) feet
measured along usual routes of public pedestrian access.



   (B)   Control of off-street parking facilities.  When required
accessory off-street parking facilities are provided elsewhere than on the
lot in which the principal use served is located, they shall be in the same
ownership or control, either by deed or long-term lease, as the property
occupied by such principal use, and the owner of the principal use shall file
a recordable document with the city requiring the owner and his or her heirs
and assigns to maintain the required number of off-street parking spaces
during the existence of said principal use.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.503  MINIMUM PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Residential uses.



 




USE

 
MINIMUM PARKING REQUIRED


Single family, townhouse, condo, two family, manufactured/mobile
 
Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit


Group home, state licensed residential facility
 
Two (2) spaces for each five (5) beds offered for residence purposes


Boarding house, bed & breakfast
 
Two (2) spaces plus one (1) for each guest room


Group daycare, nursery school
 
Five (5) spaces plus one (1) for each five (5) program participants based on
the facility’s licensed capacity


Multi-family structure (excluding senior housing)
 
Two (2) spaces for each unit, one (1) parking space for each efficiency unit


Senior housing
 
One (1) space per dwelling unit


Apartments attached to businesses
 
Two (2) spaces per unit




 



   (B)   Institutional uses.



 


USE

 
MINIMUM PARKING REQUIRED


Chemical dependent or similar group home
 
One (1) space for each three (3) residents plus one (1) for each staff member


Community center
 
Parking shall be based on the uses within the building


Hospital
 
One (1) space for each three (3) hospital beds plus one (1) for each employee
on the largest shift. Bassinets shall not be counted as beds for the purpose
of calculating the number of off-street parking spaces required



 



 




Institutional group home

 
One (1) space for each four (4) residents allowed by city code


Library, museum, art gallery
 
One (1) space for each three hundred fifty (350) square feet of floor area in
the principal structure


Nursing home, boarding care home
 
One (1) space for each ten (10) beds plus one (1) for each employee on the
largest shift


Playground, playfield
 
Two (2) spaces per acres of playground and forty (40) spaces for each
playfield. When a public recreation site has more than one (1) use
designation, the required parking spaces must be determined for each
separately. The sum of those use requirements shall be the total number of
spaces required.


Post office, parcel delivery service
 
Ten (10) spaces plus one (1) space for each five hundred (500) square feet of
floor area devoted to office, processing or service plus one (1) space for
each vehicle customarily kept on the premises


Private club or lodge hall
 
One (1) space for each three (3) persons allowed within the maximum occupancy
load as established by city, county or state fire building or health codes


Religious institution
 
One (1) space for each three (3) seats based on the design capacity of the
main assembly hall.  Up to fifty percent (50%) of the required parking can
be provided through a nonexclusive written agreement with the owner of
another property located within two hundred (200) feet of an entrance to the
religious institution which authorizes parking during times of worship or
events conducted at the religious facility at times other than usual business
hours on property which is an off-street parking lot which meets the design
requirements of this chapter and satisfies the parking requirements for the
use of the other property during ordinary business hours during the usual
work week.


School - elementary, junior high
 
Two (2) spaces per classroom


School - high school, post secondary
 
One (1) space per staff member on the largest shift plus one (1) space for
each five (5) students




 



   (C)   Commercial uses.



 




USE

 
MINIMUM PARKING REQUIRED


Bank
 
One (1) space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of usable floor
area


Beauty or barber shop
 
Two (2) spaces per seat plus one (1) space per employee on the largest shift


Bowling alley
 
Five (5) spaces per lane. Other uses which are commonly associated with
bowling alleys, such as restaurants and game rooms, will require additional
parking and loading space, the number of which shall be determined by the
parking requirements for those uses specified in this section.


Business/trade school
 
One (1) space per student calculated by reference to the design of the school
structure plus one (1) space for each classroom


Car wash
 
Stacking for a minimum of three (3) vehicles per wash bay


Club, lodge
 
One (1) space for each three (3) seats calculated by reference to the design
of the facility plus one (1) space for every fifty (50) square feet of
customer space in the dining and or bar areas


Convenience store - with or without gas pumps
 
One (1) space per two hundred (200) feet of gross floor area plus one (1)
space per two (2) employees on the largest shift. Other uses which are
commonly associated with convenience stores, such as car washes, will require
additional parking and/or stacking space, the number of which shall be
determined by the parking requirements for those uses specified in this
section.


Convention/exhibition hall
 
One (1) space for each three (3) seats calculated by reference to the design
of the facility


Fast food establishment - with seating
 
One (1) space per three (3) patron seats plus one (1) space per two (2)
employees on the largest shift plus seven (7) continuous spaces for vehicle
stacking when a drive- through window is provided


Fast food establishment - without seating
 
One (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area plus one
(1) space per two (2) employees on the largest shift plus seven (7)
continuous spaces for vehicle stacking when a drive-through window is provided




 



 




Food service, bakery

 
One (1) space for each twenty-five (25) square feet of customer floor area


Funeral home
 
One (1) space for each five (5) seats plus one space for each two hundred
fifty (250) square feet of floor area not used for seating. If fixed seats
are not provided, the requirement shall be one (1) space for every thirty
five (35) square feet of seating area


Furniture/home furnishing store
 
Two parking spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor
area for customer parking plus one (1) parking space for each two (2)
employees


Golf/archery driving range
 
One (1) space for each target or driving tee


Golf course
 
Four (4) spaces for each golf hole plus one (1) space for each two hundred
(200) square feet of locker rooms and clubrooms. If the clubhouse contains
dining and/or bar facilities, the parking requirements shall be the same as
for a restaurant.


Grocery store
 
Four (4) spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of usable floor area


Hotel, motel
 
One (1) space for each guestroom. Any other use, such as restaurant and
conference space, requires additional parking and loading spaces as
determined by the parking requirements for those other uses specified in this
section.


Laundromat, coin operated cleaner
 
One (1) space for each four (4) machines


Medical/dental clinic and/or office
 
Three (3) parking spaces for each staff doctor or dentist


Miniature golf
 
Two (2) spaces per golf hole


Motor vehicle sales establishment
 
One (1) space for each five hundred (500) square feet of usable floor area of
sales room and two (2) spaces for each service stall and one (1) for each
employee


Motor vehicle service station (full service)
 
One (1) space per employee on the largest shift plus three (3) additional
spaces for each service stall


Office
 
One (1) space for every two hundred fifty (250) square feet of usable floor
area


Oil change station
 
One (1) space per employee on the largest shift plus stacking for two (2)
additional vehicles per service stall




 



 




Open sales / rental lot

 
One (1) space fore very two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of land
which is to be used for sales and display area


Restaurant, café
 
One (1) space per four (4) patron seats


Retail store (except as otherwise specified herein)
 
Four (4) parking spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross
floor area


Skating/ice/roller rink
 
One (1) space for every three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area


Sports/health club, swimming pool
 
One space for every two hundred (200) square feet of non- court area plus two
(2) spaces per tennis or racquet ball court and one (1) space for every fifty
(50) square feet of deck area for a swimming pool


Tavern, dance hall, night club, lounge
 
One (1) space per three (3) seats plus one space for every employee on the
largest shift


Theater, auditorium, assembly hall, meeting hall
 
One (1) space for every four (4) seats plus one (1) space for every employee
on the largest shift


Veterinary office
 
Three (3) spaces per doctor plus one (1) space per employee on the largest
shift




 



   (D)   Industrial uses.



 


USE

 
MINIMUM PARKING REQUIRED


Industrial/manufacturing establishment
 
Five (5) spaces plus one (1) space for each employee on the largest working
shift, but not less than one (1) space per one thousand (1,000) square feet
of gross floor area


Wholesale/warehouse establishment
 
Four (4) spaces plus one (1) for each employee on the largest working shift


Adult entertainment
 
One (1) space per employee on the largest shift plus one (1) space per two
hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area



 



   (E)   If it can be demonstrated by a property owner through market
studies or other means that the required off-street parking requirement is
excessive and lesser requirements justifiable, the City Council may reduce
the number of required spaces by passage of a resolution following review by
the Planning Commission.



   (F)   Any use not specifically mentioned above shall meet the
requirement of the use most clearly related to it as determined by the Zoning
Administrator. If the Zoning Administrator is unable to identify a similar
use, a determination shall be made by the City Council following review by
the Planning Commission.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.504  ADJUSTMENT TO OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS IN THE B-1 AND B-2
DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Should an existing building or structure be expanded, the
required off-street parking requirements shall be adjusted upwards
accordingly. No adjustment shall be made for downsizing of any
building/structure or the change of a business to a lower zoning use.



   (B)   In the B-1 district, new buildings/structures, expansions of
existing businesses, the off-street parking requirements may be met, upon
City Council approval, by providing the actual parking spaces, by obtaining
seasonal apartment parking permits, or by contributing to the City Parking
Fund for each space or fraction of a space required. The off-street parking
requirements can be met by any combination of actual spaces, seasonal
apartment parking permits and contributed spaces, provided that the
combination is equal to the theoretical amount of spaces required.



   (C)   The amount to be contributed to the City Parking Fund for each
required parking space in lieu of an actual space is five hundred dollars
($500.00) per space.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.505  OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING AREAS.



   (A)   Requirements.



      (1)   Location. All required loading berths shall be
off-street and shall be located on the same lot as the building or use to be
served. A loading berth shall not be located less than twenty-five (25) feet
from the intersection of two (2) street rights-of-way; nor less than fifty
(50) feet from a residential district unless within a building. Loading
berths shall not occupy the required front yard set back space.



      (2)   Size. Unless otherwise specified in the zoning code, a
required loading berth shall be not less than ten (10) feet in width, fifty
(50) feet in length and fourteen (14) feet in height, exclusive of aisle and
maneuvering space.



      (3)   Access.  Each required loading berth shall be located
with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or public alley in a
manner which will least interfere with traffic.



      (4)   Surfacing.  All loading berths and access ways shall be
improved with a durable material to control the dust and drainage according
to a plan approved by the City Engineer.



   (B)   Accessory use.  Any space allocated as a loading berth or
access drive so as to comply with the terms of the zoning code shall not be
used for the storage of goods, inoperable vehicles or be included as a part
of the space requirements necessary to meet the off-street parking area.



   (C)   Required minimum berths.



      (1)   Requirements.



         (a)   Non-residential uses having ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or more. For ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred thousand
(100,000) square feet floor area, one (1) loading berth; for each additional
thirty thousand (30,000) square feet of floor area or fraction thereof above
one-fourth (1/4), one (1) additional loading berth.  For a building having
twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or less, the length of the berth may be
reduced to twenty-five (25) feet.



         (b)   Retail sales, office public administration
building, hospitals, schools, hotels, and similar uses. For such a building
having ten thousand (10,000) to two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet of
floor area, one (1) off-street loading berth fifty (50) feet in length and
one (1) berth twenty-five (25) feet in length for each fifty thousand
(50,000) square feet or fraction thereof.



         (c)   Manufacturing, fabrication, warehousing, storing,
servicing, and similar establishments. For a building having ten thousand
(10,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet floor area, one (1)
loading berth fifty (50) feet in length and one (1) additional berth for each
additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet or fraction thereof
above one-fourth (1/4), and one (1) berth twenty-five (25) feet in length for
each thirty-five thousand (35,000) square feet of floor area or fraction
thereof.



      (2)   Other businesses. Upon receiving an application for a
particular use a for a parcel or building which is not adequately provided
for by the above categories mentioned and which, in the opinion of the
Building Inspector, is to receive or distribute goods or services which will
necessitate the use of trucking to the extent that special consideration
should be given to the request, such application shall be referred to the
Council for determination.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.506  HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES; SPECIAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   The height limitations imposed by other sections of the zoning
code shall be increased by fifty percent (50%) when applied to the following
structures:



      (1)   Church spires;



      (2)   Belfries;



      (3)   Water towers;



      (4)   Flag poles;



      (5)   Smoke stacks;



      (6)   Cooling towers;



      (7)   Elevators; and



      (8)   Elevator penthouse.



   (B)   Canopies over motor fuel dispensing islands at all types of
businesses offering the sale of motor fuels.



   (C)   Heights in excess of those allowed under this section shall be
permitted only by a conditional use permit granted by resolution of the City
Council determining that such structure would not be dangerous and would not
adversely affect the adjoining or adjacent property.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010))



§ 150.507  FRONT YARDS; SPECIAL PROVISIONS.



   In any R district where the front yard of an existing principal
structures, adjacent to the lot in question, are lesser that the minimum
required by code, the minimum front yard of the lot in question shall be the
average of the two (2) adjacent structures.  In the case where there is only
one (1) adjacent structure with a lesser front yard, the required front yard
for the lot in question shall be the average of the existing adjacent
structure and the minimum front yard setback required. In no case shall the
required front yard setback be less than fifteen (15) feet.



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 150.999  PENALTY.



   The city is responsible for the administration and enforcement of the
provisions of the Zoning Code. Any person, firm, corporation, or other body
that violates any of the provisions of the codes shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon the conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine
and/or imprisonment as allowed by the state statutes.  Each day that a
violation continues may constitute a separate offense.  Violations of the
codes can occur regardless of whether or not a permit is required for a
regulated activity pursuant to the ordinances. (M.S. §§ 609.03 and 609.033)



(Ord. 395, passed 7-6-2010)



CHAPTER 151:  SHORELAND MANAGEMENT



Section




General Provisions




   151.01   Definitions



   151.02   Statutory authorization



   151.03   Policy



   151.04   Jurisdiction



   151.05   Compliance




Shoreland Classification System and Land Use Districts




   151.15   Shoreland classification system



   151.16   Waterbodies



   151.17   Lakes, rivers and streams



   151.18   Criteria for designation



   151.19   Land use district descriptions




Zoning and Water Supply/Sanitation Provisions




   151.30   Lot area and width standards



   151.31   Placement, design and height of structures



   151.32   Shoreland alterations



   151.33   Placement and design of roads, driveways and parking areas



   151.34   Stormwater management



   151.35   Special provisions for commercial, industrial,
public/semipublic, agricultural, forestry and extractive uses and mining of
metallic minerals and peat



   151.36   Conditional use



   151.37   Water supply and sewage treatment water supply




Nonconformities




   151.50   Generally



   151.51   Construction on nonconforming lots of record



   151.52   Additions/expansions to nonconforming structures



   151.53   Nonconforming sewage treatment systems




Subdivision/Platting Provisions




   151.65   Land suitability



   151.66   Consistency with other controls



   151.67   Information requirements



   151.68   Dedications



   151.69   Platting



   151.70   Controlled access or recreational lots




Planned Unit Developments (PUD’s)




   151.80   Types of PUD’s permissible



   151.81   Processing of PUD’s



   151.82   Application for a PUD



   151.83   Site “suitable area” evaluation



   151.84   Residential and commercial PUD density evaluation



   151.85   Maintenance and design criteria



   151.86   Conversions



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 151.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR FACILITY.  Any building or improvement
subordinate to a principal use which, because of the nature of its use, can
reasonably be located at or greater than normal structure setbacks.



   BLUFF.  A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff, or embankment
having the following characteristics (an area with an average slope of less
than eighteen percent (18%) over a distance for fifty (50) feet or more shall
not be considered part of the bluff):



      (1)   Part or all of the feature is located in a shoreland
area:



      (2)   The slope rises at least twenty-five (25) feet above the
ordinary high water level of the waterbody;



      (3)   The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to a
point twenty-five (25) feet or more above the ordinary high water level
averages thirty percent (30%) or greater;



      (4)   The slope must drain toward the waterbody.



   BLUFF IMPACT ZONE.  A bluff and land located within twenty (20) feet
from the top of a bluff.



   BOATHOUSE.  A structure designed and used solely for the storage of
boats or boating equipment.



   BUILDING LINE.  A line parallel to a lot line or the ordinary high
water level at the required setback beyond which a structure may not extend.



   COMMERCIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS.  Uses that provide transient,
short-term lodging spaces, rooms, or parcels and their operations are
essentially service-oriented. For example, hotel/motel accommodations,
resorts, recreational vehicle and camping parks, and other primarily
service-oriented activities are commercial planned unit developments.



   COMMERCIAL USE.  The principal use of land or buildings for the sale,
lease, rental, or trade of products, goods, and services.



   COMMISSIONER.  The Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources.



   CONDITIONAL USE.  A land use or development as defined by ordinance
that would not be appropriate generally but may be allowed with appropriate
restrictions as provided by official controls upon a finding that certain
conditions as detailed in the zoning ordinance exist, the use or development
conforms to the comprehensive land use plan of the community, and the use is
compatible with the existing neighborhood.



   DECK.  A horizontal, unenclosed platform with or without attached
railings, seats, trellises, or other features, attached or functionally
related to a principal use or site and at any point extending more than three
(3) feet above ground.



   DUPLEX, TRIPLEX, AND QUAD.  A dwelling structure on a single lot,
having two (2), three (3), and four (4) units, respectively, being attached
by common walls and each unit equipped with separate sleeping, cooling,
eating, living, and sanitation facilities.



   DWELLING SITE.  A designated location for residential use by (1) one
or more persons using temporary or movable shelter, including camping and
recreational vehicle sites.



   DWELLING UNIT.  Any structure or portion of a structure, or other
shelter designed as short- or long-term living quarters for one (1) or more
persons, including rental or timeshare accommodations such as motel, hotel,
and resort rooms and cabins.



   EXTRACTIVE USE.  The use of land for surface or subsurface removal of
sand, gravel, rock, industrial minerals, other nonmetallic minerals, and peat
not regulated under M.S. §§ 93.44 through 93.51, as they may be amended
from time to time.



   FOREST LAND CONVERSION.  The clear cutting of forested lands to
prepare for a new land use other than reestablishment of a subsequent forest
stand.



   GUEST COTTAGE.  A structure used as a dwelling unit that may contain
sleeping spaces, kitchen and bathroom facilities in addition to those
provided in the primary dwelling unit on a lot.



   HEIGHT OF BUILDING.  The vertical distance between the highest
adjoining ground level at the building or ten (10) feet above the lowest
ground level, whichever is lower, and the highest point of a flat roof or
average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof.



   INDUSTRIAL USE.  The use of land or buildings for the production,
manufacture, warehousing, storage, or transfer of goods, products,
commodities, or other wholesale items.



   INTENSIVE VEGETATION CLEARING.  The complete removal of trees or
shrubs in a contiguous patch, strip, row, or block.



   NONCONFORMITY.  Any legal use, structure or parcel of land already in
existence, recorded, or authorized before the adoption of official controls
or amendments thereto that would not have been permitted to become
established under the terms of the official controls as now written, if the
official controls had been in effect prior to the date it was established,
recorded or authorized.



   ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL.  The boundary of public waters and
wetlands, and shall be an elevation delineating the highest water level which
has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon
the landscape, commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from
predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. For watercourses, the
ordinary high water level is the elevation of the top of the bank of the
channel. For reservoirs and flowages, the ordinary high water level is the
operating elevation of the normal summer pool.



   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.  A type of development characterized by a
unified site design for a number of dwelling units or dwelling sites on a
parcel, whether for sale, rent, or lease, and also usually involving
clustering of these units or sites to provide areas of common open space,
density increases, and a mix of structure types and land uses. These
developments may be organized and operated as condominiums, time-share
condominiums, cooperatives, full fee ownership, commercial enterprises, or
any combination of these, or cluster subdivisions of dwelling units,
residential condominiums, townhouses, apartment buildings, campgrounds,
recreational vehicle parks, resorts, hotels, motels, and conversions of
structures and land uses to these uses.



   PUBLIC WATERS.  Any waters as defined in M.S. § 105.37, Subds. 14 and
15, as they may be amended from time to time.



   RESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.  A use where the nature of
residency is nontransient and the major or primary focus of the development
is not service-oriented. For example, residential apartments, manufactured
home parks, time-share condominiums, townhouses, cooperatives, and full fee
ownership residences would be considered as residential planned unit
development, a development must contain at least five (5) dwelling units or
sites.



   SEMIPUBLIC USE.  The use of land by a private, nonprofit organization
to provide a public service that is ordinarily open to some persons outside
the regular constituency of the organization.



   SENSITIVE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT.  The preservation and management of
areas unsuitable for development in their natural state due to constraints
such as shallow soils over groundwater or bedrock, highly erosive or
expansive soils, steep slopes, susceptibility to flooding, or occurrence of
flora or fauna in need of special protection.



   SETBACK.  The minimum horizontal distance between a structure, sewage
treatment system, or other facility and an ordinary high water level, sewage
treatment system, top of a bluff, road, highway, property line, or other
facility.



   SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM.  A septic tank and soil absorption system or
other individual or cluster type sewage treatment system.



   SEWER SYSTEM.  Pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, and force
main, and all other construction, devices, appliances, or appurtenances used
for conducting sewage or industrial waste or other wastes to a point of
ultimate disposal.



   SHORE IMPACT ZONE.  Land located between the ordinary high water level
of a public water and a line parallel to it at a setback of 50 percent (50%)
of the structure setback.



   SHORELAND.  Land located within the following distances from public
waters: one thousand (1,000) feet from the ordinary high water level of a
lake, pond, or flowage; and three hundred (300) feet from a river or stream,
or the landward extent of a floodplain designated by ordinance on a river or
stream, whichever is greater. The limits of shorelands may be reduced
whenever the waters involved are bounded by topographic divides which extend
landward from the waters for lesser distances and when approved by the
Commissioner.



   SIGNIFICANT HISTORIC SITE.  Any archaeological site, standing
structure, or other property that meets the criteria for eligibility to the
National Register of Historic Places or is listed in the State Register of
Historic Sites, or is determined to be an unplatted cemetery that falls under
the provisions of M.S. § 307.08, as it may be amended from time to time. A
historic site meets these criteria if it is presently listed on either
register or if it is determined to meet the qualifications for listing after
review by the Minnesota State Archaeologist or the Director of the Minnesota
Historical Society. All unplatted cemeteries are automatically considered to
be significant historic sites.



   STEEP SLOPE.  Land where agricultural activity or development is
either not recommended or described as poorly suited due to slope steepness
and the site's soil characteristics, as mapped and described in available
county soil surveys or other technical reports, unless appropriate design and
construction techniques and farming practices are used in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. Where specific information is not available,
steep slopes are lands having average slopes over twelve percent (12%), as
measured over horizontal distances of fifty (50) feet or more, that are not
bluffs.



   SUBDIVISION.  Land that is divided for the purpose of sale, rent, or
lease, including planned unit developments.



   SURFACE WATER - ORIENTED COMMERCIAL USE.  The use of land for
commercial purposes, where access to and use of a surface water feature is an
integral part of the normal conductance of business. Marinas, resorts, and
restaurants which transient docking facilities are examples of such use.



   TOE OF THE BLUFF.  The lower point of a fifty (50) foot segment with
an average slope exceeding 18 percent (18%).



   TOP OF THE BLUFF.  The higher point of a fifty (50) foot segment with
an average slope exceeding eighteen percent (18%).



   WATER-ORIENTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR FACILITY.  A small, above ground
building or other improvement, except stairways, fences, docks, and retaining
walls, which, because of the relationship of its use to a surface water
feature, reasonably needs to be located closer to public waters than the
normal structure setback. Examples of such structures and facilities include
boathouses, gazebos, screen houses, fish houses, pump houses, and detached
decks.



   WETLAND.  A surface water feature classified as a wetland in the
United States Fish and Wildlife Service Circular No. 39 (1971 edition).



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 151.02  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authorization and policies
contained in M.S. Ch. 103, as it may be amended from time to time, Minnesota
Regulations, Parts 6120.2500 - 6120.3900, and the planning and zoning
enabling legislation in M.S. Ch. 462, as it may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 151.03  POLICY.



   The uncontrolled use of shorelands of the city affects the public
health, safety and general welfare not only by contributing to pollution of
public waters, but also by impairing the local tax base. Therefore, it is in
the best interests of the public health, safety and welfare to provide of the
wise subdivision, use and development of shorelands of public waters. The
Legislature of Minnesota has delegated responsibility to local governments of
the state to regulate the subdivision, use and development of the shorelands
of public waters and thus preserve and enhance the quality of surface waters,
conserve the economic and natural environmental values of shorelands, and
provide for the wise use of waters and related land resources. This
responsibility is hereby recognized by the city.



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 151.04  JURISDICTION.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the shorelands of the
public water bodies as classified in §§ 151.15 through 151.19 of this
chapter. Pursuant to Minnesota Regulations, Parts 6120.2500 - 6120.3900, no
lake, pond, or flowage less than ten (10) acres in size in municipalities or
twenty-five (25) acres in size in unincorporated areas need be regulated in a
local government's shoreland regulations. A body of water created by a
private user where there was no previous shoreland may, at the discretion of
the governing body, be exempt from this chapter.



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 151.05  COMPLIANCE.



   The use of any shoreland public waters; the size and shape of lots; the
use, size, type and location of structures on lots; the installation and
maintenance of water supply and waste treatment systems, the grading and
filling of any shoreland area; the cutting of shoreland vegetation; and the
subdivision of land shall be in full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and other applicable regulations.



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



SHORELAND CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM AND LAND USE DISTRICTS



§ 151.15  SHORELAND CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM.



   The public waters of the city have been classified below consistent
with the criteria found in Minnesota Regulations, Part 6120.3300, and
Protected Waters Inventory Map for Kanabec County, Minnesota.



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 151.16  WATERBODIES.



   The shoreland area for the waterbodies listed in § 151.17 of this
subchapter shall be as defined in the official zoning map.



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 151.17  LAKES, RIVERS, STREAMS AND RIVERS.



 



   Lakes


Recreational development lakes



   Spring Lake

 
Inventory I.D. 33-27


General development lakes



   Lake Mora

 
Inventory I.D. 33-34


   Rivers and Streams


Transition Rivers



   Snake River

 
Legal description - North Section line, Sec. 30, T40N, R23W


   Tributary streams


All protected watercourses in the city shown on the Protected Waters
Inventory Map for Kanabec County, a copy of which is hereby adopted by
reference, not given a classification shall be considered “tributary.”




 



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 151.18  CRITERIA FOR DESIGNATION.



   The land use districts in § 151.18, and the delineation of a land use
district's boundaries on the official zoning map, must be consistent with the
goals, policies, and objectives of the comprehensive land use plan and the
following criteria, considerations, and objectives:



   (A)   General considerations and criteria for all land uses.



      (1)   Preservation of natural area;



      (2   Present ownership and development of shoreland areas;



      (3)   Shoreland soil types and their engineering capabilities;



      (4)   Topographic characteristics;



      (5)   Vegetative cover;



      (6)   In-water physical characteristics, values, and
constraints;



      (7)   Recreational use of the surface water;



      (8)   Road and service center accessibility;



      (9)   Socioeconomic development needs and plans as they
involve water and related resources;



      (10)   The land requirements of industry which, by its nature,
requires location in shoreland areas;



      (11)   The necessity to preserve and restore certain areas
having significant historical or ecological value.



   (B)   Factors and criteria for planned unit development.



      (1)   Existing recreational use of the surface waters and
likely increases in use associated with planned unit developments;



      (2)   Physical and aesthetic impacts of increased density;



      (3)   Suitability of lands for the planned unit development
approach;



      (4)   Level of current development in the area;



      (5)   Amounts and types of ownership of undeveloped lands.



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 151.19  LAND USE DISTRICT DESCRIPTIONS.



   The land use districts provided below, and the allowable land uses
therein for the given classifications of waterbodies, shall be properly
delineated on the official zoning map for the shorelands of this community.
These land use districts are in conformance with the criteria specified in
Minnesota Regulations, Part 6120.3200, Subp. 3:



 




Land Use Districts for Lakes





 

General Development Lakes

 

Recreational Development Lakes



Residential district - uses
 


 





   Single residential

 

P

 

P




   Semi-public

 

C

 

C




   Parks and historic sites

 

C

 

C




   Extractive use

 

C

 

C




   Duplex, triplex, quad residential

 

C

 

C




   Forest management

 

P

 

P



High density residential district - uses
 
 



   Residential planned unit developments

 

C

 

C




   Surface water oriented commercial*

 

C

 

C




   Semi-public

 

C

 

C




   Parks and historic sites

 

C

 

C




   Duplex, triplex, quad residential

 

P

 

P




   Forest management

 

P

 

P



General use district - uses
 
 



   Commercial

 

P

 

P




   Commercial planned unit development**

 

C

 

C




   Industrial

 

C

 

C




   Public, semi-public

 

P

 

P




   Extractive use

 

C

 

C




   Parks and historic site

 

C

 

C




   Forest management

 

P

 

P




   Mining of metallic materials and peat

 

P

 

P




*   As accessory to a residential planned unit development



**   Limited expansion of a commercial planned unit development involving
up to six (6) additional dwelling units or sites may be allowed as a
permitted use provide the provisions of §§ 151.80 through 151.86 are
satisfied





 




Land Use Districts for Rivers and Streams



 

Transition

 

Tributary



Residential district - uses
 
 



   Single residential

 

P

 

P




   Semi-public

 

C

 

P




   Parks and historic sites

 

C

 

P




   Extractive use

 

C

 

C




   Duplex, triplex, quad residential

 

C

 

C




   Forest management

 

C

 

C




   Mining of metallic minerals and peat

 

C

 

C



High density residential - uses
 
 



   Residential planned unit developments

 

C

 

C




   Single residential

 

C

 

C




   Surface water oriented commercial*

 

C

 

C




   Semi-public

 

C

 

C




   Parks and historic sites

 

C

 

C




   Duplex, triplex, quad residential

 

P

 

P




   Forest management

 

C

 

C




*   As accessory to a residential planned unit development





 



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)




ZONING AND WATER SUPPLY/SANITATION PROVISIONS




§ 151.30  LOT AREA AND WIDTH STANDARDS.



   The lot area (in square feet) and lot width standards (in feet) for
single, duplex, triplex and quad residential lots created after the date of
enactment of this chapter for the lake and river/stream classifications are
the following:



   (A)   Unsewered lakes.



 



 

Riparian Area

 

Lots Width

 

Nonriparian Area

 

Lots Width



Recreational development
 


 


 


 





   Single

 

40,000

 

150

 

40,000

 

150




   Duplex

 

80,000

 

225

 

80,000

 

265




   Triplex

 

120,000

 

300

 

120,000

 

375




   Quad

 

160,000

 

375

 

160,000

 

490



General development
 


 


 


 





   Single

 

20,000

 

100

 

40,000

 

150




   Duplex

 

40,000

 

180

 

80,000

 

265




   Triplex

 

60,000

 

260

 

120,000

 

375




   Quad

 

80,000

 

340

 

160,000

 

490





 



   (B)   Sewered lakes.



 



 

Riparian Area

 

Lots Width

 

Nonriparian Area

 

Lots Width



Recreational development
 


 


 


 





   Single

 

20,000

 

75

 

15,000

 

75




   Duplex

 

35,000

 

135

 

26,000

 

135




   Triplex

 

50,000

 

195

 

38,000

 

160




   Quad

 

65,000

 

255

 

49,000

 

245



General development
 


 


 


 





   Single

 

15,000

 

75

 

10,000

 

75




   Duplex

 

26,000

 

135

 

17,500

 

135




   Triplex

 

38,000

 

195

 

25,000

 

190




   Quad

 

49,000

 

255

 

32,500

 

245





 



   (C)   River/stream lot width standards.  There is no minimum lot
size requirements for rivers and streams. The lot width standards for single,
duplex, triplex and quad residential developments for the six river/stream
classifications are:



 

 

Transition

 

Urban and Tributary



 

No Sewer

 

Sewer

 

No Sewer

 

Sewer



Single
 

150

 

100

 

100

 

75



Duplex
 

200

 

150

 

150

 

115



Triplex
 

225

 

200

 

200

 

150



Quad
 

250

 

250

 

250

 

190




 



   (D)   Additional special provisions.



      (1)   Residential subdivisions with dwelling unit densities
exceeding those in the tables in this section can only be allowed if designed
and approved as residential planned unit developments under §§ 151.80
through 151.86 of this chapter. Only land above the ordinary high water level
of public waters can be used to meet lot area standards, and lot width
standards must be met at both the ordinary high water level and at the
building line. The sewer lot area dimensions in this section can only be used
if publicly owned sewer system service is available to the property.



      (2)   Subdivisions of duplexes, triplexes, and quads on
natural environment lakes must also meet the following standards:



         (a)   Each building must be set back at least two
hundred (200) feet from the ordinary high water level;



         (b)   Each building must have common sewage treatment
and water systems in one (1) location and serve all dwelling units in the
building;



         (c)   Watercraft docking facilities for each lot must be
centralized in one (1) location and serve all dwelling units in the building;



         (d)   No more than twenty-five percent (25%) of a lake's
shoreline can be in duplex, triplex, or quad developments.



      (3)   One (1) guest cottage may be allowed on lots meeting or
exceeding the duplex lot area and width dimensions presented in this section,
provided the following standards are met:



         (a)   For lots exceeding the minimum lot dimensions of
duplex lots, the guest cottage must be located within the smallest
duplex-sized lot that could be created including the principal dwelling unit;



         (b)   A guest cottage must not cover more than seven
hundred (700) square feet of land surface and must not exceed fifteen (15)
feet in height;



         (c)   A guest cottage must be located or designed to
reduce its visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by
vegetation, topography, increased setbacks or color, assuming summer leaf-on
conditions.



      (4)   Lots intended as controlled accesses to public waters or
as recreation areas for use by owners of nonriparian lots within subdivisions
are permissible and must meet or exceed the following standards:



         (a)   They must meet the width and size requirements for
residential lots and be suitable for the intended uses of controlled access
lots.



         (b)   If docking, mooring, or over-water storage of more
than six (6) watercraft is to be allowed at a controlled access lot, then the
width of the lot (keeping the same lot depth) must be increased by the
percent of the requirements for riparian residential lots for each watercraft
beyond six (6), consistent with the following table:



 

Controlled Access Lot Frontage Requirements


Ratio of Lake Size to Shore Length (Acres/Mile)
 
Required Increase in Frontage (Percent)


Less than 100
 
25


100 - 200
 
20


201 - 300
 
15


301 - 400
 
10


Greater than 400
 
5



 



         (c)   They must be jointly owned by all purchasers of
lots in the subdivision or by all purchasers of nonriparian lots in the
subdivision who are provided riparian access rights not the access lot;



         (d)   Covenants or other equally effective legal
instruments must be developed that specify which lot owners have authority to
use the access lot and what activities are allowed. The activities may
include watercraft launching, loading, storage, beaching, mooring, or
docking. They must also include other outdoor recreational activities that do
not significantly conflict with general public use of the public water or the
enjoyment of normal property rights by adjacent property owners. Examples of
the nonsignificant conflict activities include swimming, sunbathing, or
picnicking. The covenants must limit the total number of vehicles allowed to
be parked and the total number of watercraft allowed to be continuously
moored, docked, or stored over water, and must require centralization of all
common facilities and activities in the most suitable locations on the lot to
minimize topographic and vegetation alterations. They must also require all
parking areas, storage buildings, and other facilities to be screened by
vegetation or topography as must as practical from view from the public
water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 151.31  PLACEMENT, DESIGN, AND HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Placement of structures on lots.  When more than one (1)
setback applies to a site, structures and facilities must be located to meet
all setbacks. Where structures exist on the adjoining lots on both sides of a
proposed building site, structure setbacks may be altered without a variance
to conform to the adjoining setbacks from the ordinary high water level,
provided the proposed building site is not located in a shore impact zone or
in a bluff impact zone. Structures shall be located as follows.



      (1)   Structures and on-site sewage systems setbacks (in feet)
from ordinary high water level.



 



Setbacks*


Classes of Public Treatment Waters
 

Structures

 

Sewage System




Unsewered

 

Sewered



Lakes
 


 


 





   Recreational development

 

100

 

50

 

75




   General development

 

100

 

50

 

75



Rivers
 


 


 





   Forested and transition

 

100

 

50

 

75




   Agriculture, urban and tributary

 

100

 

50

 

75




*   One water-oriented accessory structure designed in accordance with
division (B) may be set back a minimum distance of ten (10) feet from the
ordinary high water level.





 



      (2)   Additional structure setbacks.  The following
additional structure setbacks apply, regardless of the classification of the
waterbody:



 

Setback From
 

Setback (Feet)



Top of bluff
 

30



Unplatted cemetery
 

50



Right-of-way line of federal, state, or county highway; and
 

50



Right-of-way line of town road, public streets, or other roads or street not
classified
 

20




 



      (3)   Bluff impact zones.  Structures and accessory
facilities, except stairways and landings, must not be placed within bluff
impact zones.



      (4)   Uses without water-oriented needs.  Uses without
water-oriented needs must be located on lots or parcels without public waters
frontage, or, if located on lots or parcels with public waters frontage, must
either be set back double the normal ordinary high water level setback or be
substantially screened from view from the water by vegetation or to
topography, assuming summer, while meeting the normal structure setback by
leaf-on conditions.



   (B)   Design criteria for structures.



      (1)   High water elevations.  Structures must be placed in
accordance with any floodplain regulations applicable to the site. Where
these controls do not exist, the elevation to which the lowest floor,
including basement, is placed or flood-proofed must be determined as follow:



         (a)   For lakes, by placing the lowest floor at a level
at least three feet above the highest known water level, or three feet above
the ordinary high water level, whichever is higher;



         (b)   For rivers and streams, by placing the lowest
floor at least three (3) feet above the flood of record, if data is
available. If data is not available, by placing the lowest floor at least
three (3) feet above the ordinary high water level, or by conducting a
technical evaluation to determine effects of proposed construction upon flood
stages and flood flows and to establish a flood protection elevation. Under
all three (3) approaches, technical evaluations must be done by a qualified
engineer or hydrologist consistent with Minnesota Rules, parts 6120.5000 to
6120.6200 governing the management of flood plain areas. If more than one (1)
approach is used, the highest flood protection elevation determined must be
used for placing structures and other facilities;



         (c)   Water-oriented accessory structures may have the
lowest floor placed lower than the elevation determined in this item if the
structure is constructed of flood-resistant materials to the elevation,
electrical and mechanical equipment is placed above the elevation and, if
long duration flood is anticipated, the structure is built to withstand ice
action and wind-driven waves and debris.



      (2)   Water-oriented accessory structures.  Each lot may have
one (1) water-oriented accessory structure not meeting the normal structure
setback in division (A) of this section if this water-oriented accessory
structure complies with the following provisions:



         (a)   The structure or facility must not exceed ten (10)
feet in height, exclusive of safety rails, and cannot occupy an area greater
than two hundred fifty (250) square feet. Detached decks must not exceed
eight (8) feet above grade at any point;



         (b)   The setback of the structure or facility from the
ordinary high water level must be at least ten (10) feet;



         (c)   The structure or facility must be treated to
reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by
vegetation, topography, increased setbacks or color, assuming summer, leaf-on
conditions;



         (d)   The roof may be used as a deck with safety rails,
but must not be enclosed or used as a storage area;



         (e)   The structure or facility must not be designed or
used for human habitation and must not contain water supply or sewage
treatment facilities;



         (f)   As an alternative for general development and
recreational development waterbodies, water-oriented accessory structures
used solely for watercraft storage, and including storage of related boating
and water-oriented sporting equipment, may occupy an area up to four hundred
(400) square feet provided the maximum width of the structure is twenty (20)
feet as measured parallel to the configuration of the shoreline.



      (3)   Stairways, lifts, and landings.  Stairways and lifts
are the preferred alternative to major topographic alterations for achieving
access up and down bluffs and steep slopes to shore areas. Stairways and
lifts must meet the following design requirements:



         (a)   Stairways and lifts must not exceed four (4) feet
in width on residential lots. Wider stairways may be used for commercial
properties, public open-space recreational properties, and planned unit
developments;



         (b)   Landing for stairways and lifts on residential
lots must not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet may be used for commercial
properties, public open-space recreational properties, and planned unit
developments;



         (c)   Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways,
lifts, or landings;



         (d)   Stairways, lifts, and landings may be either
constructed above the ground on posts or pilings, or placed into the ground,
provided they are designed and built in a manner that ensures control of soil
erosion;



         (e)   Stairways, lifts and landings must be located in
the most visually inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from the surface
of the public water assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, whenever practical;
and



         (f)   Facilities such as ramps, lifts, or mobility paths
for physically handicapped persons are also allowed for achieving access to
shore areas, provided that the dimensional and performance standards of
subsections (a) to (e) complies with in addition to the requirements to
Minnesota Regulations, Chapter 1340.



      (4)   Significant historic sites.  No structure may be placed
on a significant historic site in a manner that affects the values of the
site unless adequate information about the site has been removed and
documented in a public repository.



      (5)   Steep slopes.  The Zoning Administrator must evaluate
possible soil erosion impacts and development visibility from public waters
before issuing a permit for construction of sewage treatment systems, roads,
driveways, structures, or the improvements on steep slopes. When determined
necessary, conditions must be attached to issued permits to prevent erosion
and to preserve existing vegetation screening of structures, vehicles, and
other facilities as viewed from the surface of public waters, assuming
summer, leaf-of vegetation.



   (C)   Height of structures.  All structures in residential
districts, except churches and nonresidential agricultural structures, must
not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height.



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 151.32  SHORELAND ALTERATIONS.



   Alterations of vegetation and topography will be regulated to prevent
erosion into public waters, fix nutrients, preserve shoreland aesthetics,
preserve historic values, prevent bank slumping, and protect fish and
wildlife habitat.



   (A)   Vegetation alterations.



      (1)   Vegetation alteration necessary for the construction of
structures and sewage treatment systems and the construction of roads and
parking areas regulated by § 151.33 of this chapter are exempt from the
vegetation alterations standards that follow.



      (2)   Removal or alteration of vegetation, except for
agricultural and forest management uses as regulated in § 151.35(A) and (B),
respectfully, is allowed subject to the following standards:



         (a)   Intensive vegetation clearing within the shore and
bluff impact zones and on steep slopes is not allowed. Intensive vegetation
clearing for forest land conversion to another use outside of these areas is
allowable as a conditional use if an erosion control and sedimentation plan
is developed and approved by the soil and water conservation district in
which the property is located.



         (b)   In shore and bluff impact zones and on steep
slopes, limited clearing of trees and shrubs and cutting, pruning, and
trimming of trees is allowed to provide a view to the water for the principle
dwelling site and to accommodate the placement of stairways and landings,
picnic areas, access paths, livestock watering areas, beach and watercraft
access areas, and permitted water-oriented accessory structures or
facilities, provided that:



            1.   The screening of structures, vehicles, or
other facilities as viewed from the water, assuming summer, leaf-of
conditions, is not substantially reduced;



            2.   Along rivers, existing shading of water
surfaces is preserved;



            3.   The above provisions are not applicable to
the removal of trees, limbs, or branches that are dead, diseased or pose
safety hazards.



   (B)   Topographic alterations/grading and filling.



      (1)   Grading, filling and excavations necessary for the
construction of structures, sewage issued construction permits for these
facilities do not require the issuance of a separate grading and filling
permit . However, the grading and filling standards in this section must be
incorporated into the issuance of permits for construction of structures,
sewage treatment systems, and driveways.



      (2)   Public roads and parking areas are regulated by §
151.33 of this chapter.



      (3)   Notwithstanding subdivisions (1) and (2) above, a
grading and filling permit will be required for:



         (a)   The movement of more than ten (10) cubic yards of
material on steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones;



         (b)   The movement of more than fifty (50) cubic yards
of material outside of steep slopes and shores and bluffs impact zones.



      (4)   The following considerations and conditions must be
adhered to during the issuance of construction permits, grading and filling
permits, conditional use permits, variances and subdivision approvals.



         (a)   Grading or filling in any type two (2), three (3),
four (4), five (5), six (6), seven (7), or eight (8) wetland must be
evaluated to determine how extensively the proposed activity would affect the
following functional qualities of the wetland (This evaluation must also
include a determination of whether the wetland alteration being proposed
requires permits, reviews, or approvals by other local, state, or federal
agencies such as a watershed district, the Minnesota Department of Natural
Resources, or the United States Army Corps of Engineers. The applicant will
be so advised.):



            1.   Sediment and pollutant trapping and retention;



            2.   Storage of surface runoff to prevent or
reduce flood damage;



            3.   Fish and wildlife habitat;



            4.   Recreational use;



            5.   Shoreline or bank stabilization; and



            6.   Noteworthiness, including special qualities
such as historic significance, critical habitat for endangered plants and
animals, or others.



         (b)   Alterations must be designed and conducted in a
manner that ensures only the smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for
the shortest time possible;



         (c)   Mulches or similar materials must be used, where
necessary, for temporary bare soil coverage, and a permanent vegetation cover
must be established as soon as possible;



         (d)   Methods to minimize soil erosion and to trap
sediments before they reach any surface water feature must be used;



         (e)   Altered areas must be stabilized to acceptable
erosion control standards consistent with the field office technical guides
of the local soil and water conservation districts and the United States Soil
Conservation Service;



         (f)   Fill or excavated material on steep slopes must be
placed in a manner that creates unstable slopes;



         (g)   Plans to place fill or excavated material on steep
slopes must be reviewed by qualified professionals for continued slope
stability and must not create finished slopes of thirty percent (30%) or
greater;



         (h)   Fill or excavated material must not be placed in
bluff impact zones;



         (i)   Any alteration below the ordinary high water level
of public waters must first be authorized by the commissioner under M.S. §
103G.245, as it may be amended from time to time;



         (j)   Alterations of topography must only be allowed if
they are accessory to permitted or conditional uses and do not adversely
affect adjacent or nearby properties;



         (k)   Placement of natural rock riprap, including
associated grading of the shoreline and placement of a filter blanket, is
permitted if the finished slope does not exceed three (3) feet horizontal to
one (1) foot vertical, the landward extent of the riprap is within five (5)
feet of the ordinary high water level, and the height of the riprap above the
ordinary high water level does not exceed three (3) feet.



      (5)   Excavations where the intended purpose is connection to
a public water, such as boat slips, canals, lagoons, and harbors, must be
controlled by local shoreland controls . Permission for excavation may be
given only after the commissioner has approved the proposed connection to
public waters.



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 151.33  PLACEMENT AND DESIGN OF ROADS, DRIVEWAYS, AND PARKING AREAS.



   (A)   Public and private road and parking areas must designed to
take advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve maximum
screening from view from public waters. Documentation must be provided by a
qualified individual that all roads and parking areas are designed and
constructed to minimize and control erosion to public waters consistent with
the field office technical guides of the local soil and water conservation
district, or other applicable technical materials.



   (B)    Roads, driveways, and parking areas must meet structure
setback and must not be placed within bluff and shore impact zone, when other
reasonable and feasible placement alternatives exist. If no alternatives
exist, they may be placed within these areas, and must be designed to
minimize adverse impact.



   (C)   Public and private watercraft access ramps, approach roads,
and access-related parking areas may be placed within shore impact zones
provided the vegetative screening and erosion control conditions of this
subpart are met. For private facilities, the grading and filling provisions
of § 151.32  of this chapter must be met.



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 151.34  STORMWATER MANAGEMENT.



   The following general and specific standards shall apply:



   (A)   General standards.



      (1)   When possible, existing natural drainageways, wetlands,
and vegetated soil surfaces must be used to convey, store, filter, and retain
stormwater runoff before discharge to public waters.



      (2)   Development must be planned and conducted in a manner
that will minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities, erosion
potential, and reduce and delay runoff volumes. Disturbed areas must be
stabilized and protected as soon as possible and facilities or methods used
to retain sediment on the site.



      (3)   When development density, topographic features, and soil
and vegetation conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle stormwater
runoff using natural features and vegetation, various types of constructed
facilities such as diversions, settling basins, skimming devices, dikes,
waterways, and ponds may be used. Preference must be given to designs using
surface drainage, vegetation, and infiltration rather than buried pipes and
man-made materials and facilities.



   (B)   Specific standards.



      (1)   Impervious surface coverage of lots must not exceed
twenty-five percent (25%) of the lot area.



      (2)   When constructed facilities are used for stormwater
management, documentation must be provided by a qualified individual that
they are designed and installed consistent with the field office technical
guide of the local soil and water conservation districts.



      (3)   New constructed stormwater outfalls to public waters
must provide for filtering or settling of suspended solids and skimming of
surface debris before discharge.



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 151.35  SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, PUBLIC/
SEMIPUBLIC, AGRICULTURAL, FORESTRY AND EXTRACTIVE USES AND MINING OF METALLIC
MINERALS AND PEAT.



   (A)   Standards for commercial, industrial, public, and semipublic
uses.



      (1)   Surface water-oriented commercial uses and industrial,
public, or semipublic uses with similar needs to have access to and use of
public waters may be located on parcels or lots with frontage on public
waters. Those uses with water-oriented need must meet the following standards:



         (a)   In addition to meeting impervious coverage limits,
setbacks, and other zoning standards in this ordinance, the uses must be
designed to incorporate topographic and vegetative screening of parking areas
and structures;



         (b)   Uses that require short-term watercraft mooring
for patrons must centralize these facilities and design them to avoid
obstructions of navigation and to be the minimum size necessary to meet the
need; and



         (c)   Uses that depend on patrons arriving by watercraft
may use sign and lighting to convey needed information to the public, subject
to the following general standards:



            1.   No advertising signs or supporting facilities
for signs may be placed in or upon public waters. Signs conveying information
or safety messages may be placed in or on public waters by a public authority
or under a permit issued by the Country Sheriff;



            2.   Signs may be placed, when necessary, within
the shore impact zone if they are designed and sized to be the minimum
necessary to convey needed information . They must only convey the location
and name of the establishment and the general types of goods or services
available. The sign must not contain other detailed information such as
product brands and prices, must not be located higher than ten (10) feet
above the ground, and must not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in size. If
illuminated by artificial lights, the lights must be shielded or directed to
prevent illumination out across public waters;



            3.   Other outside lighting may be located within
the shore impact zone or over public waters if it is used primarily to
illuminate potential safety hazards and is shielded or otherwise directed to
prevent direct illumination out across public waters. This does not preclude
use of navigational lights.



      (2)   Uses without water-oriented needs must be located on
lots or parcels without public water frontage, or, if located on lots or
parcels with public water frontage, must either be set back double the normal
ordinary high water level setback or be substantially screened from view from
the water by vegetation or topography, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.



   (B)   Agriculture use standards.



      (1)   General cultivation farming, grazing, nurseries,
horticulture, truck farming, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting are
permitted uses if steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones are
maintained in permanent vegetation or operated under an approved conservation
plan (resource management systems) consistent with the field office technical
guides of the local soil and water conservation districts or the United
States Soil Conservation Service, as provided by a qualified individual or
agency. The shore impact zone for parcels with permitted agricultural land
uses is equal to a line parallel to and fifty (50) feet from the ordinary
high water level.



      (2)   Animal feedlots must meet the following standards:



         (a)   New feedlots must not be located in the shoreland
of watercourses or in bluff impact zones and must meet a minimum setback of
three hundred (300) feet from the ordinary high water level of all public
waters basins; and



         (b)   Modifications or expansions to existing feedlots
that are located within three hundred (300) feet of the ordinary high water
level or within a bluff impact zone are allowed if they do not further
encroach into the existing ordinary high water level setback or encroach on
bluff impact zones.



   (C)   Forest management standards.  The harvesting of timber and
associated reforestation must be conducted consistent with the provisions of
the Minnesota Nonpoint Source Pollution Assessment-Forestry and the
provisions of Water Qualities in Forest Management “Best Management
Practices in Minnesota.”



   (D)   Extractive use standards.



      (1)   Site development and restoration plan.  An extractive
use site development and restoration plan must be developed, approved, and
followed over the coarse of operation of the site. The plan must address
dust, noise, possible pollutant discharges, hours and duration of operation,
and anticipated vegetation and topographic alterations. It must also identify
actions to be taken during operation to mitigate adverse environmental
impacts, particularly erosion, and must clearly explain how the site will be
rehabilitated after extractive activities end.



      (2)   Setbacks from processing machinery.  Processing
machinery must be located consistent with setback standards for structures
from ordinary high water levels of public waters and from bluffs.



   (E)   Mining of metallic minerals and peat.  Mining of metal mining
minerals and peat, as defined in M.S. §§ 93.44 to 93.51, as they may be
amended frm time to time, shall be a permitted use provided the provisions of
M.S. §§ 93.44 to 93.51, as they may be amended from time to time, are
satisfied.



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 151.36  CONDITIONAL USE.



   Conditional uses allowable within shoreland areas shall be subject to
the review and approval procedures, and criteria and conditions for review of
conditional uses established community-wide. The following additional
evaluation criteria and conditions apply within shoreland areas:



   (A)   Evaluation criteria.  A thorough evaluation of the waterbody
and the topographic, vegetation, and soils conditions on the site must be
made to ensure:



      (1)   The prevention of soil erosion or other possible
pollution of public waters, both during and after construction;



      (2)   The visibility of structures and other facilities as
viewed from public waters is limited;



      (3)   The site is adequate for water supply and on-site sewage
treatment; and



      (4)   The type, uses, and numbers of watercraft that the
project will generate are compatible in relation to the suitability of public
waters to safely accommodate these watercraft.



   (B)   Conditions attached to conditional use permits. The Planning
Commission, upon consideration of the criteria listed above the purposes of
this chapter, shall attach such conditions to the issuance of the conditional
use permit as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter.
These conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:



      (1)   Increased set backs from the ordinary high water level;



      (2)   Limitations on the natural vegetation to be removed or
the requirement that additional vegetation be planted;



      (3)   Special provision for the location, design, and use of
structures, sewage treatment systems, watercraft launching and docking areas,
and vehicle parking areas.



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 151.37  WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE TREATMENT WATER SUPPLY.



   (A)   Generally.  Any public or private supply of water for
domestic purpose must meet or exceed standards for water quality of the
Minnesota Department of Health and the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



   (B)   Sewage treatment.  Any premises used for human occupancy must
be provided with an adequate method of sewage treatment, as follows:



      (1)   Publicly-owned sewer systems must be used where
available.



      (2)   All private sewage treatment systems must meet or exceed
the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency's standards for individual sewage
treatment systems contained in the document titled, “Individual Sewage
Treatment Systems Standards, Chapter 7080”, a copy of which is hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a party of this chapter.



      (3)   On-site sewage treatment systems must be set back from
the ordinary high level in accordance with the ordinary high level in
accordance with the setbacks contained in § 151.31 of this chapter.



      (4)   All proposed sites for individual sewage treatment
systems shall be evaluated in accordance with the criteria in subsections (a)
through (d) below. If the determination of a site's suitability cannot be
made with publicly available, existing information, it shall then be the
responsibility of the applicant to provide sufficient soil borings and
percolation tests from on-site field investigations.



 

   Evaluation Criteria


Depth to the highest known or calculated ground water table or bedrock


Soil conditions, properties, and permeability


Slope


The existence of lowlands, local surface depressions, and rockoutcrops



 



   (5)   Nonconforming sewage treatment systems shall be regulated and
upgraded in accordance with § 151.5 of this chapter.



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



NONCONFORMITIES



§ 151.50  GENERALLY.



   All legally established nonconformities as of the date of this chapter
may continue, but they will be managed according to applicable state statutes
and other regulations of this community for the subjects of alterations and
additions, repair after damage, discontinuance of use, and intensification of
use; except that the standards in this subchapter will also apply in
shoreland areas.



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 151.51  CONSTRUCTION ON NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.



   (A)   Lots of record in the office of the County Recorder on the
date of enactment of local shoreland controls that do not meet the
requirements of § 151.30 of this chapter may be allowed as building sites
without variances from lot size requirements provided the use is permitted in
the zoning district, the lot has been in separate ownership from abutting
lands at all times since it became substandard, was created compliant with
official controls in effect at the time, and sewage treatment and setback
requirements of this chapter are met.



   (B)   A variance from setback requirements must be obtained before
any use, sewage treatment system, or building permit is issued for a lot. In
evaluating the variance, the Board of Adjustment shall consider sewage
treatment and water supply capabilities or constraints of the lot and shall
deny the variance if adequate facilities cannot be provided.



   (C)   In a group of two (2) or more contiguous lots under the same
ownership, any individual lot does not meet the requirements of § 151.30 of
this chapter, the lot must not be considered as a separate parcel of land for
the purposes of sale or development. The lot must be combined with the one
(1) or more contiguous lots so they equal one (1) or more parcels of land,
each meeting the requirements of § 151.30 of this chapter as much as
possible.



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 151.52  ADDITIONS/EXPANSIONS TO NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.



   (A)   All additions or expansions to the outside dimensions of an
existing nonconforming structure must meet the setback, height, and other
requirements of §§ 151.30 to 151.37 of this chapter. Any deviation from
these requirements must be authorized by a variance pursuant to § 151.51.



   (B)   Deck additions may be allowed without a variance to a
structure not meeting the required setback from the ordinary high water level
if all of the following criteria and standards are met:



      (1)   The structure existed on the date the structure setbacks
were established;



      (2)   A thorough evaluation of the property and structure
reveals no reasonable location for a deck meeting or exceeding the existing
ordinary high water level setback of the structure;



      (3)   The deck encroachment toward the ordinary high water
level does not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the existing setback of the
structure from the ordinary high water level or does not encroach closer than
thirty (30) feet, whichever is more restrictive; and



      (4)   The deck is constructed primarily of wood and is not
roofed or screened.



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 151.53  NONCONFORMING SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Sewage treatment systems not meeting the requirements of §
151.37 of this chapter must be upgraded, at a minimum, at any time a permit
or variance of any type is required for any improvement on, or use of, the
property . For the purposes of this provision, a sewage treatment system
shall not be considered nonconforming if the only deficiency is the sewage
treatment system's improper setback from the ordinary high water level.



   (B)   The governing body of the city has, by formal resolution,
notified the commissioner of its program to identify nonconforming sewage
treatment systems. The city will require upgrading or replacement of any
unconforming system identify by this program with in a reasonable period of
time which will not exceed three (3) years. Sewage systems installed
according to all applicable local shoreland management standards adopted
under M.S. § 105.485, as it may be amended from time to time, in effect at
the time of installation may be considered as conforming unless they are
determined to be failing, except that systems using cesspools, leaching pits,
seepage pits, or other deep disposal methods, or systems with less soil
treatment area separation above ground water than required by the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency's Chapter 7080 for design on-site sewage treatment
systems, shall be considered nonconforming.



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



SUBDIVISION/PLATTING PROVISIONS



§ 151.65  LAND SUITABILITY.



   Each lot created through subdivision, including planned unit
developments authorized under §§ 151.80 through 151.86 of this chapter,
must be suitable in its natural state for the proposed use with minimal
alteration. Suitability analysis by the local unit of government shall
consider susceptibility to flooding, existence of wetlands, soil and rock
formations with severe limitations for development, severe erosion potential,
steep topography, inadequate water supply or sewage treatment capabilities,
near-shore aquatic conditions unsuitable for water-based recreation,
important fish and wildlife habitat, presence of significant historic sites,
or any other feature of the natural land likely to be harmful to the health,
safety, or welfare of future residents of the proposed subdivision of the
community.



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 151.66  CONSISTENCY WITH OTHER CONTROLS.



   Subdivisions must conform to all official controls of this community. A
subdivision will not be approved where a later variance from one (1) or more
standards in official controls purpose. In areas not served by publicly owned
sewer and water systems, a subdivision will not be approved unless domestic
water supply is available and a sewage treatment system consistent with §§
151.31 and 151.37 can be provided for every lot. Each lot shall meet the
minimum lot size and dimensional requirements of § 151.30, including at
least a minimum contiguous lawn area, that is free of limiting factors
sufficient for the construction of two standard soil treatment systems. Lots
that would require use of holding tanks must not be approved.



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 151.67  INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS.



   Sufficient information must be submitted by the applicant for the
community to make a determination of land suitability. The information shall
include at least the following:



   (A)   Topographic contours at ten (10) foot intervals or less from
United States Geological Survey maps or more accurate sources, showing
limiting site characteristics.



   (B)   The surface water feature required in M.S. § 505.02, Subd. 1,
as amended from time to time, to be shown on plats, obtained from United
States Geological Survey quadrangle topographic maps or more accurate sources.



   (C)   Adequate soils information to determine suitability for
building and on-site sewage treatment capabilities for every lot from the
most current exciting sources or from field investigations such as soil
borings, percolation tests, or other methods.



   (D)   Information regarding adequacy of domestic water supply;
extent of anticipated vegetation and topographic alterations; near-shore
aquatic conditions, including depths, types of bottom sediments, and aquatic
vegetation; and proposed methods for controlling stormwater runoff and
erosion, both during and after construction activities.



   (E)   Location of one hundred (100) year flood plain areas and
floodway districts from existing adopted maps or data.



   (F)   A line or contour representing the ordinary high water level,
the “toe” and the “top” of the bluffs, and the minimum building
setback distances from the top of the bluff and the lake or stream.



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 151.68  DEDICATIONS.



   When a land or easement dedication is a condition of subdivision
approval, the approval must provide easements over natural drainage or
ponding areas for management of stormwater and significant wetlands.



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 151.69  PLATTING.



   All subdivisions that create five (5) or more lots or parcels that are
two and one half (2 ½) acres or less in size shall be processed as a plat in
accordance with M.S. Chapter 505, as it may be amended from time to time. No
permit for construction of buildings or sewage treatment systems shall be
issued for lots created after these official controls where enacted unless
the lot was approved as part of a formal subdivision.



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 151.70  CONTROLLED ACCESS OR RECREATIONAL LOTS.



   Lots intended as controlled accesses to public waters or for
recreational use areas for use by nonriparian lots within a subdivision must
meet or exceed the sizing criteria in § 151.30 of this chapter.



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS (PUD'S)



§ 151.80  TYPES OF PUD'S PERMISSIBLE.



   Planned unit developments (PUD'S) are allowed for new projects on
undeveloped land, redevelopment of previously built sites, or conversions of
existing buildings and land. The land use districts in which they are
allowable use are identified in the land use district descriptions and the
official zoning map.



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 151.81  PROCESSING OF PUD'S.



   Planned unit developments must be processed as a conditional use,
except that an expansion to an existing commercial PUD involving six (6) or
less new dwelling units or sites since the date this chapter was adopted is
permissible as a permitted use provided the total project density does not
exceed the allowable densities calculated in the project density evaluation
procedures in § 151.84. Approval cannot occur until the environmental review
process (EAW/EIS) is complete.



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 151.82  APPLICATION FOR A PUD.



   The applicant for a PUD must submit the following documents prior to
final action being taken on the application request:



   (A)   A site plan and/or plant for the project showing locations of
property boundaries, surface water features, existing and property
boundaries, surface water facilities, land alternations, sewage treatment and
water supply systems (where public systems will not be provided), and
topographic contours at ten (10) foot intervals or less. When a PUD is a
combined commercial and residential development, the site plan and/or plat
must indicate and distinguish which buildings and portions of the project are
residential, commercial, or a combination of the two (2).



   (B)   A property owner association agreement (for residential PUD's)
with mandatory membership, and all in accordance with the requirements of §
151.85 of this chapter.



   (C)   Deed restrictions, covenants, permanent easements or other
instruments that:



      (1)   Properly address future vegetative and topographic
alternations, constructions of additional building, beaching of water craft,
and construction of commercial buildings in residential PUD's.



      (2)   Ensure the long-term preservation and maintenance of
open space in accordance with the criteria and analysis specified in §
151.85 of this chapter.



   (D)   When necessary, a master plan/drawing describing the project
and the floor plan for all commercial structures to be occupied.



   (E)   Those additional documents as requested by the Zoning
Administrator that are necessary to explain how the PUD will be designed and
will function.



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 151.83  SITE “SUITABLE AREA” EVALUATION.



   Proposed new or expansions to existing planned unit developments must
be evaluated using the following procedures and standards to determine the
suitable area for the dwelling unit/dwelling site density evaluation in §
151.84.



   (A)   The project parcels must be divided into tiers by locating one
(1) or more lines approximately parallel to a line that identifies the
ordinary high water level the following intervals, proceeding landward:



 


Shoreland Tier Dimensions





 

Unsewered (Feet)

 

Sewered (Feet)



General development lakes - first tier
 

200

 

200



General development lakes - second and additional tiers
 

267

 

200



Recreational development lakes
 

267

 

267



National environment lakes
 

400

 

320



All river classes
 

300

 

300




 



   (B)   The suitable area within each tier is next calculated by
excluding from the tier area all wetlands, bluffs, or land below the ordinary
high water level of public waters. This suitable area and the proposed
project are then subjected to either the residential or commercial planned
unit development density evaluation steps to arrive at an allowable number of
units or sites.



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 151.84  RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL PUD DENSITY EVALUATION.



   The procedures for determining the base density of a PUD and increase
multipliers are as follows. Allowable densities may be transferred from
waterbody, but must not be transferred to any other tier closer.



   (A)   Residential PUD “base” density evaluation.  The suitable
area within each tier is divided by the single residential lot size standard
for lakes or, for rivers, the single residential lot width standard times the
tier depth, unless the local unit of government has specified an alternative
minimum lot size for rivers which shall then be used to yield a base density
of dwelling units or sites for each tier. Proposed locations and numbers of
dwelling units or sites for the residential planned unit developments are
then compared with the tier, density, and suitability analyses herein and the
design criteria in § 151.85.



   (B)   Commercial PUD “base” density evaluation.



      (1)   Determine the average inside living area size of
dwelling units or sites within each tier, including both existing and
proposed units and sites. Computation of inside living area sizes need not
include decks, patios, stoops, steps, garages, or porches and basements,
unless they are habitable space.



      (2)   Select the appropriate floor area ratio from the
following table:



 




Commercial Planned Unit Development Floor Area Ratios*
Public Water Classes




Average Unit Floor Area (Square Feet)

 

Sewered General Development Lakes; First Tier on Unsewered General
Development Lakes; Urban, Agricultural, Tributary River Segments

 

Second and Additional Tiers on Unsewered General Development Lakes;
Recreational Development Lakes; Transition and Forested River Segments

 

Natural Environment Lakes and Remote River Segments



1,000
 
.108
 
.054
 
.027


1,100
 
.116
 
.058
 
.029


1,200
 
.125
 
.064
 
.032


1,300
 
.133
 
.068
 
.034


1,400
 
.142
 
.072
 
.036


1,500
 
.150
 
.075
 
.038



*   Average unit floor areas less than shown, use the floor area ratios
listed for two hundred (200) square feet. For areas greater than shown, use
the ratios listed for one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet. For
recreational camping areas, use the ratios listed at four hundred (400)
square feet. Manufactured home sites in recreational camping areas shall use
a ratio equal to the size of the manufactured home, or if unknown, the ratio
listed for one thousand (1,000) square feet.





 



      (3)   Multiply the suitable area within each tier by the floor
area ratio to yield total floor area for each tier allowed to be used for
dwelling units or sites.



      (4)   Divide the total floor area by tier computed in
subsection (3) above by the average inside living area size determined in
subsection (a) above. This yields a base number of dwelling units and sites
for each tier.



      (5)   Proposed locations and numbers of dwelling units or
sites for the commercial planned unit development are then compared with the
tier, density and suitability analyses herein and the design criteria in §
151.85.



   (C)   Density increase multipliers.



      (1)   Increases to the dwelling unit or dwelling site base
densities previously determined are allowable if the dimensional standards in
§ 151.30 are met or exceeded and the design criteria in § 151.85 are
satisfied. The allowable density increases in subdivision (2) will only be
allowed if structure setbacks from the ordinary high water level are
increased to at least fifty percent (50%) greater than the minimum setback,
or the impact on the waterbody is reduced an equivalent amount through
vegetative management, topography, or additional means acceptable to the
local unit of government and the setback is at least twenty-five percent
(25%) greater than the minimum setback.



      (2)   Allowable dwelling unit or dwelling site density
increases for residential or commercial planned unit developments.



 


Density Evaluation Tiers

 

Maximum Density Increase Within Each Tier (Percent)



First
 
50


Second
 
100


Third
 
200


Fourth
 
200


Fifth
 
200



 



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 151.85  MAINTENANCE AND DESIGN CRITERIA.



   (A)   Maintenance and administration requirements.



      (1)   Final approval.  Before final approval of a planned
unit development, adequate provisions must be developed for preservation and
maintenance in perpetuity of open spaces and for the continued existence and
functioning of the development.



      (2)   Open space preservation. Deed restrictions, covenants,
permanent easement, public dedication and acceptance, or other equally
effective and permanent means must be provided to ensure long-term
preservation and maintenance of open space. The instruments must include all
of the following protections:



         (a)   Commercial uses prohibited (for residential PUD's);



         (b)   Vegetation and topographic alterations other than
routine maintenance prohibited;



         (c)   Construction of additional buildings or storage of
vehicles and other materials prohibited; and



         (d)   Uncontrolled beaching of watercraft prohibited.



      (3)   Development organization and functioning. Unless an
equally effective alternative community framework is established, when
applicable, all residential planned unit development must use an owners
association with the following features:



         (a)   Membership must be mandatory for each dwelling
unit or site purchaser or any successive purchaser;



         (b)   Each member must pay a pro-rata share of the
association's expenses, and unpaid assessments can become liens on units or
sites;



         (c)   Assessments must be adjustable to accommodate
changing conditions; and



         (d)   The association must be responsible for insurance,
taxes, and maintenance of all commonly owned property and facilities.



   (B)   Open space requirements.  Planned unit developments must
contain open space meeting all of the following criteria:



      (1)   At least fifty percent (50%) of the total project area
must be preserved as open space;



      (2)   Dwelling units or sites, road right-of-way, or land
covered by road surfaces, parking areas, or structures, except water-oriented
accessory structures or facilities, are developed areas and shall not be
included in the computation of minimum open space;



      (3)   Open space must include areas with physical
characteristics unsuitable for development in their natural state, and areas
containing significant historic sites or unplatted cemeteries;



      (4)   Open space may include outdoor recreational facilities
for use by owners of dwelling units or sites, by guests staying in commercial
dwelling units or sites, and by the general public;



      (5)   Open space may include subsurface sewage treatment
systems if the use of the space is restricted to avoid adverse impacts on the
systems;



      (6)   Open space must not include commercial facilities or
uses, but may contain water-oriented accessory structures or facilities;



      (7)   The appearance of open space areas, including
topography, vegetation, and allowable uses, must be preserved by use of
restrictive deed covenants, permanent easements, public dedication and
acceptance, or other equally effective and permanent means;



      (8)   The shore impact zone, based on normal structure
setbacks, must be included as open space. For residential PUD's, at lease
fifty percent (50%) of the shore impact zone area of existing developments or
at lease seventy percent (70%) of the shore impact zone area of new
developments must be preserved in its natural or existing state. For
commercial PUD's, at least fifty percent (50%) of the shore impact zone must
be preserved in its natural state.



   (C)   Erosion control and stormwater management.  Erosion control
and stormwater management plans must be developed and the PUD must:



      (1)   Be designed, and the construction managed, to minimize
the likelihood of serious erosion occurring either during or after
construction. This must be accomplished by limiting the amount and length of
time of bare ground exposure. Temporary ground covers, sediment entrapment
facilities, vegetated buffer strips, or other appropriate techniques must be
used to minimize erosion impacts on surface water features. Erosion control
plans approved by a soil and water conservation district may be required if
project size and site physical characteristics warrant; and



      (2)   Be designed and constructed to effectively manage
reasonably expected quantities and qualities of stormwater runoff. Impervious
surface coverage within any tier must not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of
the tier area, except that for commercial PUD's thirty-five percent (35%)
impervious surface coverage may be allowed in the first tier of general
development lakes with an approved stormwater management plan and consistency
with § 151.32.



   (D)   Centralization and design of facilities.  Centralization and
design of facilities and structures must be done according to the following
standards:



      (1)   Planned unit developments must be connected to publicly
owned water supply and sewer systems, if available. On-site water supply and
sewage treatment systems must be centralized and designed and installed to
meet or exceed applicable standards or rules of the Minnesota Department of
Health and §§ 151.31 and 151.37 of this chapter. On-site sewage treatment
systems must be located on the most suitable areas of the development, and
sufficient lawn area free of limiting factors must be provided for a
replacement soil treatment system for each sewage system;



      (2)   Dwelling units or sites must be clustered into one (1)
or more groups and located on suitable areas of the development. They must be
designed and located to meet or exceed the following dimensional standards
for the relevant shoreland classification: setback from the ordinary high
water level, elevation above the surface water features, and maximum height.
Setbacks from the ordinary high water level must be increased in accordance
with § 151.84 of this chapter for developments within density increases;



      (3)   Shore recreation facilities, including but not limited
to swimming areas, docks, and watercraft mooring areas and launching ramps,
must be centralized and located in areas suitable for them. Evaluation of
suitability must include consideration of land slope, water depth,
vegetation, soils, depth to groundwater and bedrock, or other relevant
factors. The number of spaces provided for continuous beaching, mooring, or
docking of watercraft must not exceed one (1) for each allowable dwelling
unit or site in the first tier (notwithstanding existing mooring sites in an
existing commercially used harbor). Launching ramp facilities, including a
small dock for loading and unloading equipment, may be provided for use by
occupants of dwelling units or sites located in other tiers;



      (4)   Structures, parking areas, and other facilities must be
treated to reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent
shorelands by vegetation, topography, increased setbacks, color, or other
means acceptable to the local unit of government, assuming summer, leaf-on
conditions. Vegetative and topographic screening must be preserved, if
existing, or may be required to be provided;



      (5)   Accessory structures and facilities, except water
oriented accessory structures, must meet the required principal structure
setback and must be centralized;



      (6)   Water-oriented accessory structures and facilities may
be allowed if they meet or exceed design standards contained in § 151.31 of
this chapter and are centralized.



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 151.86  CONVERSIONS.



   Local governments may allow existing resorts or other land uses and
facilities to be converted to residential planned unit developments if all of
the following standards are met:



   (A)   Proposed conversions must be initially evaluated using the
same procedures for residential planned unit developments involving all new
construction. Inconsistencies between existing features of the development
and these standards must be identified.



   (B)   Deficiencies involving water supply and sewage treatment,
structure color, impervious coverage, open space, and shore recreation
facilities must be corrected as part of the conversion or as specified in the
conditional use permit.



   (C)   Shore and bluff impact zone deficiencies must be evaluated and
reasonable improvements made as part of the conversion. These improvements
must include, where applicable, the following:



      (1)   Removal of extraneous buildings, docks, or other
facilities that no longer need to be located in shore or bluff impact zones;



      (2)   Remedial measures to correct erosion sites and improve
vegetative cover and screening of buildings and other facilities as viewed
from the water;



      (3)   If existing dwelling units are located in shore or bluff
impact zones, conditions are attached to approvals of conversions that
preclude exterior expansions in any dimension or substantial alterations. The
conditions must also provide for future relocation of dwelling units, where
feasible, to other locations, meeting all setback and elevation requirements
when they are rebuilt or replaced.



   (D)   Existing dwelling unit or dwelling site densities that exceed
standards in § 151.84 may be allowed to continue but must not be allowed to
be increased either at the time of conversion or in the future. Efforts must
be made during the conversion to limit impacts of high densities by requiring
seasonal use, improving vegetative screening, centralizing shore recreation
facilities, installing new sewage treatment systems, or other means.



(Ord. 247, passed 8-4-1992; Am. Ord. 248, passed 10-20-1992; Am. Ord. 249,
passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



CHAPTER 152:  FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT



Section




General Provisions




   152.001   Statutory authorization



   152.002   Findings of fact



   152.003   Land to which chapter applies



   152.004   Establishment of official zoning map



   152.005   Regulatory flood protection elevation



   152.006   Interpretation



   152.007   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   152.008   Warning and disclaimer of liability



   152.009   Definitions




Establishment of Zoning Districts




   152.020   Districts



   152.021   Compliance




Floodway District (FW)




   152.035   Permitted uses



   152.036   Standards for floodway permitted uses



   152.037   Conditional uses



   152.038   Standards for floodway conditional uses



   152.039   Accessory structures



   152.040   Storage of materials and equipment



   152.041   Structural works



   152.042   One hundred (100) year or regional flood




Flood Fringe District (FF)




   152.055   Permitted uses



   152.056   Standards for flood fringe permitted uses



   152.057   Conditional uses



   152.058   Standards for flood fringe conditional uses



   152.059   Standards for all flood fringe uses




General Flood Plain District




   152.070   Permissible uses



   152.071   Procedures for floodway and flood fringe determinations
within the general flood plain district




Subdivisions




   152.085   Review criteria



   152.086   Floodway/flood fringe determination in the general flood
plain district



   152.087   Removal of special flood hazard area designation




Public Utilities, Railroads, Roads and Bridges




   152.100   Public utilities



   152.101   Public transportation facilities



   152.102   On-site sewage treatment and water supply systems:  where
public utilities are not provided




Manufactured Homes and Manufactured Home Parks and
Placement of Travel Trailers and ravel Vehicles




   152.115   Generally



   152.116   Placement



   152.117   Exemption criteria




Administration




   152.130   Zoning Administrator



   152.131   Permit requirements



   152.132   Board of Adjustment



   152.133   Conditional uses



   152.134   Nonconforming uses



   152.135   Violations



   152.136   Amendments



   152.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 152.001  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   The legislature of the State of Minnesota has, in M.S. Chapter 103F, as
it may be amended from time to time, and delegated the responsibility to
local government units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood
losses. Therefore, the City of Mora, Minnesota does ordain the following
chapter.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 152.002  FINDING OF FACTS.



   (A)   Generally.  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to
periodic inundation which results in potential loss of life, loss of
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental
services, extraordinary public expenditures or flood protection and relief,
and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.



   (B)   Methods used to analyze flood hazards.  This chapter is based
upon a reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards which is consistent with
the standards established by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.



   (C)   Statement of purpose.  It is the purpose of this chapter to
promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize those
losses described in § 152.003 by provisions contained herein.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 152.003  LANDS TO WHICH ORDINANCE APPLIES.



   This chapter shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the
city shown on the official zoning map and/or the attachments thereto as being
located within the boundaries of the Floodway, Flood Fringe, or General Flood
Plain Districts.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 152.004  ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.



   The official zoning map together with the Flood Insurance Study and the
Flood Boundary and Flowery Map and Flood Insurance Rate Map.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 152.005  REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION.



   The regulatory flood protection elevation shall be an elevation no
lower than one (1) foot above the elevation of the regional flood plus any
increase in flood elevation caused by encroachments on the flood plain that
result from designation of a flowery.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 152.006  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation
or repeal of any other powers granted by the state statutes.



   (B)   The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be determined by
scaling distances on the official zoning map. Where interpretation is needed
as to the exact location of the boundaries of the district as shown on the
official zoning map, as for example, where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and the actual field conditions and there is a
formal appeal of the decision of the Zoning Administrator, the Board of
Adjustments shall make the necessary interpretation. All decisions will be
based on the elevations of the regional one hundred (100) year flood profile
and other available technical data. Persons contesting the location of the
district boundaries shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present their
case to the Board and to submit technical evidence.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 152.007  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this
chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall
prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby
repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 152.008  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   This chapter does not imply that areas outside the flood plain
districts or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from
flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the
part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages
that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 152.009  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCESSORY USE OF STRUCTURE.  A use or structure on the same lot with,
and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use
or structure.



   BASEMENT.  Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its
floor or base subgrade (below the ground level) on all four sides, regardless
of the depth of excavation below ground level.



   CONDITIONAL USE.  A specific type of structure or land use listed in
the official control that may be allowed but only after an in-depth review
procedure and with appropriate conditions or restrictions as provided in the
official zoning controls or building codes and upon a finding that:



      (1)   Certain conditions as detailed in the zoning ordinance
exist; and



      (2)   The structure and/or land use conform to the
comprehensive land use plan if one (1) exists and are compatible with the
existing neighborhood.



   EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT.  A method of determining the location of
floodway boundaries so that flood plain lands on both sides of a stream are
capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.



   FLOOD.  A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in
the stage of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry
areas.



   FLOOD FREQUENCY.  The frequency for which it is expected that a
specific flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.



   FLOOD FRINGE.  That portion of the flood plain outside of the
floodway. FLOOD FRINGE is synonymous with the term “floodway fringe” used
in the flood insurance study for the city.



   FLOOD PLAIN.  The beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake
or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional
flood.



   FLOOD PROOFING.  A combination of structural provisions, changes, or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for
the reduction or elimination of flood damages.



   FLOODWAY.  The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a
watercourse and those portions of the adjoining flood plain which are
reasonably required to carry or store the regional flood discharge.



   OBSTRUCTION.  Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile,
abutment, projection, excavations, channel modification, culvert, building,
wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across,
or projecting into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory flood plain which
may impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either in
itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water.



   PRINCIPAL USE OR STRUCTURE.  All uses or structures that are not
accessory uses or structures.



   REACH.  A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal
segment of a stream or river influenced by a natural or man-made obstruction.
In an urban area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive
bridge crossings would most typically constitute a reach.



   REGIONAL FLOOD.  A flood which is representative of large floods known
to have occurred generally in the state and reasonably characteristic of what
can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the one
hundred (100) year recurrence interval. REGIONAL FLOOD is synonymous with the
term “base flood” used in the flood insurance study.



   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION.  An elevation no lower than one
(1) foot above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in
flood elevation caused by encroachments on the flood plain that result from
designation of a floodway.



   STRUCTURE.  Any constructed or erected on the ground or attached to
the ground or on-site utilities, including, but not limited to, buildings,
factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes, travel
trailers/vehicles not meeting the exemption criteria specified in § 152.020
and other similar items.



   VARIANCE.  A modification of a specific permitted development standard
required in an official control including this chapter to allow an
alternative development standard not stated as acceptable in the official
control, but only as applied to a particular property for the purpose of
alleviating a hardship, practical difficulty, or unique circumstance as
defined and elaborated upon in a community's respective planning and zoning
enabling legislation.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS



§ 152.020  DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Floodway District.  The Floodway District shall include those
areas designated as floodway on the flood boundary and floodway map adopted
in § 152.004.



   (B)   Flood Fringe District.  The Flood Fringe District shall
include those areas designated as floodway fringe on the flood boundary and
floodway map adopted in § 152.004.



   (C)   General Flood Plain District.  The General Flood Plain
District shall include those areas designated as unnumbered A Zones on the
flood insurance rate map adopted in § 152.004.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 152.021  COMPLIANCE.



   No new structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall
be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full
compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations
which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter. Within the
Floodway, Flood Fringe, and General Flood Plain Districts, all uses not
listed as permitted uses or conditional uses in §§ 152.035 through 152.071
that follow, respectively, shall be prohibited. In addition, a caution is
provided here that:



   (A)   New manufactured homes, replacement manufactured homes and
certain travel trailers and travel vehicles are subject to the general
provisions of this chapter and specifically §§ 152.115 through 152.117;



   (B)   Modifications, additions, structural alterations or repair
after damage to existing nonconforming structures and nonconforming uses of
structures or land are regulated by the general provisions of this chapter
and specifically § 152.134; and



   (C)   As-built elevations for elevated or flood proofed structures
must be certified by ground surveys and flood proofing techniques must be
designed and certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as
specified in the general provisions of this chapter and specifically as
stated in §§ 152.130 through 152.136.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW)



§ 152.035  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.



   (B)   Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas, and
airport landing strips.



   (C)   Private and public golf courses, tennis courts, driving
ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas,
parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting
preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas,
and single or multiple purpose recreational trails.



   (D)   Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 152.036  STANDARDS FOR FLOODWAY PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   The use shall have a low flood damage potential.



   (B)   The use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning district
if one exists.



   (C)   The use shall not obstruct flood flows or increase flood
elevations and shall not involve structures, fill, obstructions, excavations
or storage of materials or equipment.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 152.037  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Structures accessory to the uses listed in permitted uses
above and the uses listed in conditional use below.



   (B)   Extraction and storage of sand, gravel, and other materials.



   (C)   Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharfs, and water control
structures.



   (D)   Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines, and
pipelines.



   (E)   Storage yards for equipment, machinery, or materials.



   (F)   Placement of fill.



   (G)   Travel trailers and travel vehicles either on individual lots
of record or in existing or new subdivisions or commercial or condominium
type campgrounds, subject to the exemptions and provisions of §§ 152.020
and 152.021 of this chapter.



   (H)   Structural works for flood control such as levees, dikes and
floodwalls constructed to any height where the intent is to protect
individual structures and levees or dikes where the intent is to protect
agricultural crops for a frequency flood event equal to or less than the ten
(10) year frequency flood event.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 152.038  STANDARDS FOR FLOODWAY CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   All uses. No structure (temporary or permanent), fill
(including fill for roads and levees), deposit, obstruction, storage of
materials or equipment, or other uses may be allowed as a conditional use
that will cause any increase in the stage of the one hundred (100) year or
regional flood or cause an increase in flood damages in the reach or reaches
affected.



   (B)   Procedures and standards.  All floodway conditional uses
shall be subject to the procedures and standards contained in § 152.133 of
this chapter.



   (C)   Permissible.  The conditional use shall be permissible in the
underlying Zoning District if one exists.



   (D)   Fill.



      (1)   Fill, dredge spoil and all other similar materials
deposited or stored in the flood plain shall be protected from erosion by
vegetative cover, mulching, riprap, or other acceptable method.



      (2)   Dredge spoil sites, sand and gravel operations shall not
be allowed in the floodway unless a long-term site development plan is
submitted which includes an erosion/sedimentation prevention element to the
plan.



      (3)   As an alternative, and consistent with subsection (2)
above, dredge spoil disposal, sand and gravel operations may allow temporary,
on-site storage of fill or other materials which would have caused as
increase to the stage of the one hundred (100) year or regional flood but
only after the governing body has received an appropriate plan which assures
the removal of the materials from the floodway based upon the flood warning
time available. The conditional use permit must be title registered with the
property in the Office of the County Recorder.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 152.039  ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Accessory structures shall not be designed for human
habitation.



   (B)   Accessory structures, if permitted, shall be constructed and
placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the
flow of flood waters.



      (1)   Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with
the longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow; and



      (2)   So far as practicable, structures shall be placed
approximately on the same flood flow lines as those of adjoining structures.



   (C)   Accessory structures shall be elevated on fill or structurally
dry flood proofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 flood proofing
classifications in the State Building Code. As an alternative, an accessory
structure may be flood proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 flood proofing
classification in the State Building Code provided the accessory structure
constitutes a minimal investment, does not exceed five hundred (500) square
feet in size, and for a detached garage, the detached garage must be used
solely for parking of vehicles and limited storage. All flood proofed
accessory structures must meet the following additional standards, as
appropriate.



      (1)   The structure must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure and shall be
designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls; and



      (2)   Any mechanical and utility equipment in a structure must
be elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or properly
flood proofed.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 152.040  STORAGE OF MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   The storage or processing of explosive or potentially
injurious to human, animal, or plant life is prohibited.



   (B)   Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if
readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood
warning and in accordance with a plan approved by the governing body.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 152.041  STRUCTURAL WORKS.



   Structural works for flood control that will change the course, current
or cross section of protected wetlands or public waters shall be subject to
the provisions of M.S. Ch. 105, as it may be amended from time to time.
Community wide structural works for flood control intended to remove areas
from the regulatory flood plain shall not be allowed in the floodway.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 152.042  ONE HUNDRED (100) YEAR OR REGIONAL FLOOD.



   A levee, dike, or floodwall constructed in the floodway shall not cause
an increase to the one hundred (100) year or regional flood and the technical
analysis must assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides of a
stream.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



FLOOD FRINGE DISTRICT (FF)



§ 152.055  PERMITTED USES.



   Permitted uses shall be those uses of land or structures listed as
permitted uses in the underlying zoning use district(s). If no pre-existing,
underlying zoning use districts exist, then any residential or
non-residential structure or use of a structure or land shall be a permitted
use in the flood fringe provided such use does not constitute a public
nuisance. All permitted uses shall comply with the standards for flood fringe
“permitted uses” listed in  § 152.056 and the standards for all flood
fringe “permitted and conditional uses” listed in section § 152.059.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 152.056  STANDARDS FOR FLOOD FRINGE PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   All structures, including accessory structures, must be
elevated on fill so that the lowest floor including basement floor is at or
above the regulatory flood protection elevation. The finished fill elevation
for structures shall be no lower than one (1) foot below the regulatory flood
protection elevation and the fill shall extend at such elevation at least
fifteen (15) feet beyond the outside limits of the structure erected thereon.



   (B)   As an alternative to elevation on fill, accessory structures
that constitute a minimal investment and that do not exceed five hundred
(500) square feet for the outside dimension at ground level may be internally
flood proofed in accordance with § 152.039(C).



   (C)   The cumulative placement of fill where at any one time in
excess of four hundred (400) cubic yards of fill is located on the parcel
shall be allowable only as a conditional use, unless the fill is specifically
intended to elevate a structure in accordance with § 152.056 of this chapter.



   (D)   The storage of any materials or equipment shall be elevated on
fill to the regulatory flood protection elevation.



   (E)   The provisions of § 152.059 of this chapter shall apply.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 152.057  CONDITIONAL USES.



   Any structure that is not elevated on fill or flood proofed in
accordance with § 152.056 or any use of land that does not comply with the
standards in § 152.056 shall only be allowable as a conditional use. An
application for a conditional use shall be subject to the standards and
criteria and evaluation procedures specified in §§ 152.058, 152.059 and
152.130 through 152.136 of this chapter.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 152.058  STANDARDS FOR FLOOD FRINGE CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Alternative elevation methods other than the use of fill may
be utilized to elevate a structure's lowest floor above the regulatory flood
protection elevation. These alternative methods may include the use of
stilts, pilings, parallel walls, and the like, or above-grade, enclosed areas
such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages. The base or floor of an enclosed
area shall be considered above-grade and not a structures basement or lowest
floor if:



      (1)   The enclosed area is above-grade on at least one side of
the structure.



      (2)   Is designed to internally flood and is constructed with
flood resistant materials; and



      (3)   Is used solely for parking of vehicles, building access
or storage. The above-noted alternative elevation methods are subject to the
following additional standards:



         (a)   Design and certification.  The structure's design
and as-built condition must be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect as being in compliance with the general design
standards of the State Building Code and, specifically, that all electrical,
heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other
service facilities must be at or above the regulatory flood protection
elevation or be designed to prevent flood water from entering or accumulating
within these components during times of flooding.



         (b)   Specific standards for above-grade, enclosed areas
above-grade, fully enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages
must be designed to internally flood an the design plans must stipulate:



            1.   The minimum area of openings in the walls
where internal flooding is to be used as a flood proofing technique. When
openings are placed in a structure's walls to provide for entry of flood
waters to equalize pressures, the bottom of all openings shall be no higher
than one (1) foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens,
louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of flood waters.



            2.   That the enclosed are will be designed of
flood resistant materials in accordance with the FP-3 or FP-4 classifications
in the State Building Code and shall be used solely for building access,
parking of vehicles or storage.



   (B)   Basements, as defined by § 152.009, shall be subject to the
following:



      (1)   Residential basement construction shall not be allowed
below the regulatory flood protection elevation.



      (2)   Non-residential basements may be allowed below the
regulatory flood protection elevation provided the basement is structurally
dry flood proofed in accordance with division (C) of this section.



   (C)   All areas of non-residential structures including basements to
be placed below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be flood
proofed in accordance with the structurally dry flood proofing
classifications in the State Building Code. Structurally dry flood proofing
must meet the FP-1 or FP-2 flood proofing classification in the State
Building Code and this shall require making the structure watertight with the
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and the effects of buoyancy. Structures flood proofed to the FP-3 or
FP-4 classification shall not be permitted.



   (D)   When at any one (1) time more than four hundred (400) cubic
yards of fill or other similar material is located on a parcel for such
activities as on-site storage, landscaping, sand and gravel operations,
landfills, roads, dredge spoil disposal or construction of flood control
works, as erosion/sedimentation control plan must be submitted unless the
community is enforcing a state approved shoreland management ordinance. In
the absence of a state approved shoreland ordinance, the plan must clearly
specify methods to be used to stabilize the fill on site for a flood event at
a minimum of the one hundred (100) year or regional flood event. the plan
must be prepared and certified by a registered professional engineer or other
qualified individual acceptable to the governing body. The plan may
incorporate alternative procedures for removal of the material from the flood
plain if adequate flood warning time exists.



   (E)   Storage of materials and equipment:



      (1)   The storage or processing of materials that are, in time
of flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal,
or plant life is prohibited.



      (2)   Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed
if readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood
warning and in accordance with a plan approved by the governing body.



   (F)   The provisions of §§ 152.055 through 152.059 of this chapter
shall also apply.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 152.059  STANDARDS FOR ALL FLOOD FRINGE USES.



   (A)   Generally.  All new principal structures must have vehicular
access at or above an elevation not more than two (2) feet below the
regulatory flood protection elevation. If a variance to this requirement is
granted, the Board of Adjustment must specify limitations on the period of
use or occupancy of the structure for times of flooding and only after
determining that adequate flood warning time and local flood emergency
response procedures exist.



   (B)   Commercial uses. Accessory land uses, such as yards, railroad
tracts, and parking lots may be at elevations lower than the regulatory flood
protection elevation. However, a permit for such facilities to be used by the
employees or the general public shall not be granted in the absence of a
flood warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area
would be inundated to a depth greater than two (2) feet or be subject to
flood velocities greater than four (4) feet per second upon occurrence of the
regional flood.



   (C)   Manufacturing and industrial uses. Measures shall be taken to
minimize interference with normal plant operations especially along streams
having protracted flood duration. Certain accessory land uses such as yards
and parking lots may be at lower elevations subject to requirements set out
in division (B) above. In considering permit applications, due consideration
shall be given to needs of an industry whose business requires that it be
located in flood plain areas.



   (D)   Fill.  Fill shall be properly compacted and the slopes shall
be properly protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other
acceptable method. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has
established criteria for removing the special flood hazard area designation
for certain structures properly elevated on fill above the one hundred (100)
year flood elevation - FEMA's requirements incorporate specific fill
compaction and side slope protection standards for multi-structure or
multi-lot developments. These standards should be investigated prior to the
initiation of site preparation if a change of special flood hazard area
designation will be requested.



   (E)   Developments.  Flood plain developments shall not adversely
affect the hydraulic capacity of the channel and adjoining flood plain of any
tributary watercourse or drainage system where a floodway or other
encroachment limit has not been specified on the official zoning map.



   (F)   Travel trailers.  Standards for travel trailers and travel
vehicles are contained in § 152.117.



   (G)   Anchoring.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored
to an adequately anchored foundation system that resists floatation, collapse
and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be
limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
requirement is in addition to applicable state or local anchoring
requirements for resisting wind forces.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



GENERAL FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT



§ 152.070  PERMISSIBLE USES.



   (A)   The uses listed in § 152.035 of this chapter shall be
permitted uses.



   (B)   All other uses shall be subject to the floodway/flood fringe
evaluation criteria pursuant to §§ 152.071.  Sections 152.035 through
152.042 shall apply if the proposed use is in the Floodway District and §§
152.055 through 152.059 shall apply if the proposed use is in the Flood
Fringe District.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 152.071  PROCEDURES FOR FLOODWAY AND FLOOD FRINGE DETERMINATIONS WITHIN
THE GENERAL FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT.



   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a conditional use permit
for a use within the General Flood Plain District, the applicant shall be
required to furnish such information as is deemed necessary by the Zoning
Administrator for the determination of the regulatory flood protection
elevation and whether the proposed use is within the Floodway or Flood Fringe
District.



      (1)   A typical valley cross-section showing the channel of
the stream, elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the channel,
cross-sectional areas to be occupied by the proposed development, and high
water information.



      (2)   Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of
the ground; pertinent structure, fill, or storage elevations; size, location,
and spatial arrangement of all proposed and existing structures on the site;
location and elevations of streets; photographs showing existing land uses
and vegetation upstream and downstream; and soil type.



      (3)   Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel
or flow line of the stream for at least five hundred (500) feet in either
direction from the proposed development.



   (B)   The applicant shall be responsible to submit one (1) copy of
the above information to a designated engineer or other expert person or
agency for technical assistance in determining whether the proposed use is in
the Floodway or Flood Fringe District and to determine the regulatory flood
protection elevation. Procedures consistent with Minnesota Regulations 1983,
Parts 6120.5000 - 6120.6200 shall be followed in this expert evaluation. The
designated engineer or expert is strongly encouraged to discuss the proposed
technical evaluation methodology with the respective Department of Natural
Resources Area Hydrologist prior to commencing the analysis. The designed
engineer or expert shall:



      (1)   Estimate the peak discharge of the regional flood.



      (2)   Calculate the water surface profile of the regional
flood based upon a hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and overbank
areas.



      (3)   Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the
regional flood without increasing flood stages more than half (0.5) foot. A
lesser stage increase than half (0.5) foot shall be required if, as a result
of the additional stage increase, increased on both sides of the stream
within the reach shall be assumed in computing floodway boundaries.



   (C)   The Zoning Administrator shall present the technical
evaluation and findings of the designated engineer or expert to the governing
body. The governing body must formally accept the technical evaluation and
the recommended Floodway and/or Flood Fringe District boundary or deny the
permit application. The governing body, prior to official action, may submit
the application an all supporting data and analyses to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, the Department of Natural Resources or the Planning
Commission for review and comment. Once the floodway and flood fringe
boundaries have been determined, the governing body shall refer the matter
back to the Zoning Administrator who shall process the permit application
consistent with the applicable provisions of §§ 152.035 through 152.042 and
§§ 152.055 through 152.059159 of this chapter.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



SUBDIVISIONS



§ 152.085  REVIEW CRITERIA.



   No land shall be subdivided which is suitable for the reason of
flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment facilities.
All lots within the flood plain districts shall contain a building site at or
above the regulatory flood protection elevation. All subdivisions shall have
water and sewage treatment facilities that comply with the provisions of this
chapter and have road access both to the subdivision and to the individual
building sites no lower than two (2) feet below the regulatory flood
protection elevation. For all subdivisions in the flood plain, the floodway
and flood fringe boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation and
the required elevation of all access roads shall be clearly labeled on all
required subdivisions drawings and platting documents.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 152.086  FLOODWAY/FLOOD FRINGE DETERMINATIONS IN THE GENERAL FLOOD PLAIN
DISTRICT.



   In the General Flood Plain District, applicants shall provide the
information required in § 152.085 of this chapter to determine the one
hundred (100) year flood elevation, the Floodway and Flood Fringe District
boundaries and the regulatory flood protection elevation for the subdivision
site.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 152.087  REMOVAL OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA DESIGNATION.



   The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria
for removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures
properly elevated on fill above the one hundred (100) year flood elevation.
FEMA's requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope
protection standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These
standards should be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation
if a change of special flood hazard area designation will be requested.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



PUBLIC UTILITIES, RAILROADS, ROADS AND BRIDGES



§ 152.100  PUBLIC UTILITIES.



   All public utilities and facilities such as gas, electrical, sewer, and
water supply systems to be located in the flood plain shall be flood-proofed
in accordance with the State Building Code or elevated to above the
regulatory flood protection elevation.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 152.101  PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES.



   Railroad tracks, roads, and bridges to be located within the flood
plain shall comply with §§ 152.035 through 152.059 of this chapter.
Elevation to the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be provided
where failure or interruption of these transportation facilities would result
in danger to the public health or safety or where such facilities are
essential to the orderly function of the area. Minor or auxiliary roads or
railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where failure or
interruption of transportation services would not endanger the public health
or safety.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 152.102  ON-SITE SEWAGE TREATMENT AND WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS: WHERE PUBLIC
UTILITIES ARE NOT PROVIDED.



   (A)   On-site water supply systems must be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems.



   (B)   New or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters and they shall not
be subject to impairment or contamination during times of flooding. Any
sewage treatment system designed in accordance with the state's current
statewide standards for on-site sewage treatment systems shall be determined
to be in compliance with this section.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



MANUFACTURED HOMES AND MANUFACTURES HOME PARKS AND
PLACEMENT OF TRAVEL TRAILERS AND TRAVEL VEHICLES



§ 152.115  GENERALLY.



   New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing manufactured
home parks shall be subject to the provisions placed on subdivisions by §§
152.085 through 152.087 of this chapter.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 152.116  PLACEMENT.



   (A)   The placement of new or replacement manufactured homes in
existing manufactured home parks or on individual lots of record that
relocated in flood plain districts will be treated as a new structure and may
be placed only if elevated in compliance with §§ 152.055 through 152.059 of
this chapter. If vehicular road access for pre-existing manufactured home
parks is not provided in accordance with § 152.059, then replacement
manufactured homes will not be allowed until the property owner(s) develops a
flood warning emergency plan acceptable to the governing body.



   (B)   All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system that resists floatation, collapse, and
lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited
to , use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting
wind forces.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 152.117  EXEMPTION CRITERIA.



   Travel trailers and travel vehicles that do not meet the exemption
criteria specified in division (A) below shall be subject to the provisions
of this chapter and as specifically spelled out in divisions (C) and (D)
below.



   (A)   Exemption.  Travel trailers and travel vehicles are exempt
from the provisions of this chapter if they are placed in any of the areas
listed in division (B) below and further they meet the following criteria:



      (1)   Have current licenses required for highway use.



      (2)   Are highway ready meaning on wheels or the internal
jacking system are attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities commonly used in campgrounds and trailer parks and the travel
trailer/travel vehicle has no permanent structural type additions attached to
it.



      (3)   The travel trailer or travel vehicle and associated use
must be permissible in any preexisting, underlying zoning use district.



   (B)   Areas exempted for placement of travel/recreational vehicles.



      (1)   Individual lots or parcels of record.



      (2)   Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or
campgrounds.



      (3)   Existing condominium type associations.



   (C)   Travel trailers and travel vehicles exempted in division (A)
lose this exemption when development occurs on the parcel exceeding one
thousand dollars ($1,000) for a structural addition to the travel
trailer/travel vehicle or an accessory structure such as a garage or storage
building. The travel trailer/travel vehicle and all additions and accessory
structures will be treated as a new structure and shall be subject to the
elevation/flood proofing requirements and the use of land restrictions
specified in §§ 152.035 through 152.059 of this chapter.



   (D)   New commercial travel trailer or travel vehicle parks or
campgrounds and new residential type subdivisions and condominium
associations and the expansion of any existing similar use exceeding five (5)
units or dwelling sites shall be subject to the following:



      (1)   Any new or replacement travel trailer or travel vehicle
will be allowed in the Floodway or Flood Fringe Districts provided the
trailer or vehicle and its contents are placed on file above the regulatory
flood protection elevation and proper elevated road access to the site exists
in accordance with § 152.059 (A) of this chapter. No fill placed in the
floodway to meet the requirements of this section shall increase flood stages
of the one hundred (100) year or regional flood.



      (2)   All new or replacement travel trailers or travel
vehicles not meeting the criteria of division (A) above may, as an
alternative, be allowed as a conditional use if in accordance with the
following provisions and the provisions of § 152.133 of this chapter. The
applicant must submit an emergency plan for the safe evacuation of all
vehicles and people during the one hundred (100) year flood. The plan shall
be prepared by a registered engineer or other qualified prepared individual
and shall demonstrate that adequate time and personnel exist to carry out the
evacuation. All attendant sewage and water facilities for new or replacement
travel trailers or other recreational vehicles must be protected or
constructed so as to not be impaired or contaminated during times of flooding
in accordance with § 152.102 of this chapter.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 152.130  ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.



   A Zoning Administrator designated by the governing body shall
administer and enforce this chapter. If the Zoning Administrator finds a
violation of the provisions of this chapter, the Zoning Administrator shall
notify the person responsible for such violation in accordance with the
procedures stated in § 152.135 of this chapter.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 152.131  PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Permit required.  A permit issued by the Zoning Administrator
in conformity with the provisions of this chapter shall be secured prior to
the erection, addition, or alteration of any building, structure, or portion
thereof; prior to the use or change of use of a building, structure, or land;
prior to the change or extension of a nonconforming use; and prior to the
placement of fill, excavation of materials, or the storage of materials or
equipment within the flood plain.



   (B)   Application for permit.  Application for a permit shall be
made in duplicate to the Zoning Administrator on forms furnished by the
Zoning Administrator and shall include the following where applicable; plans
in duplicate drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions, and
elevations of the lot; existing or proposed structures, fill, or storage of
materials; and the location of the foregoing in relation to the stream
channel.



   (C)   State and federal permits.  Prior to granting a permit or
processing an application for a conditional use permit or variance, the
Zoning Administrator shall determine that the applicant has obtained all
necessary state and federal permits.



   (D)   Certificate of zoning compliance for a new, altered, or
nonconforming use. It shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or permit the use or
occupancy of any building or premises or part thereof hereafter created,
erected, changed, converted, altered or enlarged in its use or structure
until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued by the Zoning
Administrator stating that the use of the building or land conforms to the
requirements of this chapter.



   (E)   Construction and use to be as provided on applications, plans,
permits, variances, and certificates of zoning compliance.  Permits,
conditional use permits, or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the
basis of approved plans and applications authorize only the use, arrangement,
and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no
other use, arrangement, or construction. Any use, arrangement, or
construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of
this chapter, and punishable as provided by § 152.135 of this chapter.



   (F)   Certification.  The applicant shall be required to submit
certification by a registered professional engineer, registered architect, or
registered land surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were
accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Flood
proofing measures shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or
registered architect.



   (G)   Record of first flood elevation.  The Zoning Administrator
shall maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all new structures and alterations or additions to existing
structures in the flood plain. The Zoning Administrator shall also maintain a
record of the elevation to which structures or/and alterations additions to
structures are flood proofed.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.132  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



   (A)   Rules.  The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules for the
conduct of business and may exercise all of the powers conferred on such
Boards by state law.



   (B)   Administrative review.  The Board shall hear and decide
appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.



   (C)   Variances.  The Board may authorize upon appeal in specific
cases such relief or variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be
contrary to the public interest and only for those circumstances such as
hardship, practical difficulties, or circumstances unique to the property
under consideration, as provided for in the respective enabling legislation
for planning and zoning for cities or countries as appropriate. In the
granting of such variance, the Board of Adjustment shall clearly identify in
writing the specific conditions that existed consistent with the criteria
specified in the respective enabling legislation which justified the granting
of the variance. No variance shall have the effect of allowing in any
district uses prohibited in that district, permit a lower degree of flood
protection than the regulatory flood protection elevation for the particular
area, or permit standards lower than those required by state law.



   (D)   Hearings.  Upon filing with the Board of Adjustment of an
appeal from a decision of the Zoning Administrator, or an application for a
variance, the Board shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing and give due
notice to the parties in interest as specified by law. The Board shall submit
by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the application
for proposed variances sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will
receive at least ten (10) days notice of the hearing.



   (E)   Decisions.  The Board shall arrive at a decision on such
appeal or variance within thirty (30) days. In passing upon an appeal, the
Board may, so long as such action is in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator or other
public official. It shall make its decision in writing setting forth the
finding of fact and the reasons for its decisions. In granting a variance,
the Board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards such as those
specified in § 152.133(F) which are in conformity with the purposes of this
chapter. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of
the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of
this chapter punishable under § 152.135. A copy of all decisions granting
variances shall be forwarded by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources
within ten (10) days of such action.



   (F)   Appeals.  Appeals from any decision of the Board may be made
and as specified in this community's official controls and also the Minnesota
Statutes.



   (G)   Flood insurance notice and record keeping. The Zoning
Administrator shall notify the applicant for a variance that:



      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure
below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25) for one hundred
dollars ($100) of insurance coverage; and



      (2)   The construction below the one hundred (100) year or
regional flood level increases risks to life and property. The notification
shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions, including
justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in it's
annual or biennial report submitted to the Administrator of the National
Flood Insurance Program.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 152.133  CONDITIONAL USES.



   The City Council shall hear and the Planning Commission shall decide
applications for conditional uses permissible under this chapter.
Applications shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator who shall forward
the application to the Planning Commission for consideration.



   (A)   Hearings.  Upon filing with the city an application for a
conditional use permit, the Planning Commission shall submit by mail to the
Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the application for proposed
conditional use sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will receive
at least ten (10) days notice of the hearing.



   (B)   Decisions.  The City Council shall arrive at a decision on a
conditional use within thirty (30) days. In granting a conditional use
permit, the City Council shall prescribe appropriate conditions and
safeguards, in addition to those specified in § 152.133(F), which are in
conformity with the purposes of this chapter. Violations of such conditions
and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the conditional use
permit is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter punishable
under § 152.135. A copy of all decisions granting conditional use permits
shall be forwarded by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within
ten (10) days of such action.



   (C)   Procedures.  The procedures to be followed by the city in
passing on conditional use permit applications within all Flood Plain
Districts are to:



      (1)   Require the applicant to furnish such of the following
information and additional information as deemed necessary by the city for
determining the suitability of the particular site for the proposed use:



         (a)   Plans in triplicate drawn to scale showing the
nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the lot, existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, flood-proofing measures, and the
relationship of the above to the location of the stream channel.



         (b)   Specifications for building construction and
materials, flood-proofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement,
storage of materials, water supply and sanitary facilities.



      (2)   Transmit one (1) copy of the information described in
subsection (a) to a designated engineer or other expert person or agency for
technical assistance, where necessary, in evaluating the proposed project ion
relation to flood heights and velocities, the seriousness of flood damage to
the use, the adequacy of the plans for protection, and other technical
matters.



      (3)   Based upon the technical evaluation of the designated
engineer or expert, the city shall determine the specific flood hazard at the
site and evaluate the suitability of the proposed use in relation to the
flood hazard.



   (D)   Factors upon which the decision of the city shall be based. In
passing upon conditional use applications, the city shall consider all
relevant factors specified in other sections of this chapter.



      (1)   The danger of life and property due to increased flood
heights or velocities caused by encroachments.



      (2)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands
or downstream to the injury of others or they may block bridges, culverts, or
other hydraulic structures.



      (3)   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the
ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary
conditions.



      (4)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its
contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner.



      (5)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community.



      (6)   The requirements of the facility for a waterfront
location.



      (7)   The availability of alternative locations not subject to
flooding for the proposed use.



      (8)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing
development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.



      (9)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and flood plain management program for the area.



      (10)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood
for ordinary and emergency vehicles.



      (11)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise,
and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site.



      (12)   Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of
this chapter.



   (E)   Time for acting on application.  The city shall act on an
application in the manner described above within thirty (30) days from
receiving the application, except that where additional information is
required pursuant to division (D) of this section. The city shall render a
written decision within thirty (30) days from the receipt of such additional
information.



   (F)   Conditions attached to conditional use permits.  Upon
consideration of the factors listed above and the purpose of this chapter,
the city shall attach such conditions to the granting of conditional use
permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the purpose of this chapter. Such
conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:



      (1)   Modification of waste treatment and water supply
facilities.



      (2)   Limitations on period of use, occupancy, and operation.



      (3)   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed
restrictions.



      (4)   Requirements for construction of channel modifications,
compensatory storage, dikes, levees, and other protective measures.



      (5)   Flood-proofing measures in accordance with the State
Building Code and this chapter. The applicant shall submit a plan or document
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
flood-proofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection
elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 152.134  NONCONFORMING USES.



   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful
before the passage or amendment of this chapter but which is not in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter may be continued subject to
the following conditions:



   (A)   No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged, or altered
in a way which increases its nonconformity.



   (B)   Any alteration or addition to a nonconforming structure or
nonconforming use which would result in increasing the flood damage potential
of that structure or use shall be protected to the regulatory flood
protection elevation in accordance with any of the elevation on fill or flood
proofing techniques (such as, FP-1 through FP-4 flood proofing
classifications) allowable in the State Building Code, except as further
restricted.



   (C)   The cost of any structural alterations or additions to any
nonconforming structure over the life of the structure shall not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the structure unless the conditions of
this section are satisfied. The cost of all structural alterations and
additions constructed since the adoption of the community's initial flood
plain controls must be calculated into today's current cost which will
include all costs such as construction materials and a reasonable cost placed
on all manpower or labor. If the current cost of all previous and proposed
alterations and additions exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the current market
value of the structure, then the structure must meet the standards of §
151.50 of this chapter for new structures depending upon whether the
structure is in the floodway or flood fringe, respectively.



   (D)   If any nonconforming use is discontinued for twelve (12)
consecutive months, any future use of the building premises shall conform to
this chapter. The assessor shall notify the Zoning Administrator in writing
of instances of nonconforming uses which have been discontinued for a period
of twelve (12) months.



   (E)   If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any
means, including floods, to an extent of fifty percent (50%) or more if its
market value at the time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except
in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. The applicable provisions
for establishing new uses or new structures in §§ 152.035 through 152.071
will apply depending upon whether the use or structure is in the Floodway,
Flood Fringe, or General Flood Plain District, respectively.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 152.135  VIOLATION.



   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. The actions
may include but are not limited to:



   (A)   In responding to a suspected ordinance violation, the Zoning
Administrator and local government may utilize the full array of enforcement
actions available to it including, but not limited to, prosecution and fines,
injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders for corrective measures or a
request to the National Flood Insurance Program for denial of flood insurance
availability to the guilty party. The community must act in good faith to
enforce these official controls and to correct ordinance violations to the
extent possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the national flood
insurance program.



   (B)   When an ordinance violation is either discovered by or brought
to the attention of the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Administrator shall
immediately investigate the situation and document and nature and extent of
the violation of the official control. As soon as is reasonably possible,
this information will be submitted to the appropriate Department of Natural
Resources and Federal Emergency Management Agency Regional Office along with
the community's plan of action to correct the violation to the degree
possible.



   (C)   The Zoning Administrator shall notify the suspected party of
the requirements of this chapter and all other official controls and the
nature and extent of the suspected violation of these controls. If the
structure and/or use is under construction or development, the Zoning
Administrator may order the construction or development immediately halted
until a proper permit or approval is granted by the community. If the
construction or development is already completed, then the Zoning
Administrator may either issue an order identifying the corrective actions
that must be made within a specified time period to bring the use or
structure into compliance with the official controls, or notify the
responsible party to apply for an after-the-fact permit/development approval
within a specified period of time not to exceed thirty (30) days.



   (D)   If the responsible party does not appropriately respond to the
Zoning Administrator within the specified period of time, each additional day
that lapses shall constitute an additional violation of this chapter and
shall be prosecuted accordingly. The Zoning Administrator shall also upon the
lapse of the specified response period notify the landowner to restore the
land to the condition which existed prior to the violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 152.136  AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   The flood plain designation on the official zoning map shall
not be removed from flood plain areas unless it can be shown that the
designation is in error or that the area has been filled to or above the
elevation of the regional flood and is contiguous to lands outside the flood
plain. Special exceptions to this rule may be permitted by the Commissioner
of Natural Resources if he or she determines that through other measures,
lands are adequately protected for the intended use.



   (B)   All amendments to this chapter, including amendments to the
official zoning map, must be submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of
Natural Resources prior to adoption. Changes in the official zoning map must
meet the Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA) technical conditions
and criteria and must receive prior FEMA approval before adoption. The
Commissioner of Natural Resources must be given ten (10) days written notice
of all hearings to consider an amendment to this chapter and the notice shall
include a draft of the ordinance amendment or technical study under
consideration.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 152.999  PENALTY.



   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with
any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variances or conditional uses) shall
constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by law.



(Ord. 234, passed 1-15-1991; Am. Ord. 249, passed 10-20-1992; Ord. passed
4-13-1997; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



CHAPTER 153:  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   153.001   Purpose; scope



   153.002   Definitions




Platting Procedure




   153.020   Preparing and filing the preliminary plat



   153.021   Review of the preliminary plat



   153.022   Preliminary plat not approved



   153.023   Preparing and filing the final plat



   153.024   Review of the final plat




Preliminary Plat and Final Plat Requirements




   153.035   Data required for the preliminary plat



   153.036   Data required for the final plat



   153.037   Fees




Minimum Design Standards




   153.045   Conformity with the Comprehensive Plan



   153.046   Land requirements



   153.047   Street plan



   153.048   Cul-de-sac streets



   153.049   Street design



   153.050   Alleys



   153.051   Sidewalk design



   153.052   Public utilities



   153.053   Drainage



   153.054   Easements



   153.055   Street names



   153.056   Block design



   153.057   Lot requirements




Engineering Standards




   153.065   Monuments



   153.066   Streets



   153.067   Public utilities



   153.068   Sanitation; on-site systems



   153.069   Water supply



   153.070   Drainage



   153.071   Street signs and street lighting



   153.072   Curbs and gutters



   153.073   Inspection




Financial Arrangements




   153.080   Improvements



   153.081   Payment for installation of improvements



   153.082   Agreement providing for the installation of improvements



   153.083   Financial guarantee



   153.084   Construction plans and inspection



   153.085   Improvements completed prior to approval of the final plat



   153.086   Trunk facilities



   153.087   Alternate installation and incomplete improvements



   153.088   Optional financing of improvements




Special Provisions




   153.095   Protection of natural features



   153.096   Public sites and open space dedication



   153.097   Planned unit developments



   153.098   Minor subdivisions



   153.099   Registered land surveys



   153.100   Metes and bounds



   153.101   Non-complying subdivisions




Variances




   153.110   Granting variances



   153.111   Application for variance




Enforcement




   153.120   Building permits



 



   153.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 153.001  PURPOSE; SCOPE.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   The process of dividing open land into home sites, or
separate parcels for other uses, is one of the community.  Few activities
have a more lasting effect upon its appearance and environment. Once the land
has been subdivided into urban lots and the streets, homes, and other
structures have been constructed, the basic character of this permanent
addition to the community has become firmly established.  It is then
virtually impossible to alter its basic character without substantial
expense.  In most subdivisions, roads and streets must be maintained and
various public services must be provided.  The welfare of the entire
community is thereby affected in many important respects.  It is, therefore,
to the interest of the general public, the developer, and the future owners
that subdivisions be conceived, designed, and developed in accordance with
sound rules and proper standards.



      (2)   All subdivision of land hereafter submitted for approval
shall fully comply in all respects with the regulations set forth herein. 
It is the purpose of these regulations to:



         (a)   Encourage well planned, efficient, and attractive
subdivisions by establishing adequate standards for design and construction;



         (b)   Provide for the health and safety of residents by
encouraging properly designed streets and adequate sewage and water service;



         (c)   Place the cost of improvements against those
benefitting from their construction;



         (d)   Secure the rights of the public with respect to
public lands and waters; and



         (e)   Set the minimum requirements necessary to protect
the public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience, and general welfare.



   (B)   Scope.  The rules and regulations governing plats and
subdivision of land contained herein shall apply within the city and other
land as permitted by state statutes.  In the event of overlapping
jurisdiction within the prescribed area, the extent of jurisdiction shall be
determined and agreed upon between this community and the other governmental
units concerned.  Except in the case of minor subdivision, this chapter
shall not apply to any lot or lots forming a part of a subdivision recorded
in the office of the Register of Deed prior to the effective date of this
chapter, nor is it intended by this chapter to repeal, annul, or in any way
impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, or
with private restrictions placed upon property by deed, covenant, or other
private agreement, or with restrictive covenants governing the land.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 153.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of these regulations, certain terms and words are
hereby defined as follows.  Words used in the present tense include the past
and future tense; the singular number includes the plural and the plural
includes the singular; the word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is
permissive.



   ALLEY.  Any dedicated public right-of-way providing a secondary means
of access to abutting property.



   ATTORNEY.  The attorney employed by the city unless otherwise stated.



   BLOCK.  The enclosed area within the perimeter of roads, property
lines of boundaries of the subdivision.



   BOULEVARD.  The portion of the street right-of-way between the curb
line and the property line.



   BUTT LOT.  A lot at the end of a block and located between two (2)
corner lots.



   CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT.  A subdivision development planned and
constructed so as to group housing units into relatively tight patterns while
providing a unified network of open space and wooded areas and meeting the
overall density regulations of this chapter and the Zoning Code.



   COLLECTOR STREET.  A street which carries traffic from minor streets
to thoroughfares or from thoroughfare to thoroughfare. COLLECTOR STREETS are
designated in the Comprehensive Plan.



   COMMUNITY.  City of Mora.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.  A comprehensive plan prepared by the community
including a compilation of policy statements, goals, standards, and maps
indicating the general locations recommended for the various functional
classes of land use, places and structures, and for the general physical
development of the community and includes any unit or part of such plan
separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof.



   CONTOUR MAP.  A map on which irregularities of land surface area shown
by lines connecting points of equal elevations. Contour interval is the
vertical height between contour lines.



   COPY.  A print or reproduction made from a tracing.



   CORNER LOT.  A lot bordered on a least two (2) adjacent side by
streets.



   COUNTY.  Kanabec County, Minnesota.



   CUL-DE-SAC.  A minor street with only one (1) outlet and having a
turnaround.



   DEVELOPMENT.  The act of building structures and installing site
improvements.



   DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS.  Lots which have a front line abutting on one
(1) street and a back or rear line abutting on another street.



   DRAINAGE COURSE.  A water course or indenture for the drainage of
surface water.



   EASEMENT.  A grant by an owner of land for a specific use by persons
other than the owner.



   ENGINEER.  The registered engineer employed by the city, unless
otherwise stated.



   GOVERNING BODY.  The City Council.



   KEY MAP.  A map drawn to comparatively small scale which definitely
shows the area proposed to be platted in relation to known geographical
features, i.e., downtown, lakes, roads.



   LOT.  A parcel or portion of land in a subdivision or plat of land,
separated from other parcels or portions by description as on a subdivision
or record of survey map, for the purpose of sale or lease or separate use
thereof.



   METES AND BOUNDS DESCRIPTION.  A description of real property which is
not described by reference to a lot or block shown on a map, but is described
by starting at a known point and described the bearings and distances of the
lines forming the boundaries of the property or delineates a fractional
portion of a section, lot or area by described lines or portions thereof.



   MINIMUM SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS.  The rules, principles, and
specifications for the preparation of subdivision plans indicating among
other things, the minimum and maximum dimensions of the various elements set
forth in the plan.



   MINOR STREET.  A street of limited continuity used primarily for
access to the abutting properties and the local needs of a neighborhood.



   NATURAL WATER WAY.  A natural passage way in the surface of the earth
so situated and having such a topographical nature that surface water flows
through it from other areas before reaching a final ponding area. The term
also includes all drainage structures that have been constructed or placed
for the purpose of conducting water from one place to another.



   OWNER.  An individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership,
corporation trust, or any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary
interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain
proceedings to subdivide the same under these regulations.



   PEDESTRIAN WAY.  A public right-of-way across or within a block, to be
used by pedestrians.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, association, syndicate or partnership,
corporation trust or any other legal entity.



   PLANNING COMMISSION.  The Planning Commission of the City of Mora.



   PLAT - PRELIMINARY.  The map or drawing indicating the proposed layout
of the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning Commission and governing
body for their Comprehensive Plan and these regulations along with required
supporting data.



   PLAT - FINAL.  A map or drawing which graphically delineates the
boundary of land parcels for the purpose of identification and record of
title.  The plat is a recorded legal document and must conform to all state
laws and city requirements.



   PRIVATE STREET.  A street serving as vehicle access to two (2) or more
parcels of land which is not dedicated to the public but is owned by one (1)
or more private parties.



   PROTECTIVE COVENANTS.  Contracts entered into between private parties
and constituting a restriction on the use of all private property within a
subdivision for the benefit of the property owners, and to provide mutual
protection against undesirable aspects of development which would tend to
impair stability of values.



   RESERVE STRIPS.  A narrow strip of land placed between lot lines and
streets to control access.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The land covered by a public road or land dedicated for
public use or for certain private use such as land over which a power line
passes.



   ROADWAY.  Driving surface portion of a public right-of-way.



   SERVICE STREETS.  A minor street parallel to and adjacent to high
volume arterial streets and highways, which provide access to abutting
properties and protection of through traffic.



   SKETCH PLAN.  A drawing showing the proposed subdivision of property.
This plan is not necessarily drawn to scale and exact accuracy is not a
requirement. It is used as a basis for informal discussion.



   STREET.  A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as street,
highway, thoroughfare, parkway, through-way, road, avenue, boulevard, land,
place, drive, court, or otherwise designated.



   STREET WIDTH.  The shortest distance between the lines delineating the
right-of-way of a street.



   SUBDIVIDER.  The owner, agent, or person having control of such land
as the term is used in this chapter.



   SUBDIVISION.  The division of a parcel of land after the effective
date of this chapter into two (2) or more lots or parcels, for the purpose of
transfer of ownership or building development. The term includes
resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the
process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.



   SURVEYOR.  A land surveyor registered under Minnesota State Laws.



   THOROUGHFARE.  A street primarily designated to carry large volumes of
traffic and provide for vehicular movement between and among large areas as
designated in the Comprehensive Plan.



   TRACING.  A plat or map drawn on transparent paper or cloth which can
be reproduced by using regular reproduction procedure.



   ZONING CODE.  Zoning regulations controlling the use of land as
adopted by the city.  Definitions of the adopted Zoning Code shall also
apply to the Subdivision Code.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



PLATTING PROCEDURE



§ 153.020  PREPARING AND FILING THE PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   (A)   (1)   Prior to the preparation of the preliminary plat, the
subdivider shall prepare a subdivision sketch plan, for the review by the
city staff and city.  Such sketch plan will be submitted as a basis for
informal discussion between the subdivider and the city staff and city and
shall not constitute formal filing of the plat with the city.  The city
staff and city shall provide advice and assistance to the subdivider but will
take no action on the sketch plan.  The sketch plan should, as a minimum,
show the site’s location in the community, the type of development proposed
and preliminary lot and road layout including proposed minimum lot size.



      (2)   The subdivider shall pay the expense (if any) incurred
by the engineer and attorney in the review of the sketch plan.  City staff
may refer the sketch plan to the Planning Commission for review and comments.



   (B)   When the subdivider feels he or she is ready to prepare the
preliminary plat, he or she shall have his or her surveyor and/or planner
draw one (1) which is in conformity with the requirements of this chapter. 
(See §§ 153.065 through 153.073).



   (C)   The subdivider shall fill out an "Application for
Consideration of Planning Request," or other application blanks as may be
required.  At the time of filing, the subdivider shall pay fees as set forth
in § 153.037.



   (D)   The subdivider shall furnish the City Clerk with twelve (12)
copies of the preliminary plat at least fifteen (15) days prior to a Planning
Commission meeting at which it is to be considered.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 153.021  REVIEW OF THE PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   (A)   The City Clerk shall, upon receipt of the preliminary plat and
application, refer one (1) copy of the plat and application to the governing
body, two (2) copies of the plat to the Planning Commission and one (1) copy
of the plat to the school district, if applicable.



   (B)   If the proposed subdivision abuts any state trunk highway, the
city shall refer one (1) copy to MNDOT for review as required by state law;
if it adjoins a public body of water, one (1) copy shall be referred to the
D.N.R. for review, and if it adjoins county land it will be referred to the
County Engineer for review, one (1) copy will be sent to the S.W.C.D. if
applicable.



   (C)   The Engineer and if appropriate, the School Board, County
Planning Commission, Town Board and the District Highway Engineer, shall
within fifteen (15) days, submit reports to the Planning Commission
expressing recommendations for approval, disapproval or revisions of the
preliminary plat.



   (D)   Within forty-five (45) days after the plat is filed, the
Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the plat.  Notice of the
purpose, time, and place of such public hearing shall be published in the
official newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to the day of the hearing. 
The subdivider shall furnish the city with the names and mailing addresses of
owners of all lands within three hundred fifty (350) feet of the boundaries
of the preliminary plat and the clerk shall give mailed notice of said
hearing to said owners at least ten (10) days prior to the day of the said
hearing, although failure of any property owner to receive such notification
shall not invalidate the proceedings.



   (E)   (1)   The subdivider or his or her representative shall
appear before the Planning Commission at the public hearing, in order to
answer questions concerning the preliminary plat.



      (2)   The Planning Commission and city staff shall have the
authority to request additional information from the applicant concerning the
subdivision request or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the
expense of the applicant concerning the subdivision, said information to be
declared necessary to establish performance conditions in relation to all
pertinent sections of this chapter and all other city codes and ordinances.



   (F)   The report of the Planning Commission shall be submitted to
the governing body not later than thirty (30) days after the public hearing
on the plat unless an extension of time is obtained.  If the Planning
Commission fails to make a report within the necessary time frames, the
governing body shall proceed without said report. Failure to receive a report
from the Planning Commission as herein provided shall not invalidate the
proceedings or actions of the governing body.



   (G)   The governing body may hold a public hearing on the plat
following notice as provided herein. After receiving the Planning
Commission’s recommendations, the City Council will act to approve or
disapprove the plat at their next regularly scheduled meeting.  Approval of
the plat shall be by passage upon a simple majority vote of the entire
membership of the governing body.



   (H)   Approval of the preliminary plat is an acceptance of the
general layout and indication to the subdivider that he or she may proceed
toward fulfilling the necessary steps for approval of the plat in accordance
with the terms of approval.  Such approval does not constitute final
acceptance of the subdivision.



   (I)   The governing body may require modifications, changes, and
revisions of the plat, as it deems necessary to protect the health, safety,
morals, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of the community.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 153.022  PRELIMINARY PLAT NOT APPROVED.



   (A)   If the plat is not approved by the governing body, the reasons
for such action shall be recorded in the proceedings and transmitted to the
applicant.



   (B)   Should the subdivider desire to amend the plat as approved, he
or she may submit an amended plat which shall follow the same procedure as a
new plat, except for the pubic hearing and fee unless the amendment is in the
opinion of the governing body of such scope as to constitute a new plat, then
it shall be refiled.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 153.023  PREPARING AND FILING THE FINAL PLAT.



   (A)   After approval of the preliminary plat, the final plat may be
prepared.  It shall incorporate all changes, modifications, and revisions
required; otherwise, it shall conform to the approved plat.



   (B)   In the case of large subdivisions, to be developed in stages,
the subdivider may be granted permission to prepare a plat for only the
portion of the time, provided such portion conforms with all the requirements
of these regulations. The subdivider may be required, as a condition of
approval, to submit an estimated time schedule for further staging of the
platting and recording.



   (C)   All plats shall comply with the provisions of the Minnesota
Sate Statutes and the requirements of this regulation.



   (D)   The subdivider shall file twelve (12) copies of the final plat
with the City Clerk not later than six (6) months after the date of approval
of the preliminary plat.  If this is not done, the approval of the
preliminary plat will be considered void unless an extension is requested by
the subdivider and granted in writing by the governing body.



   (E)   The subdivider shall submit, with the plat, a current Abstract
of Title or a Registered Property Certificate along with any unrecorded
documents and an Opinion of Title by the subdivider’s attorney.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 153.024  REVIEW OF THE FINAL PLAT.



   (A)   The City Clerk shall, upon receipt of the plat, refer one (1)
copy of the governing body, the engineer and the County Planning Commission
and Watershed District Board if applicable, and to applicable utility
companies; two (2) copies to the Planning Commission; and one (1) copy, with
the Abstract of Title or Registered Property Certificate and Opinion of
Title, to the attorney.



   (B)   The governing body may refer the plat to the Planning
Commission for recommendation if they feel the plat is substantially
different from the preliminary plan.  The Planning Commission shall submit a
report to the governing body within thirty (30) days.



   (C)   The engineer and attorney shall submit a report to the
governing body within fifteen (15) days upon receipt of the plat expressing
their recommendations on the final plat.



   (D)   Prior to approval of the plat, the subdivider shall have
installed all improvements or executed as agreement with the governing body
for their installation.  Improvements shall conform to approved engineering
standards and be in compliance with these regulations.



   (E)   The governing body shall take action on the plat; this shall
be done not more than sixty (60) days after the plat is filed with the City
Clerk. If the plat is not approved, the reasons for such action shall be
recorded in the official proceedings and transmitted to the subdivider.



   (F)   If this plat is approved the governing body shall sign the
plat and the subdivider shall then record it with the County Register of
Deeds within one hundred eighty (180) days or the approved plat shall be
considered void.



   (G)   The subdivider shall, immediately upon recording, furnish the
City Clerk with a reproducible copy, either cron-aflex or its equivalent, of
the recorded plat and two (2) prints. Failure to furnish such copies shall be
grounds for refusal to issue building permits for the lots within the plat. 
Also, the subdivider shall, unless exempted by the city, provide digital
files of the plat, the construction drawings and the as-builts.  The files
shall be provided in a format as specified by the city.



   (H)   Upon receiving approval of the plat for a portion of the
preliminary plat and the subdivider shall not be required to request a
continuation of the recognition of the preliminary plat so as to maintain its
approval except that in the event a zoning amendment is adopted which
requires a larger minimum lot size for land not yet platted and recorded, the
larger minimum lot size may be required for any additional platting.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997; Am. Ord. 327A, passed 6-1-2004)



PRELIMINARY PLAT AND FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS



§ 153.035  DATA REQUIRED FOR THE PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   (A)   Identification and description.



      (1)   Proposed name of subdivision, which name shall not
duplicate or be alike in pronunciation of the name of any plat theretofore
recorded in the county.



      (2)   Legal description of the property.



      (3)   Name and address of the record owner, and any agent
having control of the land, subdivider, land surveyor, engineer, and designer
of the plan.



      (4)   Graphic scale not less than one (1) inch to one hundred
(100) feet.



      (5)   North point and key map of area showing well known
geographical points for orientation within one-half (1/2) mile radius.



      (6)   Date of preparation.



   (B)   Existing conditions.



      (1)   Boundary lines shall be shown clearly and to such a
degree of accuracy that conforms to the plat in that no major changes are
necessary in preparing said final plat.



      (2)   Existing zoning classifications for land in and abutting
the subdivision.



      (3)   Total acreage.



      (4)   Location, right-of-way width, and names of existing or
platted streets or other public ways, parks and other public lands, permanent
buildings and structures, easements and section lines, corporate and school
district lines within the plat and to a distance one hundred (100) feet
beyond shall be indicated.



      (5)   Location and size of existing sewers, water mains,
culverts, or other underground facilities within the preliminary plat area
and to a distance of one hundred (100) feet beyond. Such data as grades of
surfaces of underground structures and locations of catch basins, manholes,
hydrants, and street pavement width and types, shall also be shown.



      (6)   Boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or subdivided
land.



      (7)   Topographic data, including contours at vertical
intervals of not more than two (2) feet except where the horizontal contour
interval is one hundred (100) feet or more, a one (1) foot vertical interval
shall be shown. Water courses, marshes, wood areas, rock outcrops, power
transmission poles and lines, and other significant features shall also be
shown.  U.S.G.S. datum shall be used for all topographic mapping where
available.  A permanent bench mark shall be set within each parcel to be
platted and the location and elevation of this bench mark shall be shown on
the preliminary plat.



      (8)   A copy of all proposed private restrictions shall be
submitted.



      (9)   Percolation test and soil borings as required by the
City Engineer.



      (10)   If severe soil limitations for the intended use are
noted by the City Engineer, a plan or statement indicating the soil
conservation practice or practices to be used to overcome said limitation
shall be made part of the permit application.



   (C)   Subdivision design features.



      (1)   Layout of proposed streets, showing right-of-way widths,
and proposed names of streets.  The name of any street shall conform to the
city uniform street naming and building numbering system.



      (2)   Locations and widths of proposed alleys, pedestrian
ways, and utility easements.



      (3)   Layout numbers and preliminary dimensions of lots and
blocks.



      (4)   Proposed front side street building set-back lines.



      (5)   Location and size of proposed sanitary sewer lines and
water mains.



      (6)   Gradients of proposed streets, sewer lines, and water
mains, if requested.



      (7)   Maximum high-water level where platted areas abut on or
contain lakes, rivers, or permanent ponding basins.



      (8)   Areas, other than the streets, alleys, pedestrian ways,
and utility easements, intended to be dedicated or reserved for public use,
including the size of such area or areas in acres as required by § 153.096.



   (D)   Other information.



      (1)   Statement of the proposed use of lots stating type of
residential building with number of proposed dwelling units; type of business
or industry so as to reveal the effect of the development on traffic, fire
hazards, and congestion of population.



      (2)   Source of water supply.



      (3)   Provision for sewage disposal, surface water drainage
and flood control.



      (4)   If any zoning changes are contemplating the proposed
zoning plan for the areas, including dimension.



      (5)   Other information as may be requested by the City
Engineer or Planning Commission.



      (6)   Where the subdivider owns property adjacent to that
which is being proposed for the subdivision, the Planning Commission may
require that the subdivider submit a sketch plan of the remainder of the
property so as to show the possible relationships between the proposed
subdivision and future subdivisions.  In any event, all subdivisions must be
shown to relate well with existing or potential adjacent subdivisions and
land use.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 153.036  DATA REQUIRED FOR THE FINAL PLAT.



   (A)   The plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor who is
registered in the state and shall comply with the provisions of Minnesota
State Statutes and of this regulation.



   (B)   Form for approval by the Planning Commission.



   Approved by the Planning Commission of the City of Mora, this      
        day of               .



   Signed:                                          
           



      Chairman



         Attest:                                  
                     



            City Planner



   (C)   From for approval by the City Council:



   Approved by the City of Mora, Minnesota, this                
  day of         .



   Signed:                                          
           



      Mayor



         Attest:                                  
                     



            City Clerk



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 153.037  FEES.



   (A)   A fee and deposit as adopted by City Council resolution shall
be paid.



   (B)   (1)   The subdivider shall be required to pay at the time
of filing and submission of their plat, a cash fee to the city as required by
City Council resolution.



      (2)   Public sites and open space dedication.  In all new
residential subdivisions, including planned unit developments and
manufactured home parks, where the governing body chooses to require the
subdivider to pay a fee rather than accept the dedication of land, the
subdivider may require to pay a fee as specified in the fee schedule that is
established by resolution of the governing body.  (See also § 153.096)



   (C)   (1)   In addition to the aforementioned fee, the subdivider
shall pay any expense incurred by the City Engineer and City Attorney for
their services in the review of the preliminary plat and final plat.



      (2)   The subdivider, (owner or developer) on or before
submitting a preliminary plat, shall make a cash deposit in an amount as
determined by resolution of the governing body which shall be available in
the form of published schedule. This deposit shall be held in a
subdivider’s account and shall be credited to the said subdivider, owner,
or developer.  Engineering and legal expense incurred by the city in
checking plat improvements, checking and setting grade and drainage
requirements, general supervision, staking, inspection, drafting as-built
drawings and all other engineering services performed in the processing of
said improvements and plats, administrative and legal expenses in examining
title to the property being developed shall be charged to the aforementioned
account.



      (3)   The City Engineer and City Attorney shall itemize all
time, services, and materials billed to any subdivider’s escrow account and
said time, services and materials shall be in accordance with the rules,
regulations and fees as promulgated and adopted by the Council.  The
subdivider, owner or developer making the deposit(s) in the subdivider’s
escrow account shall be furnished a copy of said itemized charges and any
balance remaining in the account shall be returned to the depositor by the
Clerk after all claims and charges thereto have been paid.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997; Am. Ord. 308, passed 7-2-2002)



MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS



§ 153.045  CONFORMITY WITH THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.



   The proposed subdivision shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan and
policies as adopted by the city.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.046  LAND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Land shall be suited to the purpose for which it is to be
subdivided. NO plat shall be approved if the site is not suitable for
purposes of the kind proposed by reason of potential flooding, topography, or
adverse earth or rock formation.



   (B)   Land subject to hazards to life, health, or property shall not
be subdivided for residential purposes until all such hazards have been
eliminated or unless adequate safeguards against such hazards are provided by
the subdivision plan.



   (C)   Erosion and sedimentation control plans in accordance with the
technical standards and specification of the Soil Conservation Service as
provided by the Kanabec County Soil and Water Conservation District Office,
are required on slopes with grades of eighteen percent (18%) or steeper.



   (D)   Proposed subdivisions shall be coordinated with existing
neighborhoods so that the city as a whole may develop harmoniously.



   (E)   Subdivision shall comply with the Floodplain and Shoreland
Management District requirements.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.047  STREET PLAN.



   (A)   Proposed streets shall conform to all state road and county
highway plans as have been prepared, adopted, and/or filed as prescribed by
law.



   (B)   Streets shall be logically related to the topography so as to
produce usable lots and reasonable grades.



   (C)   Access shall be given to all lots and portions of the tract in
the subdivided parcels unless the topography clearly indicates that such
connection is not feasible. Reserved strips and land-locked areas shall not
be created.



   (D)   The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make
provision for the appropriate continuation of the existing streets in
adjoining areas.



   (E)   Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, but may be
subdivided, the arrangement of streets in a new subdivision shall make
provision for the proper projection of streets into adjoining areas by
carrying the new streets to the boundaries of the new subdivision at
appropriate locations.



   (F)   Minor streets shall be laid out to discourage their use by
through traffic. Thoroughfares shall be reserved for through traffic by
providing marginal access streets, interior streets for serving lots, or
other means.



   (G)   Half or partial streets will not be permitted, except where
essential to reasonable subdivision of a tract in conformance with the other
requirements and standards of these regulations and where, in addition,
satisfactory assurance for dedication of the remaining part of the street can
be secured.



   (H)   Wherever a tract to be subdivided adjoins an existing half, or
partial street, the part of the street within such tract shall be platted.



   (I)   Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except as stubs to
permit future street extension into adjoining tracts, or when designed as
cul-de-sac streets.



   (J)   Private streets and reserve strips shall be prohibited and no
public improvements shall be approved for any private street. All streets
shall be dedicated for public use.



   (K)   Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or planned
major thoroughfare or a railroad right-of-way, a street approximately
parallel to and on each side of such thoroughfare and right-of-way may be
required for adequate protection of residential properties and separation of
through and local traffic. Such service streets shall be located at a
distance from the major thoroughfare or railroad right- of-way suitable for
the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in
residential districts, or for commercial and industrial purposes in
appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due
regard grade separations.



   (L)   The street arrangements shall not be such as to cause hardship
to owners of adjoining property in platting their own land and providing
convenient access to it.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.048  CUL-DE-SAC STREETS.



   (A)   Cul-de-sac streets, permanently designed as such, shall not
exceed six hundred (600) feet in length, except as variances are permitted.
Such a variance may be granted if it can be clearly shown that by reason of
unfavorable land from, or the irregular shape of the land from which the
subdivision is being made, a normal street pattern cannot be established, or
that land would be wasted by not granting such a variance.



   (B)   Unless future extension is clearly impractical or undesirable,
the turnaround right-of-way shall be placed adjacent to a property line and a
right-of-way of the same width as the street shall be carried to said
property line in such a way as to permit future extension of the street into
the adjoining tract. At such time as such a street is extended, the acreage
covered by the turnaround outside the boundaries of the extended street shall
revert in ownership to the property owner fronting on the temporary
turnaround.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.049  STREET DESIGN.



   (A)   Minimum right-of-way widths and pavement widths (face to face
of curb) for each type of public street or road shall be as follows:



 




Type of Street

 

Right-of-way Width (Ft.)

 

Roadway Width (Ft.)



Thoroughfare
 

120

 

As determined by traffic needs



Collector street
 

80

 

44



Commercial or industrial service street
 

60

 

36



Minor street
 

60

 

34



Marginal access street
 

60

 

34



*Cul-de-sac street
 

40

 

34



*Cul-de-sac turn around
 

55 foot radius

 

45 foot radius





 



   * A ten (10) foot snow/utility easement is required along front
property lines.



   (B)   Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing street of
inadequate width, sufficient additional width shall be provided to meet the
above standards.



   (C)   Additional right-of-way and roadway widths may be required to
promote public safety and convenience when special conditions require it or
to provide parking space in areas of intensive use.



   (D)   Extensions of existing streets with lesser right-of-way than
prescribed above may be permitted by variance in special cases.



   (E)   Restriction of access.  Access of minor streets onto state
and county state aid highways, shall be discouraged at intervals of less than
five hundred (500) feet.



   (F)   Street jog.  Street jogs with center-line offsets of less
than one hundred fifty (150) feet shall not be allowed.



   (G)   Deflection. When connecting street lines deflect from each
other at any one (1) point by more than ten (10) degrees, they shall be
connected by a curve with a radius of not less than one hundred (100) feet.



   (H)   Grades.  Centerline gradients shall be at least four-tenths
percent (0.4%) and shall not exceed the following:



 


Classification

 

Gradient (In Percent)



Thoroughfares and collector street
 

5



Minor and service streets
 

8




 



   (I)   Vertical curves.  Different connection street gradients shall
be connected with vertical curves. Minimum length, in feet, of these curves
shall be twenty (20) times the algebraic difference in the percent of grade
of the two (2) adjacent slopes.



   (J)   Angle of intersection.  The angle formed by any intersecting
of streets shall not be less than sixty (60) degrees with ninety (90) degree
intersections preferred.



   (K)   Size of intersection.  Intersections of more than four (4)
corners shall be prohibited.



   (L)   Corner radii for roadways.  Roadways of street intersections
shall be rounded by a radius of not less than fifteen (15) feet.  Roadways
of alley-street intersections shall be rounded by a radius of not less than
six (6) feet. Corners at the entrances to the turnaround portions of a
cul-de-sac shall be rounded by a radius of not less than fifteen (15) feet.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.050  ALLEYS.



   (A)   Alleys shall not be permitted in new residential subdivisions.



   (B)   Except in the case of a planned shopping center development,
either a public or private alley shall be provided in a block where
commercially zoned property abuts a major thoroughfare or major street.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.051  SIDEWALK DESIGN.



   A minimum of one (1) sidewalk may be required by the city throughout
all new developments.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997; Am. Ord. 305, passed 7-2-2002)



§ 153.052  PUBLIC UTILITIES.



   Extension of water and sewer services shall be made at the discretion
of the city.



   (A)   Water supply.  Extensions of the public water supply system
shall, when available, be designed so as to provide public water service to
each lot.



   (B)   Sewage disposal.  Extensions of the public sanitary sewer
system shall when available be designed so as to provide public sewer service
to each lot.



   (C)   Underground utilities.  All telephone, electric and gas
service lines shall be placed underground within dedicated public ways or
recorded easements in such manner as not to conflict with other underground
services and in accordance with community standards.  All underground
installation or service lines within street rights-of-way shall be completed
prior to street surfacing. Upon completion of the installation of underground
service lines in dedicated public ways, a tracing and two (2) copies of plans
and specifications showing the completed installation shall be filed with the
Clerk.



   (D)   Mailboxes.  Cluster mailboxes are required as determined by
the city and as approved by the U.S. Post Office.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.053  DRAINAGE.



   A complete and adequate drainage system design shall be required for
the subdivision and may include a storm sewer system or a system of open
ditches, culverts, pipes and catch basins, and ponding areas, or both systems.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.054  EASEMENTS.



   (A)   Utility and drainage easements.  Easements of at least ten
(10) feet wide centered on rear and other lot lines as required, shall be
provided for utilities where necessary.  Where underground utilities are
being installed, a front or side yard easement may be required. These
easements shall be covered by document.



   (B)   Provided for drainage.  Easements shall be provided along
each side of the center line of any water course or drainage channel, whether
or not shown on the Comprehensive Plan, to a sufficient width to provide
proper maintenance and protection and to provide for storm water run-off and
installation and maintenance of storm sewers.



   (C)   Dedication.  Utility and drainage easements shall be
dedicated for the required use.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.055  STREET NAMES.



   Names of new streets shall not duplicate existing or platted street
names unless a new street is a continuation of or in alignment with the
existing or platted street.  In that event it shall bear the same name of
the existing or platted street so in alignment.  Street names shall conform
to the city uniform street naming and building numbering system.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.056  BLOCK DESIGN.



   (A)   Block length and width or acreage within bounding streets
shall be such as to accommodate the size of residential lots required in the
area by the Zoning Code and to provide for convenient access, circulation
control, and safety of street traffic.



   (B)   In residential areas, other than water frontage, blocks shall
be not less than four hundred (400) feet or more than eighteen hundred
(1,800) feet in length measured along the greatest dimension of the enclosed
block area, unless minor variances are necessitated by topography or
conformance with an adjoining plat.



   (C)   In blocks over nine hundred (900) feet long, a ten (10) foot
wide pedestrian crosswalk may be required through the blocks in locations
deemed necessary to public health, convenience, and necessity. Suitable
paving and fencing shall be provided.



   (D)   Blocks for commercial and industrial areas may vary from the
elements of design contained in this section if the nature of the use
requires other treatment.  In such cases, off-street parking for employees
and customers shall be provided along with safe and convenient limited access
to the street system. Space for off-street loading shall also be provided
with similar access. Extension of roads and utilities shall be provided as
necessary.



   (E)   Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two (2) tiers of lots
with a minimum depth as required by the Zoning Code except adjoining a lake,
stream, or thoroughfare or where one (1) tier of lots is necessary because of
topographic conditions.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.057  LOT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Side lot lines shall be substantially to right angles to
straight street lines or radial to curved street lines or radial to lake or
stream shores unless topographic conditions necessitate a different
arrangement.



   (B)   Each lot shall be afforded primary access on a public street.



   (C)   No lot shall have less area or width than is required by
zoning regulations applying to the area in which it is located; except as
herein provided.



   (D)   Lots designed for commercial or industrial purposes shall
provide adequate off-the-street service, loading and parking facilities.



   (E)   Building sites.  Each lot shall provide an adequate building
site at least one (1) foot above the street grade or have a site drainage
plan which is approved by the City Engineer.



   (F)   Minimum lot lines.  No lot shall have a total width at the
front or rear lot line of less than thirty (30) feet.



   (G)   Corner lots shall be platted at least twenty (20) feet wider
than the minimum required.



   (H)   Butt lots in any subdivision are to be discouraged. Where such
lots must be used to fit a particular type of design, they shall be platted
at least five (5) feet wider than the average width of interior lots in the
block.



   (I)   Through or double frontage lots.  Such lots shall not be
permitted except where such lots shall have an additional depth of ten (10)
feet for screen planting along the rear lot line.



   (J)   Water courses.  Lots abutting upon water course, drainage
way, channel or stream shall have an additional depth or width, as required
to assure building sites that are not subject to flooding.



   (K)   Lots with lakeshore frontage shall be designed so that the lot
lines extended shall maintain the closest approximation to riparian rights.



   (L)   Natural features.  In the subdividing of any land, regard
shall be shown for all natural features, such as tree growth, water courses,
historic spots, or similar conditions, which as preserved will add
attractiveness and stability to the proposed development.



   (M)   Lot remnants.  All remnants of lots below minimum size left
over after subdividing of a larger tract must be added to adjacent lots, or a
plan shown as to future use rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels.



   (N)   Access to thoroughfares.  In the case where a proposed plat
is adjacent to a limited access highway, other major highway, or
thoroughfare, there shall be no direct vehicular access from individual lots
to such streets and roads. In the platting of small tracts of land fronting
on limited access highways or thoroughfares where there is no other
alternative, a temporary entrance may be granted; as neighboring land becomes
subdivided and more preferable access arrangements become possible, such
temporary access permits shall become void.



   (O)   Large lot planning and future resubdivision.  In any area
where lots in excess of twenty-four thousand (24,000) square feet or one
hundred sixty (160) feet in width at the building setback line, a preliminary
resubdivision plan may be required showing a potential and feasible way in
which the lot or lots may be resubdivided in future years for more intensive
use of the land. The placement of buildings or structures upon such lots
shall allow for potential resubdivision.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)  Penalty, see § 153.999



ENGINEERING STANDARDS



§ 153.065  MONUMENTS.



   All lot corner pipes or iron rods shall be a minimum of one-half (1/2)
inch in diameter, eighteen (18) inches in length, and shall be inscribed with
the registration number of the land surveyor making the survey as prescribed
in M.S. Chapter 505. All unmonumented quarter corners and section corners
will be set by the Kanabec County surveyor.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.066  STREETS.



   All streets will be constructed according to existing adopted city
policy.



   (A)   Street grading.  Streets shall be graded in accordance with a
plan approved by the engineer. The grading shall include the entire width of
the right-of-way and shall provide a boulevard section, in accordance to the
minimum pavement width.



   (B)   Street paving.  The design of street pavement for all streets
covered by this regulation shall be in accordance with the most current State
of Minnesota Highway Department Road Design Manual for flexible and rigid
pavements. The designed thickness of the surfacing elements shall be in
accordance with the flexible or rigid pavement design standard for road
classifications as follows:



 


Classification

 

Pavement Design; Axle Load



Thoroughfare, collector streets and commercial or industrial service streets
 

10 ton



Minor and service streets
 

9 ton minimum




 



   (C)   Special conditions.  At the discretion of the city, other
design standards for street improvements may be required or allowed.



   (D)   Soil tests.  To determine subgrade soil classifications, soil
samples shall be collected and analyzed by a reputable testing laboratory.
Reports of the soil analysis shall be submitted to the engineer with the
pavement plans.  Soil samples shall be taken along the centerline of the
proposed road at intervals not exceeding three hundred (300) feet or as
required by the engineer.



   (E)   Water course.  All water courses shall have three (3) inches
of top soil (black dirt) placed on them and then seeded or sodded.



   (F)   Sidewalks and pedestrian ways.  All required walks shall be
concrete four (4) inches thick. Grades shall be as approved by the City
Engineer. Sidewalks shall be placed in the public right-of-way.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.067  PUBLIC UTILITIES.



   (A)   Water main.  A minimum water main of six (6) inch cast iron
pipe or other approved pipe shall be required.  Mains over six (6) inches in
size may be required.



   (B)   Sanitary sewer.  The sanitary sewer shall be sized and
installed as required by the engineer. Mains over eight (8) inches in size
may be required.  Service "y's" shall be four (4) inches, or as required by
the engineer.  Root repellent joint material is required.



   (C)   House services.  Each house service shall be run from the
main to the property line where a cap or plug shall be placed until the
service is extended to the structure. House service shall be as required by
the City Engineer.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.068  SANITATION; ON-SITE SYSTEMS.



   (A)   All lots must be connected to city sewer unless an exemption
certificate has been obtained.  Where lots cannot be connected with a public
sewerage system, provisions must be made for sanitary sewerage facilities,
consisting of individual disposal systems for each lot. This does not mean
that the installation of individual disposal systems shall be at the expense
of the subdivider.



   (B)   Any subdivision or lot not provided with off-site sewer
facilities shall be subject to soil and percolation tests to determine
whether or not the lot size proposed will meet minimum standards of health
and sanitation. The lot area and topographic must be such that it will
accommodate an adequate disposal system or systems to serve the residence for
the estimated unscrewed years as determined by the governing body. Such tests
shall be made at the expense of the subdivider, and a sketch map shall be
submitted to identify the specific locations where tests were made.



   (C)   All proposed on-site sewage disposal systems shall comply with
the regulations and recommended standards of the Minnesota Department of
Health, Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, the city, and any other
applicable governmental regulations.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.069  WATER SUPPLY.



   All lots must be connected to city water unless an exemption
certificate has been obtained.  Public water facilities shall be utilized
where available.  Water supply systems for all other areas shall be designed
to meet regulations and recommended standards of the Minnesota Department of
Health and the city when allowed.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.070  DRAINAGE.



   All surface and underground drainage systems shall be installed to
adequately remove all natural drainage that accumulates on the developed
property. All such systems shall be in conformity to the city’s drainage
plans and all piping shall provide complete removal and a permanent solution
for the removal of drainage water.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.071  STREET SIGNS AND STREET LIGHTING.



   All street signs of standard design approved by the city shall be
provided and installed by the subdivider. Street lighting as required shall
be provided and installed by the subdivider.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.072  CURBS AND GUTTERS.



   A concrete curb and gutter of a design approved by the engineer shall
be installed by the subdivider on each side of the streets indicated in the
plat.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.073  INSPECTION.



   All required improvements shall be inspected by the engineer during
construction at the expense of the subdivider.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)  Penalty, see § 153.999



FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS



§ 153.080  IMPROVEMENTS.



   Prior to the approval of a final plat by the governing body, the
subdivider shall have agreed, in the manner set forth herein to install, in
conformity with approved construction plans and in conformity with all
applicable standards and ordinances, the following improvements on the site:



   (A)   Survey monuments;



   (B)   Grading;



   (C)   Pavements;



   (D)   Water mains;



   (E)   Public sanitary sewer;



   (F)   Drainage facilities; and



   (G)   Miscellaneous facilities and other improvements as required.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 153.081  PAYMENT FOR INSTALLATION OF IMPROVEMENTS.



   The improvements as listed elsewhere are to be furnished and installed
at the sole expense of the subdivider.  However, if any improvement
installed within the subdivision will be of substantial benefit to lands
beyond the boundaries of the subdivision, provision may be made for causing a
portion of the cost of the improvement, representing the benefit to such
lands, to be assessed against the same.  In such a situation, the subdivider
will pay only for such portion of the whole cost of said improvements as will
represent the benefit to the property within the subdivision.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 153.082  AGREEMENT PROVIDING FOR THE INSTALLATION OF IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Prior to the installation of any improvements and prior to
approval of the plat, the subdivider shall enter into a contact in writing
with the city requiring the subdivider to furnish and construct said
improvement at his or her sole cost and in accordance with plans and
specifications and usual contract conditions.  This shall include provision
for supervision of details of construction by the engineer, and shall grant
to the engineer authority to correlate the work to be done under said
contract by any subcontractor authorized to proceed thereunder and with any
other work being done or contracted by the community in the vicinity.  The
agreement shall require the subdivider to make an escrow deposit or, in lieu
thereof, to furnish a performance bond, the amount of the deposit or penal
amount of the bond to be equal to one hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of
the engineer’s estimate of the total cost of the improvements to be
furnished under the contract, including the cost of inspection.



   (B)   No subdivider shall be permitted to start work on any other
subdivision without special approval of the governing body if he or she has
previously defaulted on work or commitments.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 153.083  FINANCIAL GUARANTEE.



   The contract provided for in § 153.082 shall require the subdivider to
make an escrow deposit or, in lieu thereof, furnish a performance bond.  The
escrow deposit or performance bond shall conform to the requirements of this
regulation.



   (A)   Escrow deposit.  An escrow deposit shall be made with the
City Clerk in a sum equal to one hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of the
total cost as estimated by the engineer of all improvements to be furnished
and installed by the subdivide pursuant to the contract, which have not been
completed prior to approval of the plat. The total cost shall include costs
of inspection by the city. The city shall be entitled to reimburse itself out
of said deposit for any cost and expense incurred by the city for completion
of the work in case of default of the subdivider under said contract, and for
any damages sustained on account of any breach thereof. Upon completion of
the work and termination of any liability, the balance remaining in said
deposit shall be refunded to the subdivider.



   (B)   Performance bond.  In lieu of making the escrow deposit, the
subdivider may furnish a performance bond with corporate surety, in a penal
sum equal to one hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of the total cost as
estimated by the engineer of all the improvements to be furnished and
installed by the subdivider pursuant to the contract, which have not been
completed prior to the approval of the plat. The total costs shall include
costs of inspection by the city. The bond shall be approved as to from by the
attorney and filed with City Clerk.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 153.084  CONSTRUCTION PLANS AND INSPECTION.



   (A)   Construction plans for the required improvements conforming in
all respects with the standards and ordinances of the city shall be prepared
at the subdivider’s expense by a professional engineer who is registered in
the state, and said plans shall contain his or her certificate. Such plans
shall be submitted to the City Engineer for his or her approval and for his
or her estimate of the total costs of the required improvement. Upon
approval, such plans shall become a part of the required contract. The
tracings of the plans approved by the engineer plus two (2) prints shall be
furnished to the city to be filed as a public record.



   (B)   All required improvements on the site that are to be installed
under the provisions of this regulation shall be inspected during the course
of construction by the City Engineer at the subdivider’s expense, and
acceptance by the city shall be subject to the engineer’s certificate of
compliance with the contract. A cash escrow account to pay for the cost of
inspection and engineering services during the construction of improvement is
described under § 153.067.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 153.085  IMPROVEMENTS COMPLETED PRIOR TO APPROVAL OF THE FINAL PLAT.



   Improvements within a subdivision which have been completed prior to
application for approval of the plat or execution of the contract for
installation of the required improvements in compliance with the requirements
only if the engineer shall certify that he or she is satisfied that the
existing improvements conform to applicable standards.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 153.086  TRUNK FACILITIES.



   Where a larger size water main, sanitary sewer, storm drain or similar
facility is required to serve areas outside the subdivision, the larger
facility required must be constructed. Additional cost may be borne by the
benefitting properties and the assessments are to be determined accordingly
by the governing body.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 153.087  ALTERNATE INSTALLATION AND INCOMPLETE IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   The governing body may elect to install any or all of the
required improvements pursuant to a cash escrow agreement or other financial
arrangements with the subdivider.



   (B)   It is hereby the announced policy of the city that full and
complete utility systems be installed in all needed areas as soon as is
practicable and soon as it is practicable after final approval of a
subdivision with installation within the subdivision of such improvements as
may be determined to be necessary. In the event of small subdivisions or in
subdivisions in which development may proceed slowly, or in other events in
which the construction of gravel streets, utility line, or other improvements
is clearly not feasible immediately following the approval of the plat, the
governing body may elect to commence assessment proceedings, utilize funds of
a cash escrow agreement, or otherwise move to finance and install
improvements when the subdivision is developed to the point of warranting the
improvements. Such improvements are required in order to provide greater
assurance of public health, assure reliability of water supply, provide for
economy of installation, provide more effective fire fighting through
hydrants, and otherwise protect the public health, safety, convenience and
general welfare.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 153.088  OPTIONAL FINANCING OF IMPROVEMENTS.



   Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary herein contained the
City Council, upon recommendation from the Planning Commission, may issue
municipal improvement condos to pay the cost of required streets, sewer,
water, and storm sewer improvements subject to the following:



   (A)   The proposed subdivision must be abutting upon a presently
platted and substantially developed residential neighborhood.



   (B)   Before proceeding to issue improvement bonds, the Planning
Commission and the City Council must make a finding based on current real
estate activity in and around the city that lots within the proposed
subdivision will be readily marketable.



   (C)   Issuance of improvement bonds to construct required
improvements shall be upon petition and in accordance with M.S. Chapter 429
as amended and the total cost of such improvements shall be assessed against
the benefitted property.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



SPECIAL PROVISIONS



§ 153.095  PROTECTION OF NATURAL FEATURES.



   The governing body reserves the right to decline approval of a
subdivision if due regard is not shown for the preservation of all natural
features such as large trees, water courses, scenic points, historical spots
and similar community assets which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and
stability to the proposed development of the property.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 153.096  PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACE DEDICATION.



   (A)   Consideration of the public property.  The subdivider shall
consult with the city staff, at the time his or her sketch plan is under
consideration, to secure their recommendation as to the location of any
property that should be dedicated to the public, such as parks, playgrounds
or other public property.  The plat shall show the location and dimensions
of all areas to be dedicated in this manner.



   (B)   Public sites to be reserved.



      (1)   Where a proposed drainage way, park, playground, school
site or other public site, as shown on the Comprehensive Plan, is embraced in
part or in whole by the boundary of a proposed subdivision and such public
sites are not dedicated, such sites shall be reserved and no action taken
towards approval of a final plat for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days
to allow the proper governmental agency the opportunity to consider and take
action towards acquisition of such public ground or park by purchase or other
methods.



      (2)   In all new residential subdivisions, including planned
unit development and mobile home parks, a minimum of five percent (5%) of the
gross area subdivided shall be dedicated for public recreation space or other
public use. The dedicated percent of the gross area subdivided shall be in
addition to property dedicated for streets, alleys, easement, or other public
ways. No areas may be dedicated for public use until such areas have been
approved by the governing body as suitable and necessary for the public
health, safety, convenience, and general welfare. When the subdivision is too
small for practical dedication of public land or if no land in the
subdivision is suitable or required for such use, the subdivider may be
required to pay a fee as specified in a published fee schedule established by
resolution of the governing body. Such money as may be collected shall be
used for park land acquisition and park development.



      (3)   Lots created in any manner that are larger than five (5)
acres may be subject to the above requirements if, in the opinion of the
governing body, the lots will not be resubdivided.



      (4)   Where a subdivision includes any portion of a lake shore
or the shoreline of a meandered stream, no less than ten percent (10%) of the
portion of the shoreline lying within a subdivision shall be dedicated for
use by the public along with sufficient land to allow access to a publicly
dedicated street. This land may be a part of, or equal to, the percent of
land for dedication as public land under this section.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 153.097  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS.



   Upon receiving a report from the Planning Commission, the governing
body may grant a variance from the provisions for these regulations in the
case of a planned unit development, as defined in the Zoning Code, provided
that the Council shall find that the proposed development is fully consistent
with the purpose and intent of these regulations and the Comprehensive Plan.
This provision is intended to provide the necessary flexibility for new land
planning and land development trends and techniques such as cluster
development.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 153.098  MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.



   (A)   (1)   In the case of a subdivision resulting in three (3)
or less lots, situated in a neighborhood where conditions are well defined,
the governing body may exempt the subdivider from complying with some of the
requirements of these regulations. In the case of a request to subdivide a
lot which is a part of a recorded plat, or where the subdivision is to permit
the adding of a parcel of land to an abutting lot or to crate not more than
two (2) new lots plus the existing lot, and the newly crated property lines
will not cause any resulting lot to be in violation of these regulations or
the Zoning Code, the division may be approved by the governing body, after
submission of a survey by a registered land surveyor showing the original lot
and the proposed subdivision. Payment of all encumbrances for special
assessments shall be a prerequisite for approval by the governing body unless
specifically exempted.



      (2)   There shall be only one (1) minor subdivision with
regard to the subject property in any twelve (12) month period.



   (B)   (1)   Fees shall be payable at the time applications are
filed with the city and are not refundable unless application is withdrawn
prior to review by the City Council. City Council may refer to Planning
Commission for recommendation.



      (2)   There shall be no fee in the case of applications filed
in the public interest by members of the Council or by the Planning
Commission.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997; Am. Ord. 313, passed 2-4-2003)  Penalty, see §
153.999



§ 153.099  REGISTERED LAND SURVEYS.



   All registered land surveys shall be filed subject to the same
procedure as required for the filing of a plat for platting purposes. The
standards and requirements set forth in these regulations shall apply to all
registered land surveys.  Unless the governing body shall approve, a
registered land survey shall not be used to divide a parcel of land into lots
for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development, if any of
the tracts do not have the required frontage on a dedicated public street.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 153.100  METES AND BOUNDS.



   (A)   No building permit shall be issued for any structure on any
parcel of land less than five (5) acres in area and having a width of less
than three hundred (300) feet at the building setback line.



   (B)   No building permit shall be issued for any structure on any
parcel of land less than five (5) acres in area and having a width of less
than three hundred (300) feet on an improved public street, at the building
setback line which is described by metes and bounds, until a plat describing
such parcel of land is filed with the Kanabec County Register of Deeds and
proof thereof is furnished to the local governing body.



   (C)   When a conveyance by metes and bounds is made the parcels
involved are between five (5) and twenty (20) acres in size, a survey of the
parcels involved shall be submitted to the City Clerk before any building
permits will be issued for those parcels and a copy of the survey should be
attached to the deed when it is submitted to the Kanabec County Register of
Deeds for recording.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 153.101  NON-COMPLYING SUBDIVISIONS.



   In any case in which compliance with the foregoing restrictions will
create an unnecessary hardship and failure to comply does not interfere with
the purpose of these regulations, the governing body may waive such
compliance by adoption of a resolution to that effect and the conveyance may
then be filed or recorded.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



VARIANCES



§ 153.110  GRANTING VARIANCES.



   Upon receiving the report from the Planning Commission, the governing
body may grant a variance in any particular case where the subdivider can
show that by reason of the exceptional topography or other physical
conditions the strict compliance to these regulations could cause an
exceptional and undue hardship on the enjoyment of a substantial property
right. Such relief may be granted provided there is no detriment to the
public welfare and no impairment of intended purpose of this regulation.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 153.111  APPLICATION FOR VARIANCE.



   Application for any such variance shall be made in writing by the
subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat is filed for consideration.
Variance procedure will follow the Zoning Code process and a public hearing
will be held. Such application shall state fully all facts relied upon by the
subdivider, and shall be supplemented with maps, plans or other additional
data which may aid the Planning Commission in the analysis of the proposed
project. Such variances shall be considered at the next regular meeting held
by the Planning Commission. The plans for such restrictions or other legal
provisions necessary to guarantee the full achievement of the proposed plat.
Any variance or modification thus granted shall be recorded and entered in
the minutes of the governing body setting forth the reasons for granting the
variance. The fees to be paid for each application for a variance shall be
established by resolution of the governing body and be available in the from
of a published fee statement.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 153.120  BUILDING PERMITS.



   No building permit shall be issued for any construction, enlargement,
alteration, or repair, demolition, or moving of any building or structure on
any lot or parcel until all the requirements of this regulation have been
fully met.



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



§ 153.999  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine
and/or by imprisonment as provided for in the state statutes. Each day a
violation exists may constitute a separate offense. (M.S. §§ 609.03 and
609.033)



(Ord. 274, passed 4-15-1997)



CHAPTER 154:  BUILDING CODE



Section



   154.01   Application, administration and enforcement



   154.02   Permits and fees



   154.03   Building Code



   154.04   Violation



§ 154.01  APPLICATION, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The application, administration, and enforcement of the code
shall be in accordance with Minnesota State Building Code, as it may be
amended from time to time.



   (B)   The code enforcement agency of this municipality is called the
Building Code Department.



   (C)   This code shall be enforced by the Minnesota Certified
Building Official designated by the city to administer the code as required
by M.S. § 326B.133(1), as it may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 376, passed 1-20-2009)



§ 154.02  PERMITS AND FEES.



   (A)   The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as
authorized in Minn. Rules Chapter 1300, as it may be amended from time to
time.



   (B)   Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by this code
in accordance with the fee schedule (Appendix A, Chapter 33 of the Mora City
Code) set forth by the City Council from time to time. In addition, a
surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits issued for work governed by
this code in accordance with M.S. § 326B.148, as it may be amended from time
to time.



(Ord. 376, passed 1-20-2009)



§ 154.03  BUILDING CODE.



   (A)   The Minnesota State Building Code, established pursuant to
M.S. Ch. 326B, as it may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted as
the Building Code for the city. The code is hereby incorporated in this
chapter as if fully set out herein.



   (B)   The Minnesota State Building Code includes the following
chapters of Minnesota Rules:



      (1)   1300, Administration of Minnesota State Building Code;



      (2)   1301, Building Official Certification;



      (3)   1302, State Building Code Construction Approvals;



      (4)   1303, Minnesota Provisions;



      (5)   1305, Adoption of the 2006 International Building Code;



      (6)   1307, Elevators and Related Devices;



      (7)   1309, Adoption of the 2006 International Residential
Code;



      (8)   1311, Adoption of the 2000 Guidelines for the
Rehabilitation of Existing Buildings;



      (9)   1315, Adoption of the 2005 National Electrical Code;



      (10)   1325, Solar Energy Systems;



      (11)   1330, Fallout Shelters;



      (12)   1335, Floodproofing Regulations;



      (13)   1341, Minnesota Accessibility Code;



      (14)   1346, Adoption of the Minnesota State Mechanical Code;



      (15)   1350, Manufactured Homes;



      (16)   1360, Prefabricated Structures;



      (17)   1361, Industrialized/Modular Buildings;



      (18)   1370, Storm Shelters (Manufactured Home Parks);



      (19)   4715, Minnesota Plumbing Code; and



      (20)   7670, 7672, 7674, 7676, and 7678, Minnesota Energy Code.



   (C)   The city may adopt by reference any or all of the following
optional chapters of Minn. Rules: Chapter 1306, Special Fire Protection
Systems; and Chapter 1335, Floodproofing Regulations, parts 1335.0600 to
1335.1200.



   (D)   The city hereby adopts, by reference, Appendix Chapter J
(Grading), of the 2006 International Building Code.



(Ord. 376, passed 1-20-2009)



§ 154.04  VIOLATION.



   A violation of the code is a misdemeanor per M.S. § 326B.082(16), as
it may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 376, passed 1-20-2009)



CHAPTER 155:  SUBSURFACE SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEMS



Section



   155.01   Introduction



   155.02   Definitions



   155.03   Purpose and authority



   155.04   General provisions



   155.05   General requirements



   155.06   SSTS standards



   155.07   SSTS permitting



   155.08   Management plans



   155.09   Compliance management



   155.10   Enforcement; violations



   155.11   Fees



   155.12   Interpretation



   155.13   Severability



   155.14   Abrogation and greater restrictions



§ 155.01  INTRODUCTION.



   This is  chapter authorizes and provides for sewage treatment and soil
dispersal in unsewered areas of the city. It establishes:



   (A)   Minimum standards for and regulation of individual (and
mid-sized) sewage treatment systems (SSTS) in unsewered areas of the City of
Mora. This chapter is at least as strict as the Kanabec County Subsurface
Sewage Treatment System Ordinance, incorporating by reference minimum
standards established by Minnesota Statutes and Administrative Rules of the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency;



   (B)   Requirements for issuing permits for installation, alteration,
repair or expansion of SSTS;



   (C)   Requirements for all SSTS permitted under the revised
Minnesota Rules, Chapters 7080 and 7081 to be operated under an approved
management plan;



   (D)   Standards for upgrade, repair, replacement, or abandonment of
SSTS;



   (E)   Penalties for failure to comply with these provisions;



   (F)   Provisions for enforcement of these requirements; and



   (G)   Promotes the health, safety and welfare of the public pursuant
to the M.S. §§115.55, 145A.05, 375.51, 394.21 through 394.37, and 471.82
and in furtherance of city policy stated in the city's Comprehensive Plan and
the city's Shoreland Zoning Ordinance.



(Ord. 426, passed 11-18-2014)



§ 155.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY.  The City of Mora, Kanabec County, Minnesota.



   DEPARTMENT.  The Community Development Department of the city or its
successor agency.



   SSTS.  Subsurface sewage treatment system(s).



(Ord. 426, passed 11-18-2014)



§ 155.03  PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.



   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of this chapter shall be to
provide minimum standards for individual subsurface sewage treatment systems
(SSTS) and the treatment and dispersal including the proper location, design,
construction, operation, maintenance and repair to protect surface water and
ground water from contamination by human sewage and waterborne household and
commercial waste; to protect the public's health and safety; and to prevent
or eliminate the development of public nuisances.



   (B)   Authority. This chapter is adopted pursuant to M.S. § 115.55;
M.S. §§ 145A.01 through 145A.08; M.S. § 375.51; or successor statutes, and
Minnesota Rules, Chapters 7080, 7081, 7082 and 7083; or successor rules.



(Ord. 426, passed 11-18-2014)



§ 155.04  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Scope. This chapter regulates the siting, design,
installation, alterations, operation, maintenance, monitoring, and management
of all SSTS within the city's applicable jurisdiction including but not
necessarily limited to individual SSTS and cluster or community SSTS, privy
vaults, and other non-water carried SSTS. All sewage generated in unsewered
areas of the city shall be treated and dispersed by an approved SSTS that is
sited, designed, installed, operated, and maintained in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter or by a system that has been permitted by the MPCA.



   (B)   Jurisdiction. The jurisdiction of this chapter shall include
all lands within the city.



   (C)   City administration. The Department shall administer the SSTS
program and all provisions of this chapter. At appropriate times, the city
shall review and revise and update this chapter as necessary. The city shall
employ or retain under contract qualified and appropriately licensed
professionals to administer and operate the SSTS program. The standards and
ordinance of the jurisdiction of the city may be administratively and
technically more restrictive than Kanabec County's Subsurface Sewage
Treatment Ordinance.



   (D)   Validity. The validity of any part of this chapter shall not
be affected by the invalidity of any other parts of this chapter where the
part can be given effect irrespective of any invalid part or parts.



   (E)   Liability. Any liability or responsibility shall not be
imposed upon the department or agency or any of its officials, employees, or
other contract agent, its employees, agents or servants thereof for damage
resulting from the defective construction, operation, or abandonment of any
onsite or cluster treatment system regulated under this rule by reason of
standards, requirements, or inspections authorized hereunder.



(Ord. 426, passed 11-18-2014)



§ 155.05  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Existing permits. Unexpired permits which were issued prior to
the effective date shall remain valid under the terms and conditions of the
original permit until the original expiration date or until a change in
system ownership.



   (B)   SSTS on lots created after January 23, 1996. All lots created
after January 23, 1996 must have a minimum of two (2) soil treatment and
dispersal areas that can support trenches, seepage beds, mounds, and at-grade
systems as described in Minnesota Rules 7080.2200 through 7080.2230 or site
conditions described in Minnesota Rules 7081.0270, Subp. 3 through 7.



   (C)   SSTS capacity expansions. Expansion of an existing SSTS also
must include any system upgrades that are necessary to bring the entire
system into compliance with the prevailing provisions of this chapter at the
time of the expansion.



   (D)   Failure to protect groundwater. An SSTS that is determined not
to be protective of groundwater in accordance with Minnesota Rules, Chapter
7080.1500, Subp. 4B shall be upgraded, repaired, replaced or abandoned by the
owner in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within twelve (12)
months of receipt of a notice of noncompliance.



   (E)   Imminent threat to public health or safety. An SSTS that is
determined to be an imminent threat to public health or safety in accordance
with Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080.1500, Subp. 4A shall be upgraded,
repaired, replaced or abandoned by the owner in accordance with the
provisions of this ordinance within ten (10) months of receipt of a notice of
noncompliance.



   (F)   Abandonment. Any SSTS, or any component thereof, which is no
ionger intended to be used, must be abandoned in accordance with Minnesota
Rules 7080.2500,



   (G)   SSTS in floodplains. SSTS shall not be located in afloodwayand
wherever possible, location within any part of a floodplain should be
avoided. If no option exists to locate a SSTS outside of a floodplain,
location within the flood fringe is allowed if the requirements in Minnesota
Rules 7080.2270 and all relevant local requirements are met.



   (H)   Class V injection wells. All owners of new or replacement SSTS
that are considered to be Class V injection wells, as defined in the Code of
Federal Regulations (hereinafter "CFR"), Title 40, Part 144, are required by
the federal government to submit SSTS inventory information to the
Environmental Protection Agency as described in CFR Title 40, Part 144.
Further, owners are required to identify all Class V injection wells in
property transfer disclosures.



   (I)   SSTS practitioner licensing. No person shall engage in site
evaluation, inspection, design, installation, construction, alternation,
extension, repair, maintenance, or pumping of SSTS without an appropriate and
valid license issued by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (hereinafter
"MPCA") in accordance with Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7083 except as exempted
in 7083.0700.



   (J)   Prohibitions. Any surface discharging system must be permitted
under the National Pollution Discharge Elimination program by the MPCA.



(Ord. 426, passed 11-18-2014)



§ 155.06  SSTS STANDARDS.



   (A)   Standards adopted by reference. The city hereby adopts by this
reference Minnesota Rules Chapters 7080 and 7081 in their entirety as now
constituted and from time to time amended. This adoption does not supersede
the city's right or ability to adopt local standards that are in compliance
with M.S. § 115.55.



   (B)   List of adopted standards. All new and upgraded subsurface
sewage treatment systems for individual dwelling shall be sized for Type I
dwelling



   (C)   Determination of hydraulic loading rate and SSTS sizing.
Either Table IX or Table IXa from Minnesota Rules 7080.2150, Subp. 3(E) and
herein adopted by reference shall be used to determine the hydraulic loading
rate and infiltration area for all SSTS permitted under this chapter.



   (D)   Compliance criteria for existing SSTS. SSTS built after March
31, 1996 or SSTS located in a shoreland area, wellhead protection area, or
serving a food, beverage, or lodging establishment as defined under Minnesota
Rules 7080.1100, Subp. 84 shall have a three (3)-foot vertical separation
between the bottom soil infiltrative surface and the periodically saturated
soil and/or bedrock. Existing systems that have no more than a fifteen
percent (15%) reduction in this separation distance (a separation distance no
less than 30.6 inches) to account for settling of sand or soil, normal
variation of separation distance measurements and interpretation of limiting
layer characteristics may be considered compliant under this ordinance. The
vertical separation measurement shall be made outside the area of system
influence but in an area of similar soil, Minnesota Rules 7080.1500, Subp. 4.
All other system compliance shall be as defined in Minnesota Rules 7080.1500,
Subp. 1-6.



   (E)   Holding tanks. Holding tanks may be used for single-family
homes and other buildings with limited water use under the following
conditions:



      (1)   The owner shall install a holding tank in accordance
with Minnesota Rules 7080.2290.



      (2)   The owner shall maintain a valid contract with a
licensed liquid waste hauler to pump and haul the holding tank to a licensed
wastewater treatment facility.



      (3)   The holding tank shall be regularly pumped per a
schedule agreed upon by the permitting entity and the licensed liquid waste
hauler.



      (4)   The pumper shall certify each date the tank is pumped
and the volume of the liquid waste removed and report to the permitting
entity.



A property owner may request a variance from the standards as specified in
this chapter pursuant to city policies and procedures.



   (F)   Variance requests. A property owner may request a variance
from the standards as specified in this ordinance pursuant to city policies
and procedures.



   (G)   Affected agency. Variances that pertain to the standards and
requirements of the State of Minnesota must be approved by the affected state
agency pursuant to the requirements of the state agency.



   (H)   Board of Adjustment. The City Council shall have the authority
only to consider variances to horizontal setbacks from property lines,
rights-of-way, structures, or buildings.



(Ord. 426, passed 11-18-2014)



§ 155.07  SSTS PERMITTING.



   (A)   Permit required. It is unlawful for any person to construct,
install, modify, replace, or operate a subsurface sewage treatment system
without the appropriate permit from the city.



   (B)   Permit. A permit shall be obtained by the property owner or an
agent of the property owner from the city prior to the installation,
construction, replacement, modification, alteration, repair, or capacity
expansion of a SSTS. The purpose of this permit is to ensure that the
proposed construction activity is sited, designed, and constructed in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter by appropriately certified
and/or licensed practitioner(s).



   (C)   Activities requiring a permit. A permit is required for
installation of a new SSTS, for replacement of an existing SSTS, or for any
repair or replacement of components that will alter the original function of
the system, change the treatment capacity of the system, change the location
of the system, or otherwise change the original system's design, layout, or
function.



   (D)   Activities not requiring a permit. A permit is not required
for minor repairs or replacement of system components that do not alter the
original function of the system, change the treatment capacity of the system,
change the location of the system, or otherwise change the original system's
design, layout, or function.



   (E)   Permit application requirements. Permit applications shall be
made on forms provided by the Department and signed by the applicant or
applicant's agent. The applications shall include the documents listed in
division (E)(1) through (5) below.



      (1)   Name, mailing address, telephone number, and email
address.



      (2) Property identification number and address or other
description of property location.



      (3)   Site Evaluation Report as described in Minnesota Rules
7080.1730



      (4)   Design Report as described in Minnesota Rules 7080.2430.



      (5)   Management Plan as described in Minnesota Rules
7082.0600. B. Monitoring and Disposal Contract.



   (F)   Application review and response. The Department shall review a
permit application and supporting documents within fifteen (15) working days
from the date of receipt of a satisfactorily completed application. Upon
satisfaction that the proposed work will conform to the provisions of this
chapter, the Department shall issue a written permit authorizing construction
of the SSTS as designed. In the event that for any reason the applicant makes
a significant change to the approved application, the applicant must file an
amended application detailing the changed conditions for approval prior to
initiating or continuing construction, modification, or operation for
approval or denial. The Department shall complete the review of the amended
application within fifteen (15) working days of receipt of the amended
application. If the permit applications is incomplete or does not meet the
requirements of this chapter the Department shall deny the application. A
notice of denial shall be provided to the applicant, which must state the
reason for the denial.



   (G)   Permit expiration. The permit is valid for a period of no more
than one (1) year from its date of issue, unless it is extended in accordance
with this section or construction has been completed satisfactorily,
whichever is shorter. Satisfactory completion of construction shall be
determined by receipt a signed certification that the construction or
installation of the system was completed in substantial conformance to the
approved design documents by a qualified employee of the Department or a
licensed inspection business which is authorized by the Department and
independent of the owner and the SSTS installer.



   (H)   Extensions and renewals. The Department may grant an extension
of the permit if the construction has commenced prior to the original
expiration date of the permit The permit may be extended for a period of no
more than six (6) months.



   (I)   Suspension or revocation. The Department may suspend or revoke
a construction permit issued under this section for any false statements,
misrepresentations of facts on which the permit was issued, or unauthorized
changes to the system design that alter the original function of the system,
change the treatment capacity of the system, change the iocation of the
system, or otherwise change the original system's design, layout, or
function. A notice of suspension or revocation and the reasons for the
suspension or revocation shall be conveyed in writing to the permit holder.
If suspended or revoked, installation or modification of a treatment system
may not commence or continue until a valid permit is obtained.



   (J)   Operating permit. An operating permit shall be required for
all systems installed under Minnesota Rules 7080.2290, 7080.2350 and
7080.2400 and Chapter 7081.



   (K)   Abandonment certification. The purpose of the system
abandonment certification is to ensure that a treatment system no longer in
service is abandoned within a reasonable time following decommissioning and
in a manner that protects public health, safety, and water quality. It also
terminates all permits associated with the system.



   (L)   Abandonment requirements.



      (1)   Whenever the use of a SSTS or any system component is
discontinued as the result of a system repair, modification, replacement or
decommissioning following connection to a municipal or private sanitary
sewer, or condemnation or demolition of a building served by the system,
further use of the system or any system component for any purpose under this
chapter shall be prohibited.



      (2)   Continued use of a treatment tank where the tank is to
become an integral part of a replacement system or a sanitary sewer system
requires the prior written approval of the Department.



      (3)   Abandonment shall be completed in accordance with
Minnesota Rules 7080.2500. No prior notification to the Department of an
owner's intent to abandon a system is necessary.



      (4)   A report of abandonment certified by the licensed
installation business shall be submitted to the Department. The report shall
include:



         (a)   Owner's name and contact information;



         (b)   Property address;



         (c)   The reason(s) for abandonment;



         (d)   A brief description of the abandonment methods
used, description of the system components removed or abandoned in place, and
disposition of any materials or residuals.



   (M)   Abandonment certificate. Upon receipt of an abandonment report
and verification that the SSTS has been abandoned according to the
requirements of this chapter, the Department shall issue an abandonment
certificate. If the abandonment is not completed according the requirements
of this chapter the city shall notify the owner of the SSTS of the
deficiencies, which shall be corrected within thirty (30) calendar days.



(Ord. 426, passed 11-18-2014)



§ 155.08  MANAGEMENT PLANS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of management plans is to describe how a
particular SSTS is intended to be operated and maintained to sustain the
performance required. The plan is to be provided by the certified designer to
the system owner when the treatment system is commissioned.



   (B)   SSTS requiring management plans. Management plans are required
for all new or replacement SSTS as described in Minnesota Rules 7080.210 to
7080.2400. The management plan shall be submitted to the Department with the
permit application for review and approval. The Department shall be notified
of any system modifications made during construction and the management plan
revised and resubmitted at the time of final construction certification.



   (C)   Required contents of a management plan. Management plans shall
include (Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7082.0600, Subp. 1):



      (1)   Operating requirements describing tasks that the owner
can perform and tasks that a licensed service provider or maintainer must
perform;



      (2)   Monitoring requirements;



      (3)   Maintenance requirements including maintenance
procedures and a schedule for routine maintenance;



      (4)   Statement that the owner is required to notify the
Department when the management plan requirements are not being met;



      (5)   Disclosure of the location and condition of the
additional soil treatment and dispersal area on the owner's property or a
property serving the owner's residence.



   (D)   Requirements for systems not operated under a management plan
(Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7082.0100, Subp. 3.(L). SSTS that are not operated
under a management plan or operating permit must inspect treatment tanks and
remove solids if needed every three (3) years. Solids must be removed when
their accumulation meets the limit described in Minnesota Rules 7080.2450.



(Ord. 426, passed 11-18-2014)



§ 155.09  COMPLIANCE MANAGEMENT.



   (A)   Compliance inspection.



      (1)   SSTS compliance inspections must be performed as defined
in Minnesota Rules 7082.0700 Inspection Program for Subsurface Sewage
Treatment Systems.



      (2)   All compliance inspections must be performed and signed
by licensed inspection businesses or qualified employees certified as
inspectors.



   (B)   New construction or replacement.



      (1)   Compliance inspections must be performed on new or
replacement SSTS to determine compliance with Minnesota Rules Chapters 7080
or 7081. SSTS found not to be in compliance with Minnesota Rules 7080.1500,
Subp. 4A or 7081.0080, Subp. 3 must be repaired or replaced within ten (10)
months or as directed under M.S. Chapter 145A. SSTS that are determined to
have operation or monitoring deficiencies must immediately be maintained,
monitored or otherwise managed according to the operating permit.



      (2)   It is the responsibility of the SSTS owner or the
owner's agent to notify the Department two (2) calendar days prior to any
permitted work on the SSTS.



      (3)   A certificate of compliance for new SSTS construction or
replacement, which shall be valid for five (5) years, shall be issued by the
Department if the system was built in accordance with the applicable
requirements as specified in the construction permit.



      (4)   Certificates of compliance for new construction or
replacement shall remain valid for five (5) years from the date of issue
unless the Department finds evidence of noncompliance.



   (C)   Existing systems.



      (1)   Compliance inspections shall be required when any of the
following conditions occur:



         (a)   When a construction permit is required to repair,
modify, or upgrade an existing system; or



         (b)   Upon receipt of a complaint or other notice of a
system malfunction.



      (2)   Compliance inspections for existing SSTS shall be
reported on inspection report forms provided by the PCA. Compliance
inspections of existing SSTS shall meet the requirements for Minnesota Rules,
Chapter 7082.0700, and Subp. 4B. Vertical separation disputes must follow the
procedure described in Minnesota Rules 7080.0700, Subp. 5.



      (3)   The certificate of compliance or notice of noncompliance
must be submitted to the Department and the owner or owner's agent no later
than fifteen (15) calendar days after the date the inspection was performed.



      (4)   Certificates of compliance for existing SSTS shall
remain valid for three (3) years from the date of issue unless the Department
finds evidence of noncompliance.



      (5)   Neither the issuance of permits, certificates of
compliance nor notices of noncompliance as requested or issued shall be
construed to represent a guarantee or warranty of the system's operation or
effectiveness. Such certificates signify that the system in question is or
has been designed and installed in compliance or noncompliance with the
provisions of these standards and regulations.



(Ord. 426, passed 11-18-2014)



§ 155.10  ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Cause to issue a notice of violation. Any person who violates
any of the provisions of this chapter or who makes any false statement on a
certificate of compliance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by
imprisonment or a fine or both as defined by law.



   (B)   Notice of violation. The Department shall serve, in person or
by mail, a notice of violation to any person determined to be violating
provisions of this chapter. The notice of violation shall contain:



      (1)   A statement documenting the findings of fact determined
through observations, inspections, or investigations;



      (2)   A list of specific violation(s) of this chapter;



      (3)   Specific requirements for correction or removal of the
specified violation(s); and



      (4)   A mandatory time schedule for correction, removal, and
compliance with this chapter.



   (C)   Prosecution. In the event of a violation of this chapter, in
addition to other remedies, the city may institute appropriate actions or
proceedings to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate such violations.



   (D)   State notification of violation, in accordance with state law,
the city shall notify the MPCA of any inspection, installation, design,
construction, alteration, or repair of an SSTS by a licensed/certified person
or any septage removal by a licensed pumper that is performed in violation of
the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 426, passed 11-18-2014)



§ 155.11  FEES.



   From time to time, the city shall establish fees for activities
undertaken by the Department pursuant to this chapter. Fees shall be due and
payable at a time and in a manner to be determined by the Department.



(Ord. 426, passed 11-18-2014)



§ 155.12  INTERPRETATION.



   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in
favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of
any other powers granted by Minnesota Statutes.



(Ord. 426, passed 11-18-2014)



§ 155.13  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this chapter is
adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of law, the remainder of this
chapter shall not be affected and shall remain in full force.



(Ord. 426, passed 11-18-2014)



§ 155.14  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
other existing city ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of
this chapter shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this
chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.



(Ord. 426, passed 11-18-2014)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Table



      I.   AGREEMENTS, FRANCHISES AND CONTRACTS



      II.   ANNEXATIONS



      III.   ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS



TABLE I:  AGREEMENTS, FRANCHISES AND CONTRACTS



 


Ord. No.

 
Date Passed
 
Description


174
 
11-3-1981
 
Granting franchise to Peoples Natural Gas Company, Division of InterNorth,
Inc. for gas distribution system, for 25 years


354
 
1-16-2007
 
Granting a nonexclusive franchise to Minnesota Energy Resources, a subsidiary
of WPS Resources, to construct and operate facilities and equipment for gas
distribution.


 
 
 
 
 



 



TABLE II:  ANNEXATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




48
 
2-3-1954
 
Annexing the west 33 feet of the southwest one-quarter of southeast one-
quarter Section 12, Township 39, Range 24


107
 
3-6-1973
 
Annexing 2 properties of land in Section 12, Township 39, Range 24, 38 acres


110
 
9-18-1973
 
Annexing 3 properties of land in Section 12, Township 39, Range 24


235
 
3-19-1991
 
Annexing 9 tracts of land in Arthur Township in Section 1, Township 39, Range
24 and Section 12, Township 39, Range 24


236
 
9-17-1991
 
Annexing 2 tracts of land in Arthur Township in Section 15, Township 39N,
Range 24W (19.8 acres) and Section 10, Township 39N, Range 24W (20.34 acres)


242
 
2-4-1992
 
Annexing part of Arthur Township, Section 15, Township 39N, Range 24W, 37.0
acres


276
 
1-29-1998
 
Annexing the Douglas Buckley Estate, including Lots 1 through 4, Block 3,
Spring Brook Estates in Section 24, Township 39, Range 24, 31.13 acres zoned
R-1


334
 
5-17-2005
 
Extending the corporate limits of the city to include certain lands owned by
the Mora Housing & Redevelopment Authority and abutting the city.


339
 
7-19-2005
 
Repealing Ordinance No. 334


340
 
7-19-2005
 
Annexing 3 properties: part of Section 12, Township 39, Range 24;  Lots 9
through 17, Block 2 and Lots 1 through 18, Block 3, Krawiecki’s East Side;
and all of 7th Street SE; all of 8th Street SE; Howe Avenue (C.R. 69) to its
centerline adjacent to Lot 17, Block 2 and Lots 1 and 10, Block 3, including
street intersections, in Krawiecki’s East Side, 16 acres zoned R-3


344
 
4-4-2006
 
Annexation of Outlot A, Little Ranches 1st Addition


350
 
11-7-2006
 
Annexation of property consisting of approximately 172.9 acres


351
 
1-2-2007
 
Annexation of that part of the south one-half of the northwest one-quarter of
Section 1, Township 36, Range 24


359
 
11-6-2007
 
Annexation of the Servin Property and Bengston Property


360
 
11-20-2007
 
Annexation of land generally located south of Trunk Highway 23, east of Oslin
Road, west of property owned by the Housing & Redevelopment Authority and
north of Howe Avenue


365
 
2-14-2008
 
Annexation of land generally located north of Howe Avenue, east of the future
Valhalla Circle and west of Mahogany Street


372
 
10-21-2008
 
Extending the corporate limits of the city to include certain property
located at 2198 Kastenbauer Road, owned by and abutting the city


382
 
10-6-2009
 
Extending the corporate limits of the city to include certain property
described as Section 12, Township 039, Range 024, owned by and abutting the
City of Mora


384
 
11-3-2009
 
Extending the corporate limits of the city to include certain property owned
by the Mora congregation of Jehovah Witness and located at 1897 Commercial
Place


414
 
8-21-2012
 
Extending the corporate limits of the city to include certain property owned
by Independent School District 332 (ISD 332) and located east of CR 70, west
of State Highway 65, and north of Trailview Elementary School


434
 
6-16-2015
 
Extending the corporate limits of the city to include certain land owned by
Donald Servin located west of State Highway 65 and south of State Highway 23


436
 
7-21-2015
 
Extending the corporate limits of the city to include certain land owned by
Donald Servin located northwest of the Southwest Quarter of Section 23,
Township 39, Range 24


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE III:  ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




361
 
12-4-2007
 
Designating permanent zoning classification for Servin and Bengston
Properties, annexed to the city


367
 
2-5-2008
 
Designating permanent zoning classification of all 17 properties located in
the Oslin Road - Mattson Road annexation area to be R-3 (Multiple Dwelling
District)


368
 
3-14-2008
 
Approval of a rezoning request of 3.88 acres from I-1 (Limited Industrial
District) to R-3 (Multiple Dwelling District)


373
 
11-4-2008
 
Designating permanent zoning classification of two acres of city owned
property located at 2198 Kastenbauer Road to I-1 (Limited Industrial
District) and the Comprehensive Plan land use designation shall be
Public/Semi-Public/Institutional


379
 
7-7-2009
 
Approving the rezoning of approximately 3.01 acres from R-1 (One-Family
Residential District) to B-2 (General Business District) as requested by Zion
Lutheran Church and Mora United Methodist Church, and approving an amendment
to the 2009 Comprehensive Plan land use map to guide this area as commercial


381
 
8-4-2009
 
Approving the rezoning of approximately 3.88 acres from R-3
(Multiple-Dwelling District) to I-1 (Limited Industrial District) as
requested by Arnold and Kristy Hohn


383
 
10-6-2009
 
Designating a permanent zoning classification and comprehensive plan land use
designation for property owned by the city and located west of 2198
Kastenbauer Road


385
 
11-3-2009
 
Designating a permanent zoning classification and comprehensive plan land use
designation for property owned by the Mora congregation of Jehovah Witness
and located at 1897 Commercial Place


393
 
6-1-2010
 
Approving the rezoning of 17.6 acres of property from I-1 (Limited Industrial
District) to B-2 (General Business District)


396
 
8-3-2010
 
Approving the rezoning of 11.5 acres of property from R-1 (Single Family
Residential District) to R-3 (Multiple Dwelling District) and an amendment to
the comprehensive plan land use map


410
 
7-5-2011
 
Approving the rezoning of 43 Maple Avenue East and Maple Lane properties from
R-1 (Single Family Residential District) and I-2 (General Industrial
District) to R-3 (Multiple Dwelling District)


413
 
7-17-2012
 
Designating a permanent zoning classification as R-1 and comprehensive plan
land use designation for 80 acres of property owned by Independent School
District 332 (and proposed for annexation into the city) and located east of
CR 70, west of State Highway 65, and north of Trailview Elementary School


418
 
8-20-2013
 
Approving the rezoning of approximately 7.13 acres of property located in
Section 23, Township 39, Range 24, from B-2 (General Business District) to
I-1 (Limited Industrial District, and an amendment to the comprehensive plan
land use map


423
 
8-19-2014
 
Approving the rezoning of three properties located on Clark Street from R-1
(Single Family Residential District) to B-2 (General Business District)


424
 
8-19-2014
 
Approving the rezoning of 842 Howe Avenue from I-1 (Limited Industrial
District) to B-2 (General Business District)


428
 
12-16-2014
 
Approving the rezoning of 1888 Liberty Street from R-1 (Single Family
Residential District) to B-2 (General Business District)


431
 
4-21-2015
 
Approving the rezoning of one property located north of Trunk Highway 23 and
east of Industrial Park Road from I-1 (Limited Industrial District) to B-2
(General Business District) and an amendment to the comprehensive plan land
use map


433
 
6-16-2015
 
Designating a permanent zoning classification and comprehensive plan land use
designation for property owned by Donald Servin and proposed for annexation
into the city


441
 
8-18-2015
 
Rezoning one property generally located west of the intersection of Rowland
Road and Commercial Place and south of the Snake River from R-1 (Single
Family Residential District) to R-3 (Multiple Dwelling District) and an
amendment to the Comprehensive Pland Land Use Map from Low Density
Residential to Medium Density Residential.


 
 
 
 
 




 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Minnesota Statutes





References to 1969 Code





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES



 

M.S. Cite
 
Code Section




Ch. 13
 
34.01


13.03(3)(c)
 
Ch. 33, App. A


14.57–14.70
 
112.37, 112.99


15.73, Subd. 3
 
54.03


15.99
 
150.273


Ch. 18B
 
92.01


65B.48, Subd. 5
 
70.17


93.44–93.51
 
151.01, 151.35


Ch. 103
 
151.02


Ch. 103F
 
152.001


103G.245
 
151.32


Ch. 105
 
152.041


105.37, Subds. 14, 15
 
151.01


105.485
 
151.53


115.01, Subd. 8
 
53.002


115.07
 
53.002


115.55
 
155.01, 155.03, 155.06


144.391
 
115.01


Ch. 145A
 
155.09


145A.01 - 145A.08
 
155.03


145A.05
 
155.01


161.242
 
93.01


168.10
 
93.01


168.27
 
111.13


Ch. 168A
 
111.11


168B.04, subd. 2
 
93.01


168B.10
 
93.08


Ch. 169
 
70.01, 70.16


169.01
 
93.01


169.045
 
70.15, 70.16


169.522
 
70.16


Ch. 176
 
117.04


205.13(3)(c)
 
Ch. 33, App. A


Ch. 216D
 
54.06, 54.16


216D.01 - 216D.09
 
54.16, 54.25


216B.02, Subds. 4, 6
 
54.03


216D.04, Subd. 3
 
54.03


237.16
 
54.01


237.162
 
54.01, 54.03, 54.18


237.162, Subd. 4
 
54.03


237.163
 
54.01, 54.03, 54.18


237.163, Subd. 2(b)
 
54.02


237.163, Subd. 6
 
54.30


237.79
 
54.01


237.81
 
54.01


Ch. 238
 
54.03


238.086
 
54.01


245.782
 
150.002


260.185
 
130.99


300.06
 
54.07, 118.07


307.08
 
151.01


Ch. 308A
 
54.03


Ch. 326B
 
154.03


326B.082(16)
 
154.04


326B.133(1)
 
154.01


326B.148
 
Ch. 33, Appendix A, 154.02


327.14, Subd. 2
 
150.002


Ch. 329
 
113.03


333.01
 
118.07


Ch. 336
 
111.11


Ch. 340A
 
112.01, 112.02, 112.23, 112.37, 112.99


340A.24
 
112.22


340A.24, Subd. 2
 
112.22


340A.26
 
112.22


340A.28
 
112.22


340A.101
 
112.03, 112.22


340A.101, Subd. 3a
 
112.22


340A.401
 
112.22


340A.401, Subd. 1
 
112.22


340A.404, Subd. 4a
 
112.22


340A.404, Subd. 4b
 
112.22


340A.404, Subd. 5
 
112.22


340A.408, Subd. 2b
 
112.22


340A.409
 
112.25, 112.54


340A.414
 
112.35


340A.504
 
112.33


340A.504(d)
 
112.22


340A.509
 
112.02


340A.801
 
112.25


347.51
 
90.51


Ch. 349
 
116.01, 116.02, 116.14


349.11–349.21
 
116.99


349.11–349.23
 
116.06, 116.07


349.12
 
116.04


349.166
 
116.09


349.213
 
116.02


364.03, Subd. 2
 
111.08


364.03, Subd. 3
 
111.08, 120.08


364.06
 
34.01


364.09
 
34.01


366.011
 
40.01


366.012
 
40.01


375.51
 
155.01, 155.03


394.21 - 394.27
 
155.01


412.02, Subd. 3
 
10.05, 31.02


412.321–412.391
 
32.01, 32.03, 52.02, 53.002


415.01
 
40.01


415.11
 
30.02


Ch. 429
 
33.45, 54.23, 153.088


429.061
 
33.18


429.101
 
33.18


444.075
 
51.01


444.075, Subd. 3
 
51.09


Ch. 453
 
54.03


Ch. 453A
 
54.03


461.12
 
115.99


Ch. 462
 
54.23, 151.02


463.15–463.26
 
33.10, 33.13


463.17
 
131.07


471.6985
 
112.53


471.82
 
155.01


Ch. 505
 
151.69, 153.065


505.02, Subd. 1
 
151.67


514.67 et seq.
 
131.05


604.113(2)(a)
 
Ch. 33, App. A


609.03
 
150.999


609.033
 
150.999


609.75–609.763
 
116.06, 116.99


617.241
 
150.003, 150.134, 150.149, 150.161


624.20, Subd. 1(c)
 
130.05


624.717
 
130.03


626.862
 
10.20


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 1969 CODE



 

1969 Code Section
 
2007 Code Section




1.060
 
10.21


3.050
 
10.05


3.080
 
10.05


3.120
 
10.02


3.130
 
10.02


5.040
 
10.05


5.050
 
10.05


5.070
 
10.05


5.080
 
10.05


5.090
 
10.05


5.100
 
10.05


5.110
 
10.05


10.010
 
32.01


10.020
 
32.02


10.030
 
32.03


11.010
 
31.01


11.020
 
31.01


11.030
 
31.01


11.040
 
31.01


12.010
 
32.30


12.020
 
32.31


12.030
 
32.32


12.040
 
32.33


12.050
 
32.34


12.060
 
32.35


14.010
 
31.02


18.010
 
33.02


19.010
 
32.15


19.020
 
32.16


19.030
 
32.17


19.040
 
32.18


19.050
 
32.19


35.010
 
91.01


35.030
 
91.02


35.040
 
91.03


35.050
 
91.04


36.040
 
91.18


38.010
 
92.01


38.020
 
92.02


38.030
 
92.03


43.10
 
92.30


43.20
 
92.31


43.30
 
92.32


43.40
 
92.33


56.01
 
117.01


56.02
 
117.02


56.03
 
117.03


56.04
 
117.04


56.05
 
117.05


56.06
 
117.06


56.07
 
117.07


56.08
 
117.08


56.09
 
117.09


60.010
 
70.02


62.010
 
71.01


62.030
 
71.02; Ch. 73, Sch. I


62.035
 
71.03; Ch. 73, Sch. II


62.040
 
71.04; Ch. 73, Sch. III


62.050
 
71.05


62.060
 
71.06


80.010
 
90.01


80.020
 
90.02


80.030
 
90.03


80.040
 
90.04


80.060
 
90.05


80.070
 
90.06


80.080
 
90.20


80.090
 
90.21


80.100
 
90.22


80.110
 
90.23


80.120
 
90.24


80.130
 
90.25


80.140
 
90.35


80.150
 
90.36


80.160
 
90.37


80.170
 
90.38


80.180
 
90.39


80.190
 
90.07


80.200
 
90.08


80.210
 
90.09


95.130
 
50.01


Ch. 97, Subd. 1
 
51.01


Ch. 97, Subd. 2
 
51.02, 51.03


Ch. 97, Subd. 4
 
51.04


Ch. 97, Subd. 5
 
51.05


Ch. 97, Subd. 9
 
51.06


Ch. 97, Subd. 10
 
51.07


Ch. 97, Subd. 11
 
51.08


Ch. 97, Subd. 12
 
51.09


139.01
 
131.01


139.02
 
131.02


139.03
 
131.03


139.04
 
131.04


139.05
 
131.05


139.06
 
131.06


139.07
 
131.07


139.08
 
131.08


139.09
 
131.09


139.10
 
131.20


139.11
 
131.21


139.12
 
131.22


139.13
 
131.23


139.14
 
131.24


140.020
 
130.01


Ch. 170
 
72.01


176.010
 
33.03


176.020
 
33.03


176.030
 
33.03


176.040
 
33.03


176A.010
 
93.01


176A.020
 
93.02


176A.030
 
93.03


176A.040
 
93.04


176A.050
 
93.05


176A.060
 
93.06


176A.080
 
93.07


176A.090
 
93.08


176A.100
 
93.09


176A.110
 
93.10


176A.120
 
93.11


176A.130
 
93.12


176A.140
 
93.13


176A.150
 
93.14


176A.160
 
93.15


177.010
 
55.01


177.020
 
55.02


177.030
 
55.03


178.010
 
70.30


178.020
 
70.31


178.030
 
70.32


178.040
 
70.33


178.050
 
70.34


178.060
 
70.35


178.070
 
70.36


178.080
 
70.37


178.090
 
70.38


179.000
 
70.39


179.010
 
70.40


180
 
72.02


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




28
 
3-6-1940
 
71.06


40
 
7-6-1949
 
71.04, 71.06


48
 
2-3-1954
 
T.S.O. II


49
 
9-1-1954
 
130.01


57
 
10-1-1957
 
30.02


64
 
11-6-1957
 
32.03


75
 
1-9-1963
 
31.02, 33.02


80
 
1-6-1965
 
91.01–91.04


83
 
1-3-1967
 
32.03


96
 
12-29-1970
 
30.02


102
 
1-4-1972
 
32.02


107
 
3-6-1973
 
T.S.O. II


110
 
9-18-1973
 
T.S.O. II


146
 
10-4-1997
 
30.02


157
 
2-5-1980
 
71.05


160
 
4-1-1980
 
91.18


161
 
4-15-1980
 
33.03


171
 
8-18-1981
 
70.02


174
 
11-3-1981
 
T.S.O. I


177
 
5-18-1982
 
55.01–55.03


180
 
6-1-1982
 
71.06


179
 
6-15-1982
 
71.02; Ch. 73, Sch. I


183
 
12-7-1982
 
90.01–90.09, 90.20–90.25, 90.35–90.39


199
 
9-16-1986
 
Ch. 73, Sch. II


200
 
10-7-1986
 
Ch. 73, Sch. II


205
 
1-6-1987
 
30.02


214
 
5-3-1987
 
71.03; Ch. 73, Sch. II


216
 
11-15-1988
 
71.02


218
 
12-20-1988
 
90.03, 90.04


221
 
9-5-1989
 
32.15–32.19


222
 
10-3-1989
 
93.01–93.15


226
 
2-6-1990
 
70.30–70.40


228
 
4-3-1990
 
Ch. 73, Sch. III


232
 
7-17-1990
 
92.01–92.03


234
 
1-15-1991
 
152.001–152.009, 152.020, 152.021, 152.035–152.042, 152.055–152.059,
152.070, 152.071, 152.085–152.087, 152.100–152.102, 152.115–152.117,
152.130–152.136, 152.999


235
 
3-19-1991
 
T.S.O. II


236
 
9-17-1991
 
T.S.O. II


242
 
2-4-1992
 
T.S.O. II


243
 
3-3-1992
 
32.16


246
 
6-16-1992
 
92.30, 92.31, 92.33


247
 
8-4-1992
 
151.01–151.05, 151.15–151.19, 151.30–151.37, 151.50–151.53,
151.65–151.70, 151.80–151.86


248
 
10-20-1992
 
151.01–151.05, 151.15–151.19, 151.30–151.37, 151.50–151.53,
151.65–151.70, 151.80–151.86


249
 
10-20-1992
 
151.01–151.05, 151.15–151.19, 151.30–151.37, 151.50–151.53,
151.65–151.70, 151.80–151.86; 152.001–152.009, 152.020, 152.021,
152.035–152.042, 152.055–152.059, 152.070, 152.071, 152.085–152.087,
152.100–152.102, 152.115–152.117, 152.130–152.136, 152.999


255
 
4-18-1995
 
90.05


256
 
6-20-1995
 
72.02


257
 
7-18-1995
 
131.01–131.09


258
 
7-18-1995
 
32.30–32.35


268
 
7-2-1996
 
30.02


275
 
1-6-1998
 
30.01


276
 
1-29-1998
 
T.S.O. II


280
 
9-15-1998
 
70.15–70.19


289
 
6-6-2000
 
92.30–92.32


290
 
10-3-2000
 
72.02


291
 
10-3-2000
 
131.20–131.24


292
 
10-3-2000
 
92.31


298
 
11-6-2001
 
10.05


301
 
11-6-2001
 
93.02


305
 
7-2-2002
 
153.051


308
 
7-2-2002
 
153.037


311
 
9-17-2002
 
30.02


312
 
11-5-2002
 
71.05


313
 
2-4-2003
 
153.098


320
 
2-4-2003
 
71.05


321
 
3-4-2003
 
33.01


327A
 
6-1-2004
 
153.024


330
 
6-24-2004
 
71.02


331
 
7-20-2004
 
51.01–51.09


332
 
11-2-2004
 
117.01–117.09


333
 
1-18-2005
 
51.01–51.09


334
 
5-17-2005
 
T.S.O. II


335
 
7-5-2005
 
40.01


336
 
7-5-2005
 
50.01


339
 
7-19-2005
 
T.S.O. II


340
 
7-19-2005
 
T.S.O. II


341
 
10-4-2005
 
71.05


344
 
4-4-2006
 
T.S.O. II


346
 
6-6-2006
 
50.20–50.24


347
 
6-20-2006
 
32.16, 32.31, 32.66


348
 
7-18-2006
 
30.02


350
 
11-7-2006
 
T.S.O. II


351
 
1-2-2007
 
T.S.O. II


352
 
1-2-2007
 
Ch. 33, Appendix A


354
 
1-16-2007
 
T.S.O. I


356
 
4-17-2007
 
Ch. 33, Appendix A


357
 
7-17-2007
 
Adopting Ordinance


359
 
11-6-2007
 
T.S.O. II


360
 
11-20-2007
 
T.S.O. II


361
 
12-4-2007
 
T.S.O. III


363
 
12-18-2007
 
50.10–50.13


364
 
1-2-2008
 
40.01, 114.07, 115.99


365
 
2-14-2008
 
T.S.O. II


367
 
2-5-2008
 
T.S.O. III


368
 
3-14-2008
 
T.S.O. III


370
 
5-20-2008
 
112.37, 112.99


371
 
7-15-2008
 
34.01


372
 
10-21-2008
 
T.S.O. II


373
 
11-4-2008
 
T.S.O. III


375
 
1-20-2009
 
Ch. 33, Appendix A


376
 
1-20-2009
 
50.24, 71.05, 93.01, 112.22, 154.01–154.04


379
 
7-7-2009
 
T.S.O. III


381
 
8-4-2009
 
T.S.O. III


382
 
10-6-2009
 
T.S.O. II


383
 
10-6-2009
 
T.S.O. III


384
 
11-3-2009
 
T.S.O. II


385
 
11-3-2009
 
T.S.O. III


387
 
12-15-2009
 
Ch. 33, Appendix A


389
 
2-2-2010
 
92.32, 118.17


390
 
2-2-2010
 
112.06


391
 
3-2-2010
 
34.01


392
 
6-1-2010
 
130.06


393
 
6-1-2010
 
T.S.O. III


395
 
7-6-2010
 
150.001 - 150.018, 150.030 - 150.039, 150.050 - 150.052, 150.060 - 150.066,
150.075 - 150.082, 150.090 - 150.096, 150.115 - 150.121, 150.130 - 150.138,
150.145 - 150.154, 150.160 - 150.168, 150.180 - 150.188, 150.195 - 150.203,
150.210 - 150.227, 150.240 - 150.256, 150.270 - 150.273, 150.290 - 150.294,
150.500 - 150.507, 150.999


396
 
8-3-2010
 
T.S.O. III


397
 
9-7-2010
 
52.01 - 52.08, 52.15 - 52.24, 52.99


399
 
9-21-2010
 
92.32


400
 
11-16-2010
 
52.18, 52.23


401
 
12-21-2010
 
34.01, 120.01 - 120.09, 120.99


402
 
12-21-2010
 
Ch. 33, Appendix A


403
 
1-4-2011
 
32.16


404
 
4-5-2011
 
55.02, 112.05


405
 
4-5-2011
 
54.50 - 54.61


406
 
4-5-2011
 
110.09


407
 
6-21-2011
 
92.31, 92.32


408
 
6-21-2011
 
Ch. 73, Sch. II


409
 
6-21-2011
 
53.001 - 53.003, 53.015 - 53.018, 53.030 - 53.036, 53.050 - 53.065, 53.080 -
53.087, 53.100 - 53.103, 53.999


410
 
7-5-2011
 
T.S.O. III


412
 
1-17-2012
 
Ch. 33, Appendix A


413
 
7-17-2012
 
T.S.O. III


414
 
8-21-2012
 
T.S.O. II


415
 
8-21-2012
 
150.002, 150.092


416
 
1-2-2013
 
Ch. 33, Appendix A


417
 
2-19-2013
 
150.164


418
 
8-20-2013
 
T.S.O. III


419
 
12-17-2013
 
150.210 - 150.227


420
 
1-21-2014
 
Ch. 33, Appendix A


421
 
2-18-2014
 
90.01, 90.02


422
 
5-20-2014
 
150.147


423
 
8-19-2014
 
T.S.O. III


424
 
8-19-2014
 
T.S.O. III


426
 
11-18-2014
 
155.01 - 155.14


427
 
11-18-2014
 
111.01 - 111.19, Ch. 33, Appendix A


428
 
12-16-2014
 
T.S.O. III


429
 
1-20-2015
 
Ch. 33, Appendix A


430
 
3-17-2015
 
112.31


431
 
4-21-2015
 
T.S.O. III


432
 
5-5-2015
 
33.50 - 33.52


433
 
6-16-2015
 
T.S.O. III


434
 
6-16-2015
 
T.S.O. II


435
 
6-16-2015
 
150.147


436
 
7-21-2015
 
T.S.O. II


437
 
8-4-2015
 
112.22


438
 
8-4-2015
 
Ch. 33, Appendix A, 112.03, 112.07, 112.22


439
 
8-18-2015
 
130.03


440
 
8-18-2015
 
150.162


441
 
8-18-2015
 
T.S.O. III


442
 
10-20-2015
 
130.03


443
 
1-19-2016
 
Ch. 33, Appendix A


444
 
2-16-2016
 
92.31, 92.32


446
 
8-2-2016
 
30.02


447
 
12-6-2016
 
112.32


449
 
3-21-2017
 
Ch. 73, Sch. II


452
 
10-17-2017
 
150.210 - 150.227


453
 
10-17-2017
 
150.132, 150.146


455
 
1-2-2018
 
Ch. 33, Appendix A


 
 
 
 
 




 


