NEW PRAGUE, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2018 S-12 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 302, passed 3-19-18
 
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
CITY CHARTER
   
Chapter 1   Names, boundaries, powers and general provisions
   
Chapter 2   Form of government
   
Chapter 3   City Council procedures
   
Chapter 4   Elections
   
Chapter 5   Initiative and referendum
   
Chapter 6   Administration of city affairs
   
Chapter 7   Taxation and finances
   
Chapter 8   Public improvements and special assessments
   
Chapter 9   Eminent domain
   
Chapter 10   Franchises
   
Chapter 11   Public ownership and operation of utilities
   
Chapter 12   General Provisions
Home Rule Charter
of the
City of New Prague
Scott and Le Sueur Counties, Minnesota
CHAPTER 1
Name, Boundaries, Powers and General Provisions
   Section 1.01. NAMES AND BOUNDARIES.  The City of New Prague, Scott and Le
Sueur Counties, Minnesota, shall continue to be a municipal corporation under
that name and with the same boundaries as now are or hereafter may be
established.
   Section 1.02. POWERS OF THE CITY.  The City shall have all powers which it
may now or hereafter be possible for a municipal corporation in the State of
Minnesota to exercise in harmony with the Constitution of the State of
Minnesota and the Constitution of the United States.  It is the intention of
this Charter to confer upon the City every power which it would have if it were
specifically mentioned.  The Charter shall be construed liberally in favor of
the City and the specific mention of particular municipal powers in other
sections of this Charter does not limit the powers of the City to those thus
mentioned.  Unless granted to some other officer or body, all powers are vested
in the City Council.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
CHAPTER 2
Form of Government
   Section 2.01. FORM OF GOVERNMENT.  The form of government established by
this Charter is the "Council - Administrator Plan".  Except as otherwise
provided by law or this Charter, all powers of the City are vested in the City
Council.  The City Administrator shall be the head of the administrative branch
of the City government and shall be responsible to the City Council for the
proper administration of delegated City affairs.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 2.02. BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.  The City Council may adopt enabling
resolutions establishing appointed Boards and Commissions to carry out various
undertakings and assignments as outlined in the enabling resolutions.  The
enabling resolution shall state the number of members for each Board or
Commission, the terms of each appointment and the term limits, if any, for each
Board and Commission member.  The enabling resolution may impose the following
limits upon the actions of the appointed Boards and Commissions.  The enabling
resolution may also provide for other limitations or controls as deemed
necessary by the City Council.
   Subd. 1.  The Boards or Commissions may exercise all power as authorized in
the enabling resolution.
   Subd. 2.  The sale of all bonds or obligations issued by a Board or
Commission must be approved by the City Council before issuance.
   Subd. 3.  All Boards or Commissions shall follow the budget process for City
departments as provided by this Charter and as implemented by the City Council.
   Subd. 4.  All official actions of appointed Boards and Commissions must be
consistent with the adopted comprehensive plan of the City and any official
controls implementing the comprehensive plan.
   Subd. 5.  All Boards or Commissions must submit all planned activities for
influencing the action of any governmental agency, subdivision, or body, to the
City Council for approval.
   Subd. 6.  All Boards or Commissions shall submit their administrative
structure and management practices to the City Council for approval.
   Subd. 7.  Except when previously pledged by a Board or Commission and
approved by the City Council, the City Council may by resolution require a
Board or Commission to transfer any portion of the reserves generated by
activities of that Board or Commission that the City Council determines is not
necessary for the successful operation of the Board or Commission, to the City
to be used solely to reduce tax levies for bonded indebtedness of the City.
   Subd. 8.  The enabling resolution may provide for other limitations or
controls as deemed necessary by the City Council.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 2.03. CITY COUNCIL COMPOSITION AND ELECTION.  The City Council shall
be composed of a Mayor and four (4) Council members elected at large.  Each
City Council member shall serve a term of four (4) years and until the
successor is elected and qualifies.  The Mayor shall serve for a term of two
(2) years and until the successor is elected and qualifies.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 2.04. INCOMPATIBLE OFFICES.  No member of the City Council shall be
appointed City Administrator, nor shall any member hold any full-time paid
municipal office or employment under the City, until one (1) year after the
expiration of their term as Mayor or City Council member.  No former member
shall be appointed to any paid appointive office or employment under the City
which was created or for which the compensation was increased during the former
member’s term of office.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 2.05. VACANCIES; APPOINTMENTS.  A vacancy in the City Council shall
be deemed to exist on the happening of any of the following events, before the
expiration of the term of such office:
      (1)   the death of the Mayor or City Council member;
      (2)   the resignation of the Mayor or City Council member;
      (3)   the removal of the Mayor or City Council member;
      (4)   the Mayor's or City Council member's ceasing to be an inhabitant of
the City;
      (5)   the Mayor's or City Council member's conviction of any infamous
crime, or of any offense involving a violation of the official oath;
      (6)   the Mayor's or City Council member's refusal or neglect to take the
oath of office, or to give or renew the official bond, or to deposit or file
such oath or bond within the time prescribed;
      (7)   the decision of a competent tribunal declaring the Mayor's or City
Council member's election or appointment void;
      (8)   the death of the person elected or appointed to fill a vacancy, or
for a full term, before the person qualifies, or before the time when by law
the person should enter upon the duties of the office, in which case the
vacancy shall be deemed to take place at the time when the term of office would
have begun had the person lived.
      (9)   the Mayor's or City Council member's inability to serve in the
office or attend City Council meetings for a ninety (90) day period because of
illness, or because of absence from or refusal to attend City Council meetings
for a ninety (90) day period.  If any of the preceding conditions occurs, the
City Council may, after it has by resolution declared a vacancy to exist, fill
the vacancy at a regular or special City Council meeting for the remainder of
the unexpired term, or until the person is again able to resume duties and
attend City Council meetings, whichever is earlier.  When the person is again
able to resume duties and attend City Council meetings, the City Council shall
by resolution remove the temporary officeholder and restore the original
officeholder.
   In each case, the City Council shall by resolution declare such vacancy to
exist and shall appoint an eligible person to fill the vacant office until the
next regular City election is held.  In the case of a tie vote in the City
Council for a vacancy in the position of a City Council member, the Mayor shall
make the appointment.  In the case of a tie vote in the City Council for a
vacancy in the position of Mayor, the Vice President shall make the
appointment.  If the vacancy occurs before the first day to file affidavits of
candidacy for the next regular City election and more than two (2) years remain
in the unexpired term, a special election shall be held at or before the next
regular City election and the appointed person shall serve until the
qualification of a successor elected at a special election to fill the
unexpired portion of the term.  If the vacancy occurs on or after the first day
to file affidavits of candidacy for the regular City election or when less than
two (2) years remain in the unexpired term, there need not be a special
election to fill the vacancy and the appointed person shall serve until the
qualification of a successor.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 2.06. THE MAYOR.  The Mayor shall serve as President of the City
Council and shall preside at meetings of the City Council and shall have a vote
as a member. The City Council shall choose from its members a Vice President. 
The Vice President shall serve as President in the Mayor's absence and as the
Mayor in case of the Mayor's disability or absence from the City.  The Mayor
shall be recognized as head of the City government for all ceremonial purposes,
by the courts for the purpose of serving civil process, and by the Governor of
the State of Minnesota for purposes of martial law, but shall have no
administrative duties.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 2.07. SALARIES.  The Mayor and City Council members shall receive
such compensation as is fixed by the City Council in accordance with laws of
the State of Minnesota. The City Administrator and all subordinate officers and
employees of the City shall receive such salaries or wages as may be fixed by
the City Council.
   Section 2.08. INVESTIGATION OF CITY AFFAIRS.  The City Council may make
investigations into the affairs of the City and the conduct of any City
department, office or agency and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses,
administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence.  The
City Council shall provide for an audit of the City’s accounts at least once a
year by the State of Minnesota department or agency in charge of such work or
by a certified public accountant.  At any time the City Council may provide for
an examination or audit of the accounts of any City officer or agency and it
may provide for any survey or research study of any subject of City concern.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 2.09. INTERFERENCES WITH ADMINISTRATION.  Except for the purpose of
inquiry and investigation under Section
2.08 of this Charter, the City Council and its members shall deal with and
control City officers and employees under the jurisdiction of the City
Administrator solely through the City Administrator, and neither the City
Council nor any City Council member shall give orders to any subordinate of the
City Administrator, either publicly or privately.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 2.10. APPOINTIVE OFFICES.  There shall be appointed, in the manner
hereinafter provided, such officers and employees as may be required under this
Charter, the general laws of the State of Minnesota, or the ordinances of the
City.  The City Council may create and establish additional offices,
departments, Boards or Commissions, consistent with the general purposes of
this Charter and may, from time to time, alter or abolish the form or functions
of any appointive office, department, Board or Commission by ordinance.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
CHAPTER 3
City Council Procedures
   Section 3.01. CITY COUNCIL REGULAR MEETING.  On the first Tuesday after the
first Monday in January in each year, the City Council shall hold what shall be
known as the regular annual meeting. All other stated regular meetings shall be
as established by the City Council.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 3.02. SPECIAL CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS.  The Mayor or any two (2) 
members of the City Council may call special meetings of the City Council upon
such notice as is required by the laws of the State of Minnesota.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 3.03. MEETINGS TO BE PUBLIC.  To the extent provided and required by
the laws of the State of Minnesota, all meetings of the City Council and its
committees shall be public and any citizen shall have access to the minutes and
records of the City Council within and at all reasonable times.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 3.04. ORGANIZATION.  At the regular annual meeting of the City
Council immediately following any regular municipal election, the newly elected
City Council members shall enter upon the duties of their office, and the City
Council shall then proceed to establish its organization.  From their own
members they shall choose a Vice President, who shall preside at all meetings
of the City Council in the absence of the President and perform such other
duties as may be required by the provisions of this Charter.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 3.05. APPOINTMENTS.  The City Council shall appoint a City
Administrator, who shall hold office pursuant to the discretion of the City
Council and whose powers and duties as the administrative officer of the City
shall be as defined herein.  The City Administrator shall be appointed for an
indefinite period and may be suspended or removed by the City Council at any
time.  The action of the City Council in suspending or removing the City
Administrator shall be final, it being the intention of this Charter to vest
all authority and fix all responsibility for such suspension or removal in the
City Council.  In the event of such removal, the City Council shall immediately
take steps to appoint a successor.
   The City Council shall appoint a City Attorney, a Police Chief, and such
other officers as are, or may be, required under the provisions of this
Charter, the general laws of the State of Minnesota, or the ordinances of the
City, and whose appointment is not specifically delegated to some other
authority.
   The Mayor shall make such nominations for appointment as the Mayor is
authorized to make by this Charter, but which require confirmation by the City
Council.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 3.06. SECRETARY OF  CITY COUNCIL.  The City Administrator shall act
as Secretary to the City Council and shall be responsible to keep a journal of
City Council proceedings and perform such other duties as this Charter or the
City Council may require. The City Council may designate any other City
official or employee to assist the Secretary of the City Council.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 3.07. RULES OF PROCEDURE AND QUORUM.  The City Council shall
determine its own rules and order of business.  A majority of all City Council
members shall constitute a quorum, but a smaller number may adjourn from time
to time.  The City Council may by rule provide a means by which a minority may
compel the attendance of absent members.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 3.08. ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND MOTIONS.  Except as otherwise
provided in this Charter, all legislation shall be by ordinance.  The votes of
City Council members on any action taken shall be recorded in accordance with
the laws of the State of Minnesota.  Except as otherwise provided in this
Charter, an affirmative vote by a majority of all the members of the City
Council shall be required for the adoption of all ordinances and resolutions.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 3.09. PROCEDURE ON ORDINANCES.  Every proposed ordinance shall be
presented in writing.  No ordinance shall contain more than one (1)  subject
which shall be clearly expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be,
"THE CITY OF NEW PRAGUE ORDAINS”.  No ordinance, except an emergency ordinance,
shall be adopted at the meeting at which it is introduced and at least three
(3) days shall elapse between its introduction and final passage.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 3.10. EMERGENCY ORDINANCES.  An emergency ordinance is an ordinance
necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, safety or
welfare in which the emergency is defined and declared in a preamble and the
ordinance is adopted by majority vote of the City Council members present.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 3.11. PROCEDURE ON RESOLUTIONS.  Every resolution shall be presented
in writing and read at the discretion of the City Council.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 3.12. SIGNING AND PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.  Every
ordinance or resolution passed by the City Council shall be signed by the
Mayor, attested by the City Administrator, and filed and preserved by the City
Administrator.  Every ordinance shall be published at least once in the
official newspaper, or as permitted by the laws of the State of Minnesota.  To
the extent and in the manner provided by law, an ordinance may incorporate by
reference a statute, administrative rule or regulation of the State of
Minnesota or the United States of America, a code, or ordinance or part thereof
without publishing the material referred to in full.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 3.13. WHEN ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS TAKE EFFECT.  Every resolution
and emergency ordinance shall take effect immediately upon its passage or at
such later date as it specifies.  Every other ordinance shall take effect upon
publication or at such later date as it specifies.  Every ordinance and
resolution adopted by the voters of the City shall take effect immediately upon
its adoption or at such later date as it specifies.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 3.14. SUMMARY PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES. In the case of lengthy
ordinances, or ordinances that include charts or maps, if the City Council
determines that publication of the title and a summary of an ordinance would
clearly inform the public of the intent and effect of the ordinance, the City
Council may by a four-fifths (4/5ths) vote of its members, direct that only the
title of the ordinance and a summary be published, with notice that a printed
copy of the ordinance is available for inspection during regular office hours
at the office of the City Administrator.  Prior to the publication of the title
and summary, the City Council shall approve the text of the summary and
determine that it clearly informs the public of the intent and effect of the
ordinance, and shall further state that the complete text of the ordinance is
on file at the office of the City Administrator.  The publishing of the title
and summary shall be deemed to fulfill all legal publication requirements as
completely as if the entire ordinance had been published.  A copy of the
publication shall be attached to and filed with the ordinance for reference.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 3.15.  AMENDMENT AND REPEAL OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.  Every
ordinance or resolution repealing all or part of a previous ordinance or
resolution shall give the number, if any, and the title of the ordinance or
resolution to be repealed in whole or in part.  No ordinance or resolution
shall be amended by reference to the title alone, but such an amending
ordinance or resolution shall set forth in full each section or subdivision to
be amended and shall indicate by appropriate type or symbols matter to be
omitted or added.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 3.16.  REVISION AND CODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.  The City may
revise, rearrange, and codify its ordinances with such additions and deletions
as may be deemed necessary.  The ordinance code may be published in book,
pamphlet, continuously revised loose leaf, or electronic form and copies shall
be made available by the City Council at the City offices for general
distribution to the public free or for a reasonable charge.  Publication in
such a code shall be a sufficient publication of any ordinance provision not
previously published in the official newspaper of the City.  The City shall
provide notice that copies of the codification are available at the City
offices by publication in the official City newspaper for at least two (2)
successive weeks.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
CHAPTER 4
Elections
   Section 4.01. THE REGULAR MUNICIPAL ELECTION.  The regular municipal
election shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November
of each even numbered year at such place or places as the City Council may
designate.  At least two (2) weeks published notice of the time and place of
holding such election and of the officers to be elected shall be given, but
failure to give such notice shall not invalidate the election.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 4.02. SPECIAL ELECTIONS.  The City Council may by resolution order a
special election and provide all means for holding it.  At least (2) two weeks
published notice of a special election shall be given. The procedure at such
election shall conform as nearly as possible to that prescribed for other City
elections.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 4.03. FILING FOR OFFICE.  No earlier than sixty (60) days or later
than thirty (30) days before the municipal election, voters of the City
qualified under the Constitution of the State of Minnesota for elective office
may, by filing an affidavit and paying a filing fee of $5.00, have their name
placed on the municipal primary election ballot or, if there is no primary
election, on the municipal election ballot.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 4.04. PROCEDURE AT ELECTIONS.  Subject to this Charter and
applicable laws of the State of Minnesota, the City Council may by ordinance
further regulate the conduct of municipal elections.  Except as otherwise
provided by this Charter and supplementary ordinances, general laws of the
State of Minnesota on elections shall apply to municipal elections.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
CHAPTER 5
Initiative and Referendum
   Section 5.01. GENERAL VOTER AUTHORITY.  The voters of the City shall have
the right, in accordance with this Charter, to propose ordinances and to
require ordinances to be submitted to a vote by processes known respectively as
the initiative and referendum.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 5.02. PETITIONS.  An initiative or referendum shall be initiated by
a petition signed by registered voters of the City equal in number to twenty
(20) percent of those who voted in the last regular City election.  Each
petition shall be sponsored by a committee of five (5) voters whose names and
addresses shall appear on the petition.  A petition may consist of one (1) or
more papers, but each paper circulated separately shall contain at its head or
attached to it the statement required by Section
5.05 or
5.06 of this Charter, as the case may be.  All who sign shall sign their name
and give their street address.  Each separate page of the petition shall have
appended to it a certificate, verified by oath, that each signature is a
genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be.  The person
making the certificate shall be a resident of the City.  Any person whose name
appears on a petition may withdraw their name by a statement in writing filed
with the Secretary of the City Council before the Secretary advises the City
Council of the sufficiency of the petition.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 5.03. DETERMINATION OF SUFFICIENCY.  Immediately upon receipt of the
petition, the Secretary of the City Council shall examine the petition as to
its sufficiency and report to the City Council within thirty-one (31) calendar
days.  Upon receiving the report, the City Council shall determine by
resolution the sufficiency of the petition.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 5.04. DISPOSITION OF INSUFFICIENT PETITION.  If the City Council
determines that the petition is insufficient or irregular, the Secretary of the
City Council shall deliver a copy of the petition, together with a written
statement of its defects, to the sponsoring committee.  The committee shall
have thirty (30) days in which to file additional signature papers and to
correct the petition in all other particulars. If at the end of that period the
City Council finds that the petition is still insufficient or irregular, the
Secretary of the City Council shall file the petition in the office of the City
Administrator and notify the sponsoring committee. The final finding that the
petition is insufficient or irregular shall not prejudice the filing of a new
petition for the same purpose nor shall it prevent the City Council from
referring the ordinance to the voters at the next regular or special election
at its option.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 5.05. INITIATIVE.  Any ordinance that is legislative in character
and that does not involve administrative or quasi-judicial acts of the City
(which specifically excludes, but is not limited to, an ordinance relating to
the budget or capital program, the appropriation of money, the levy of taxes,
the salaries of the City officers or employees, or the conveyance or sale of
land), may be proposed by a petition which shall state at the head of each page
or attached thereto the exact text of the proposed ordinance.  If the City
Council passes the proposed ordinance with amendments and a majority of the
sponsoring committee do not disapprove the amended form by a statement filed
with the Secretary of the City Council within ten (10) days of its passage by
the City Council, the ordinance need not be submitted to the voters.  If the
City Council fails to enact the ordinance in an acceptable form within sixty
(60) days after the final determination of sufficiency of the petition, the
ordinance shall be placed on the ballot at the next election occurring in the
City.  If no election is to occur within one hundred twenty (120) days after
the filing of the petition, the City Council shall call a special election
consistent with the requirements of the laws of the State of Minnesota on the
ordinance to be held within such period.  If a majority of those voting on the
ordinance vote in its favor, it shall become effective thirty (30) days after
adoption unless the ordinance specifies a later effective date.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 5.06. REFERENDUM.  Any ordinance subject to an initiative that is
legislative in character and that does not involve administrative or quasi-
judicial acts of the City may be subjected to referendum by a petition which
shall state, at the head of each page or on an attached paper, a description of
the ordinance.  If the ordinance is not thereafter entirely repealed, it shall
be placed on the ballot at the next election or at a special election called
for that purpose, as the City Council determines.  If a majority of the voters
voting thereon favors the ordinance, it shall remain in effect; if a majority
of the voters voting thereon vote against the ordinance, it shall be considered
repealed upon certification of the election results.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
CHAPTER 6
Administration of City Affairs
   Section 6.01. THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR.  The City Administrator shall be the
chief administrative officer of the City and shall be chosen by the City
Council solely on the basis of training, experience, executive and
administrative qualifications.  The City Administrator shall be the City Clerk
of the City.  The City Administrator shall be appointed for an indefinite term
and may be removed at any time by an affirmative vote of a majority of the City
Council; but after serving as City Administrator for one (1) year, may demand
written charges and a public hearing on the charges before the City Council
prior to the date when final removal takes effect.  After the hearing, if one
is demanded, the City Council may suspend the City Administrator from office. 
The City Administrator may designate some properly qualified person to perform
the duties of the City Administrator during absence or disability or while the
office is vacant.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 6.02. POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR.  The City
Administrator shall be responsible to the City Council for the administration
of the City’s affairs and shall have powers and duties set forth in the
following subdivisions:
   Subd. 1.  The City Administrator shall see that this Charter and the laws,
ordinances, and resolutions of the City are enforced.
   Subd. 2.  The City Administrator shall attend all meetings of the City
Council and may take part in discussion but not vote.
   Subd. 3.  The City Administrator shall recommend to the City Council for
adoption such measures as are necessary for the welfare of the people and the
efficient administration of the City’s affairs.
   Subd. 4.  The City Administrator shall keep the City Council fully advised
on the financial condition and needs of the City, and shall prepare and submit
to the City Council the annual budget and capital program.
   Subd. 5.  The City Administrator shall submit to the City Council and make
available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative
activities of the City at the end of each fiscal year.
   Subd. 6.  The City Administrator shall see that all purchases and contracts
entered into by the City for public improvements or other purposes are
faithfully and honestly performed by the contractor, and that all street and
other work ordered or authorized by the City Council is properly performed.  No
work shall be finally accepted until final inspection and approval by the City
Administrator.
   Subd. 7.  The City Administrator shall direct and supervise all departments
and officers of the City, except as otherwise provided by law or this Charter.
   Subd. 8.  The City Administrator shall perform such other duties and have
such other powers as are prescribed by this Charter or may be required by the
City Council.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 6.03. ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION.  The City Council may by
ordinance establish City departments and offices and prescribe their
functions.  No power or duty conferred by this Charter, upon a particular
office shall be transferred to any other.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 6.04. PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS.  The City Administrator shall be the
chief purchasing agent of the City. All City purchases and contracts shall be
made or let by the City Administrator when the amount involved does not exceed
an amount established at least annually by the City Council by resolution.  All
other purchases shall be made and all other contracts let by the City Council
after recommendation of the City Administrator has first been obtained.
Contracts shall be made in compliance with the laws of the State of Minnesota,
and whenever competitive bids are required, the contract shall be let to the
lowest responsible bidder consistent with the laws of the State of Minnesota. 
All contracts, bonds and instruments of any kind to which the City is a party
shall be signed by the Mayor and the City Administrator on behalf of the City
and shall be executed in the name of the City.  The City Council may by
ordinance adopt further regulations for the making of bids and the letting of
contracts.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 6.05. SUBORDINATE OFFICERS.  There may besuch other officers
subordinate to the City Administrator as the City Council may establish by
ordinance.  Such other officers shall be subject to the direction of the City
Administrator and shall have such duties in connection with the keeping of the
public records, the custody and disbursement of the public funds, and the
general administration of the City’s affairs as the City Council may
prescribe.  The City Administrator or such other officers may be designated to
act as Secretary of the City Council and also as Treasurer.  The City Council
may by ordinance abolish offices which have been created by ordinance and it
may combine the duties of various offices as it may see fit.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 6.06. CITY ATTORNEY.  The City Attorney shall be a person who has
been admitted to practice in the courts of the State of Minnesota prior to
appointment. The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor of and attorney for
the City and all departments or offices thereof in relation to their official
powers and duties.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 6.07. CITY ASSESSOR.  The City Council may designate or enter into a
contract for a City Assessor that shall have and possess all of the
qualifications, authority, rights, powers and duties of assessors under the
laws of the State of Minnesota, now or hereafter enacted, together with the
right to appoint a deputy or deputies, subject to the approval of the City
Council.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
CHAPTER 7
Taxation and Finances
   Section 7.01. CITY COUNCIL TO CONTROL FINANCES.  The City Council shall have
authority over the financial affairs of the City.  It shall provide for the
collection of all revenues and other assets, the auditing and settlement of
accounts, and the safekeeping and disbursement of public moneys.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 7.02. FISCAL YEAR.  The fiscal year of the City shall be the
calendar year.
   Section 7.03. SYSTEM OF TAXATION.  Subject to the Constitution of the State
of Minnesota and except as forbidden by it or by the laws of the State of
Minnesota, the City Council shall have full power to provide for a system of
local taxation.  This authority includes the power by ordinance to assess,
levy, and collect taxes on all subjects or objects of taxation except as
limited or prohibited by the Constitution of the State of Minnesota or the laws
of the State of Minnesota, by this Charter or by laws imposing restrictions
upon the City irrespective of the provisions of this Charter.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 7.04. SUBMISSION OF BUDGET.  Annually, the City Administrator shall
submit to the City Council a recommended budget in accordance with a budget
calendar established by the City Council in accordance with the laws of the
State of Minnesota.
   The budget shall provide a complete financial plan for the City funds and
activities for the ensuing fiscal year and, except as required by the laws of
the State of Minnesota or this Charter, shall be in such form as the City
Administrator deems desirable or the City Council may require.  It shall
include a summary and show in detail all estimated income and all proposed
expenditures, including debt service and comparative figures for the fiscal
year, actual and estimated, and the preceding fiscal year.  In addition to
showing proposed expenditures for current operations, it shall show proposed
capital expenditures to be made during the year and the proposed method of
financing each such capital expenditure.  For each enterprise operated by the
City, the budget shall show anticipated net surplus or deficit and the proposed
method of its disposition; and subsidiary budgets for each such enterprise
giving income and expenditure information shall be included or attached as
appendices.  The total proposed operating budget shall not exceed the amounts
authorized by the laws of the State of Minnesota.  Consistent with these
provisions, the budget shall contain such information and be in the form
prescribed by ordinance and by the laws of the State of Minnesota.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 7.05. CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN.  The City Administrator shall
prepare and submit to the City Council a recommended capital improvement plan
to include all enterprise operations in accordance with the calendar
established by the City Council. The capital improvement plan shall include a
list of all capital improvements proposed to be undertaken during the upcoming
fiscal years, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for
such improvements, cost estimates, estimates of financing and recommended time
schedules for each improvement and the estimated annual cost of operating and
maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired.  This information
shall be revised and extended each year for capital improvements still pending
or in process.  The City Council shall hold a public hearing on the capital
improvement plan.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 7.06. CITY COUNCIL ACTION ON BUDGET.  The budget shall be considered
at a regular monthly meeting of the City Council as scheduled in the budget
calendar and at subsequent meetings until a budget is adopted for the ensuing
year.  This meeting shall be so conducted as to give interested citizens a
responsible opportunity to be heard.  The City Council may revise the proposed
budget, but no amendment to the budget shall increase the authorized
expenditures to an amount greater than the estimated income of the City.  The
City Council shall adopt the budget by a resolution which shall set forth the
total for each budgeted fund and each department with such segregation as to
objects and purposes of expenditures as the City Council deems necessary for
purposes of budget control.  The City Council shall also adopt a resolution
levying the amount of taxes provided in the budget and the City Administrator
shall certify the tax resolution to the County Auditor in accordance with the
laws of the State of Minnesota.  Adoption of the budget resolution shall
constitute appropriations at the beginning of the fiscal year of the sums fixed
in the resolution for the several purposes named.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 7.07. ENFORCEMENT OF THE BUDGET.  The City Administrator shall
enforce strictly the provisions of the budget. The City Administrator shall not
authorize any payment or the incurring of any obligation by the City unless an
appropriation has been made in the budget resolution and there is a sufficient
unexpended balance left after deducting the total past expenditures and
encumbrances against the appropriation.  No officer or employee of the City
shall place any order or make any purchase except for a purpose and to the
amount authorized in the budget resolution. Any obligation incurred by any
person in the employ of the City for any purpose not authorized in the budget
resolution or for any amount in excess of the amount authorized shall be a
personal obligation upon the person incurring the obligation.  No check shall
be issued or transfer made to any account other than one owned by the City
until the claim to which it relates has been supported by an itemized bill,
payroll, or time sheet or other document approved and signed by the responsible
City employee who vouches for its correct accuracy.
   Section 7.08. ALTERATIONS IN THE BUDGET.  After the budget resolution has
been adopted, the City Council shall not increase the amounts fixed in the
resolution beyond the estimated receipts except to the extent that actual
receipts exceed the estimate. At any time the City Council may, by resolution
approved by a majority of its members, reduce the sums appropriated for any
purpose by the budget resolution or authorize the transfer of sums from
unencumbered balances of appropriations in the budget resolution to other
purposes.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 7.09. FUNDS.  There shall be maintained in the City treasury a
general fund and such other funds as may be required by the laws of the State
of Minnesota, City ordinance or resolution.  The City Council may, by ordinance
or resolution, make inter-fund loans, except from trust funds, as it may deem
necessary and appropriate.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 7.10. TAX ANTICIPATION CERTIFICATES.  At any time after January 1,
the City Council may issue certificates of indebtedness in anticipation of the
collection of taxes levied the previous year for any fund and not yet
collected.  The total amount of certificates issued against any fund for any
year together with interest thereon until maturity shall not exceed the total
current taxes for the fund uncollected at the time of issuance.  Such
certificates shall be issued on such terms and conditions as the City Council
may determine, but they shall become due not later than April 1, of the year
following their issuance.  The proceeds of the tax levied for the fund against
which tax anticipation certificates are issued and the full faith and credit of
the City shall be irrevocably pledged for the redemption of the certificates.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 7.11. EMERGENCY DEBT CERTIFICATES.  If in any year the receipts from
taxes or other sources from some unforeseen cause become insufficient for the
ordinary expenses of the City, or if any calamity or other public emergency
necessitates the making of extraordinary expenditures, the City Council may by
ordinance issue, on such terms and in such manner as the City Council
determines, emergency debt certificates to run not to exceed three (3) years. 
A tax sufficient to pay principal and interest on such certificates with the
margin required by the laws of the State of Minnesota shall be levied as
required by the laws of the State of Minnesota. The ordinance authorizing an
issue of such emergency debt certificate shall state the nature of the
emergency and be approved by a majority vote of the City Council.  The
ordinance may be passed as an emergency ordinance.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 7.12. CITY INDEBTEDNESS.  Except as provided in Section
7.10 and
7.11 of this Charter, no obligations shall be issued to pay current expenses,
but the City Council may issue and sell obligations for any other City purpose
in accordance with and within limitations prescribed by the laws of the State
of Minnesota.  Except in the case of obligations for which an election is not
required by this Charter or by the laws of the State of Minnesota, no such
obligations shall be issued and sold without the approval of the majority of
the voters voting on the question at a general or special election.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 7.13. AUTHORITY FOR EXPENDITURES.  The City Council shall establish
a Public Expenditure Policy (the “Policy”), which shall be reviewed and
approved by the City Council annually. In establishing, reviewing, and
approving this Policy, the City Council shall consider whether the expenditures
to be authorized by the Policy: 1) benefit the community as a whole; 2) are
directly related to governmental functions; and 3) primarily benefit the public
interest, not a private interest. In establishing, reviewing, and approving the
Policy, the City Council shall consider the opinion of the City Attorney and
statewide sources of authority, which may include judicial determinations,
Minnesota Attorney General opinions, and findings of the Office of the State
Auditor.
   Expenditures related to any of the following activities shall be deemed
authorized if the Policy expressly provides authorization: international,
cultural, and economic development programs; community events, festivals, and
celebrations; miscellaneous employee benefits; employee recognition; and
funding for conference attendance. The City Council may also provide specific
authorization regarding any other expenditure.
(Ord. 2016-286, passed 2-1-16)
CHAPTER 8
Public Improvements and Special Assessments
   Section 8.01. POWER TO MAKE IMPROVEMENTS AND LEVY ASSESSMENTS.  The City may
make any type of public improvement not forbidden by the laws of the State of
Minnesota and levy special assessments to pay all or any part of the cost of
such improvements as are of a local character.  The total assessments for any
local improvements may not exceed the cost of the improvement including all
costs and expenses connected therewith, with interest.  No assessment shall
exceed the benefits to the property.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 8.02. ASSESSMENTS FOR SERVICES.  The City Council may provide by
ordinance that the cost of City services to streets, sidewalks, or other public
or private property may be assessed against property benefited and collected in
the same manner as special assessments.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 8.03. LOCAL IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURE.  When the City undertakes any
local improvement to which the State local improvement code as set forth in the
laws of the State of Minnesota applies, the City shall comply with the
provisions of that law.  The City Council may by ordinance prescribe the
procedure to be followed in making any other local improvement and levying
assessments therefor.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
CHAPTER 9
Eminent Domain
   Section 9.01. ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY.  The City may acquire, by purchase,
gift, condemnation, or otherwise, any property, either within or without its
boundaries, that may be needed by the City for any public purpose.  In
acquiring property by exercising the power of eminent domain, the City shall
proceed according to Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 117 or other applicable law.
CHAPTER 10
Franchises
   Section 10.01. FRANCHISES REQUIRED.  Except as otherwise provided by the
laws of the State of Minnesota or other applicable law, no person, firm, or
corporation shall place or maintain any permanent or semi-permanent fixtures
in, over, upon, or under any street or public place for the purpose of
operating a public utility or for any other purpose, without a franchise
therefor from the City.  A franchise shall be granted only by ordinance, which
shall not be an emergency ordinance.  Every ordinance granting a franchise
shall contain all the terms and conditions of the franchise.  The grantee shall
bear the costs of publication of the franchise ordinance and shall make a
sufficient deposit with the City Administrator to guarantee publication before
the ordinance is passed.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 10.02. TERM.  No exclusive or perpetual franchise shall ever be
granted.  No franchise for a term exceeding twenty (20) years shall be
effective until approved by a majority of the voters voting thereon.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 10.03. PUBLIC HEARING.  Before any franchise ordinance is adopted or
any rates, fares, or prices to be charged by a public utility are fixed by the
City Council, the City Council shall hold a public hearing on the matter. 
Notice of such hearing shall be published at least once in the official
newspaper not less than ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the
hearing.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 10.04. POWER OF REGULATION RESERVED.  Subject to any applicable law,
the City Council may by ordinance reasonably regulate and control the exercise
of any franchise, including the maximum rates, fares, or prices to be charged
by the grantee.  No franchise value shall be included in the valuation of the
grantee's property in regulating utility rates, fares, or prices under any
applicable law, ordinance or regulation or in proceedings for City acquisition
of the grantee's property by purchase or eminent domain.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 10.05. RENEWALS OR EXTENSIONS.  Every renewal or modification of a
franchise, including an existing franchise, shall be subject to the same
limitations and shall be granted in the same manner as a new franchise.
CHAPTER 11
Public Ownership and Operation of Utilities
   Section 11.01. ACQUISITION AND OPERATION OF UTILITIES.  The City may own and
operate any water, gas, light, power, heat, telephone, transportation or other
public utility for supplying its own needs for utility service or for supplying
utility service to private consumers or other governmental agencies.  It may
construct all facilities reasonably needed for that purpose and may acquire any
existing utility properties so needed.  The City shall not acquire or construct
any public utility unless the proposition to acquire or to construct it has
been incorporated in an ordinance and adopted by the City Council.  Such
ordinance shall not be an emergency ordinance.  No public utility now or
hereafter at any time owned by the City, nor any part thereof, shall be sold,
leased, or abandoned except by ordinance adopted by a vote of more than eighty
(80) percent of the City Council; and no such ordinance shall become effective
until it shall have been submitted to the legal voters of the City at a regular
or special election and approved by two thirds (2/3rds) vote of the voters
voting thereon at such election.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
CHAPTER 12
General Provisions
   Section 12.01. OFFICIAL PUBLICATION.  The City Council shall annually, at
its first meeting of the year, designate a legal newspaper of general
circulation in the City as its official newspaper, or some other official
publication as authorized by the laws of the State of Minnesota, or other
applicable law, in which shall be published the City Council minutes,
ordinances, annual financial statement, and other matters required by the laws
of the State of Minnesota or other applicable law to be so published, as well
as such other matters as the City Council may deem it in the public interest to
have published in this manner.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 12.02. OATH OF OFFICE.  Every elected or appointed officer of the
City shall, before entering upon the duties of office, take and subscribe an
oath of office in substantially the following form: "I do solemnly swear (or
affirm) to support the Constitution of the United States and of the State of
Minnesota and to discharge faithfully the duties of the office of_____________
(title of office) of the City of New Prague to the best of my judgment and
ability".
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 12.03. OFFICIAL BONDS.  The City Administrator and such other
officers or employees of the City as may be specified by the laws of the State
of Minnesota or City ordinance shall each, before entering upon the duties of
their respective office or employment, give a corporate surety bond to the City
as security for the faithful performance of their official duties and the
safekeeping of the public funds.  Such bonds shall be in such form and amount
as the City Council determines and may be either individual or blanket bonds at
the discretion of the City Council.  They shall be approved by the City Council
and filed with the City Administrator.  The provision of the laws of the State
of Minnesota relating to official bonds not inconsistent with this Charter
shall be complied with.  The premiums on such bonds shall be paid by the City.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 12.04. OFFICIAL INTEREST IN CONTRACTS.  Except as otherwise
permitted by law, no officer of the City who is authorized to take part in any
manner in any contract with the City shall voluntarily have a personal
financial interest in or personally benefit from such contract.
   Section 12.05. SALE OF REAL PROPERTY.  No real property of the City shall be
disposed of except by ordinance.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 12.06. VACATION OF STREETS.  The City Council may by ordinance or
pursuant to the laws of the State of Minnesota approved by a majority vote of
the City Council vacate any street or alley thereof within the City.  Such
vacation may be made only after published notice and an opportunity for
affected property owners and the public to be heard, and upon such further
terms and by such procedure as the City Council by ordinance may prescribe, or
pursuant to the laws of the State of Minnesota.  A notice of completion of such
proceedings shall be filed with the proper county officers in accordance with
the laws of the State of Minnesota.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 12.07. CITY TO SUCCEED TO RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF FORMER CITY. 
The City shall succeed to all the property, rights, and privileges, and shall
be subject to all legal obligations of the City under the former Charter.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 12.08. EXISTING ORDINANCES CONTINUED.  All ordinances and
regulations of the City in force when this Charter or any amended section of
this Charter takes effect and not inconsistent with this Charter are continued
in full force and effect until amended or repealed.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 12.09. ORDINANCES TO MAKE CHARTER EFFECTIVE.  The City Council shall
by ordinance, resolution, or other appropriate action take such steps as may be
necessary to make effective the provisions of this Charter.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 12.10. CHARTER AMENDMENTS.  Amendments to this Charter may be made
in accordance with the laws of the State of Minnesota.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
   Section 12.11. THIS CHARTER BECOMES EFFECTIVE___________, 2015.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-17-14)
TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
11.   SALARIES OF ELECTED OFFICIALS
CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Rules of interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Official time
   
10.11   Reasonable time
   
10.12   Ordinances repealed
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
   
10.18   Copies of code
   
10.19   Adoption of statutes and rules by reference
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city, as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“New Prague Code,” for which designation “code of ordinances,” “codified
ordinances” or “code” may be substituted.  Code title, chapter and section
headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to the
components of the code unless otherwise specified.  Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “Traffic Code.”  Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§
10.01.”  Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Generally.  Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of
state law.
   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation.  The construction of all ordinances
of this city shall be by the following rules, unless that construction is
plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of
the same ordinance:
      (1)   AND or OR.  Either conjunction shall include the other as if
written “and/or,” whenever the context requires.
      (2)   Acts by assistants.  When a statute, code provisions or ordinance
requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as
the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the
act by an authorized agent or deputy.
      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.  Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
      (4)   General term.  A general term following specific enumeration of
terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule.  Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain or
ordinary and usual sense.  However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CITY.  The area within the corporate boundaries of the city as presently
established or as amended by ordinance, annexation or other legal actions at a
future time.  The term CITY when used in this code may also be used to refer to
the City Council and its authorized representatives.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This city code as modified
by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections.
      COUNTY.  Scott and/or LeSueur County, Minnesota.
      MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH.  A calendar month.
      OATH.  An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may
be substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall
be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.  All terms shall mean a pledge
taken by the person and administered by an individual authorized by state law.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT.  An officer, office,
employee, commission, or department of this city unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
      PERSON.  Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver.  Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as
applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before or next after, respectively.
      SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE.  The State of Minnesota.
      SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a
heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the
chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the
heading.  Not all chapters have subchapters.
      WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06  SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.07  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.09  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published.  No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.10  OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all city
business.
§ 10.11  REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last.  If the last day
is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.12  ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.13  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
§ 10.15  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
to it, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.16  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this
indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or
title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.17  PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws. 
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties
incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code.  The
liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or
forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been
enacted.  In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway
right-of-ways, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance,
establishment or vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate
officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not been
enacted.
§ 10.18  COPIES OF CODE.
   The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City
Administrator for public inspection.  The Administrator shall provide a copy
for sale for a reasonable charge.
§ 10.19  ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES BY REFERENCE.
   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this code, all
future amendments to any state or federal rules and statutes adopted by
reference in this code or referenced in this code are hereby adopted by
reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this code
was adopted, unless there is clear intention expressed in the code to the
contrary.
§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this
code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor.  The penalty which may be imposed for
any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including Minnesota Statutes
specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90 days
or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor.  The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense
which is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than
$300.
   (C)   In either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs
of prosecution may be added.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
   (D)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
CHAPTER 11:  SALARIES OF ELECTED OFFICIALS
Section
   
11.01   Council salaries
   
11.02   Worker’s compensation
§ 11.01  COUNCIL SALARIES.
   (A)   Mayor.  Effective January 1, 2015, the salary of the Mayor shall be
$425 per month.
   (B)   Council members.  Effective January 1, 2015, the salary of each member
of the Council shall be $325 per month.
   (C)   Payments.  The salaries of the Mayor and Council members are payable
monthly.
   (D)   Special meetings.  The Mayor and each Council member are to be paid an
additional $50 for each special Council meeting attended that is called for the
benefit of an applicant or an applicant's project. The applicant requesting the
special Council meeting is responsible for paying the cost referenced herein
prior to the date of the special Council meeting.
   (E)   Reimbursement of expenses.  The Mayor and each Council member
attending any meeting or other business relating to the function of the city
shall be entitled to reimbursement for their expenses, provided, that such
reimbursement is authorized by the Council. This provision shall not apply to
attendance at regular and special Council meetings or for the performance of
routine Council business.
(Ord. 276, passed 9-15-14)
§ 11.02  WORKER’S COMPENSATION.
   The Mayor and Council members, elected or appointed to an unexpired term,
are covered by the city's workers' compensation insurance.
(Ord. 276, passed 9-15-14)
TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   BOARDS, DEPARTMENTS AND COMMISSIONS
      
31.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
         
APPENDIX: EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN
      
32.   CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND CHECKS
      
33.   OFFICIAL FEE SCHEDULE
      
34.   SERVICE CHARGES
CHAPTER 30:  BOARDS, DEPARTMENTS AND COMMISSIONS
Section
   
30.01   Establishment of boards and commissions
   
30.02   Economic Development Authority
   
30.03   Housing and Redevelopment Authority
   
30.04   Planning Commission
   
30.05   Utilities Commission
   
30.06   Park Board
   
30.07   Golf Board
   
30.08   Charter Commission
   
30.09   Applicability
   
30.10   Appointments and terms
   
30.11   Officers
   
30.12   Meetings
§ 30.01  ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.
   Consistent with Minnesota statutes and the City Charter, specifically §§
2.02,
2.10 and
3.08 of the City Charter, the following boards and commissions listed in this
chapter are hereby created, or recreated and affirmed consistent with Minnesota
statutes, the City Charter, city ordinances and the specific enabling
resolutions.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all boards and
commissions listed in this chapter, unless a specific requirements or condition
is imposed by Minnesota statutes, the City Charter, city ordinances or a
specific enabling resolution.
(Ord. 254, passed 3-19-12)
§ 30.02  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY.
   The Economic Development Authority was established by the city to take
action on economic development programs for businesses and industries in the
city.  The Economic Development Authority was established by City Council
resolution that was adopted on June 18, 1990.  A modified resolution was
adopted by the City Council on February 19, 1991.  The Economic Development
Authority consists of seven commissioners, all of whom are appointed as
prescribed by M.S. § 469.095, Subdivision  2, as it may be amended from time to
time, for six-year terms.  Two Economic Development Authority commissioners
must be members of the City Council.
(Ord. 254, passed 3-19-12)
§ 30.03  HOUSING AND REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY.
   The city’s Housing and Redevelopment Authority was established by M.S. §
469.003, Subdivision 1, as it may be amended from time to time, in order to
ensure that there are affordable, decent, safe, and sanitary housing
accommodations available in the city.  The Housing and Redevelopment Authority
consists of five commissioners who are the City Council members appointed as
prescribed by M.S. § 469.003, Subdivision 6, as it may be amended from time to
time.  Notwithstanding §
30.10(C), the term of office for the commissioners of the Housing and
Redevelopment Authority shall be January 1 through December 31.
(Ord. 254, passed 3-19-12)
§ 30.04  PLANNING COMMISSION.
   The Planning Commission was established by the city pursuant to M.S. Chapter
462, as it may be amended from time to time, through its Zoning Ordinance in
order to provide recommendations to the City Council and the City Zoning
Administrator in the administration of the City Zoning Ordinance.  The Planning
Commission consists of five members as established in § 503 of the City Zoning
Ordinance.  The members of the Planning Commission shall serve four-year terms
of office.  The City Council shall appoint one of its members to serve on the
Commission.
(Ord. 254, passed 3-19-12)
§ 30.05  UTILITIES COMMISSION.
   The Utilities Commission was established by the city consistent with the
City Charter to control and manage the city’s water system and electrical
utility.  The Utility Commission was re-established and affirmed by City
Council Resolution #95-1-3-3 on January 3, 1995.  This resolution was amended
by City Council Resolution #99-2-1-1 on February 1, 1999.  The Utility
Commission consists of five members who are appointed for four-year terms of
office as prescribed by the provisions in the resolutions.
(Ord. 254, passed 3-19-12)
§ 30.06  PARK BOARD.
   (A)   Park Board established.  A Park Board is hereby established by the
city as an advisory board to the City Council to help maintain existing city
parks, schedule and develop policy for the use of various parts of the parks,
and advise the Planning Commission and City Council in all matters relating to
the acquisition and development of property for future recreational needs.  It
is the goal of the Park Board to provide recreational facilities and activities
for all ages.
   (B)   Membership.  The Park Board consists of seven voting members who are
appointed by the City Council.  One member of the City Council shall serve as a
voting member.  In addition, one Park Board youth representative shall be
appointed by the City Council to serve as a non-voting member.
   (C)   Terms.
      (1)   Park Board members shall be appointed for four-year terms of
office.
      (2)   The Council representative shall serve for a term of one year, that
shall be reviewed annually by the City Council.
      (3)   The Park Board youth representative shall serve for a term of one
year.
   (D)   Duties.  Duties of the Park Board shall relate to, but not be limited
to the following:
      (1)   To plan for future park and recreational development and propose
rules and regulations for use and maintenance of facilities;
      (2)   To schedule activities for use of parks and recreational areas, and
recommend fees to be charged and collect these fees; and
      (3)   To prepare and design a comprehensive park plan for the city and
report annually to the City Council the activities of the Park Board.
   (E)   Meetings.  Meetings of the Park Board are to be held monthly.  The
Board shall elect from its members a Chairman and a Vice-Chair annually.
(Ord. 160, passed 1-18-82; Am. Ord. passed 2-16-93; Am. Ord. 254, passed 3-19-
12)
§ 30.07  GOLF BOARD.
   The Golf Board was established by the city to operate and manage the New
Prague Golf Course.  The Golf Board was established by City Council Resolution
#95-1-3-4 adopted on January 3, 1995.  This resolution was amended by
Resolution #97-11-3-2 on November 3, 1997, and Resolution #08-04-21-09 on April
21, 2008.  The Golf Board consists of seven voting members who shall serve
three-year terms of office.  One Golf Board member shall be a member of the
City Council.  Golf Board members are appointed as prescribed by the provisions
in the resolutions.
(Ord. 254, passed 3-19-12)
§ 30.08  CHARTER COMMISSION.
   A Charter Commission is re-established consistent with M.S. Chapter 410, as
it may be amended from time to time, and the City Charter to fulfill the
statutory requirements for the City Charter consistent with Minnesota statutes.
(Ord. 254, passed 3-19-12)
§ 30.09  APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all boards and commissions
listed in this chapter, unless a specific requirement or condition is imposed
by Minnesota statutes, the City Charter, city ordinances or a specified
enabling resolution.
(Ord. 254, passed 3-19-12)
§ 30.10  APPOINTMENTS AND TERMS.
   (A)   Appointing authority.  All city board and commission appointments
authorized by Minnesota statutes, city ordinance or resolution shall be made by
the Mayor, and such appointments shall be confirmed by the City Council.
   (B)   Appointment procedure.  All applicants for board and commission
appointments shall complete an application form and may be selected to be
interviewed by the Mayor and City Council.  Any appointment shall not be made
until there has been a publication in the newspaper or as otherwise required by
the City Council opening up the appointment to applicants, and the applicants
have been interviewed.
   (C)   Term of appointment.  Unless otherwise stated differently in this
chapter, new appointees shall assume office on June 1 and shall serve until May
31; provided however, that all appointees to boards and commissions shall hold
office until a successor is appointed and deemed qualified.  All vacancies
shall be filled in the same manner as for an expired term, but the appointment
shall be for the unexpired term.  The terms of office for any City Council
member serving as a board or commission member shall coincide with their term
of office as a member of the City Council.
   (D)   Employment by the city.  No appointed board or commission member shall
be an employee of the city except those who are members of the board or
commission by virtue of their position with the city.
   (E)   City Administrator.  The City Administrator shall be a non-voting ex
officio member of all boards and commissions.  If the City Administrator is
unable to attend the board or commission meeting or act in the capacity of such
membership, the City Administrator may authorize another city employee to serve
in that capacity.
   (F)   Residency.  All members of any board or commission that are appointed
for terms beginning on or after June 1, 2012 shall be at the date of
appointment and at all times during the term of appointment, a resident of the
city.
   (G)   Remuneration.  All appointed board and commission members shall serve
without remuneration, but may be reimbursed by the city for out of pocket
expenses incurred in the performance of their duties when such expenses have
been authorized by the City Council prior to being incurred.
   (H)   Removal.  If a commission or board member misses three meetings within
a year without being excused prior to the meeting, such member may be removed
therefrom any time during or at the end of the appointive year.  Any board or
commission member may be removed by the City Council for misfeasance,
malfeasance, nonfeasance, or without cause by a majority vote of the City
Council.  The removed person’s position may be filled as in the case of any
other vacancy.  The removal process shall be without a hearing, and it shall
not be necessary that the City Council establish cause for removal.  This
paragraph (H) does not apply to the removal of an Economic Development
Authority commissioner, as the removal process shall instead be conduct
pursuant to Minnesota statutes.
(Ord. 254, passed 3-19-12)
§ 30.11  OFFICERS.
   The chair or presiding officer and the other officers of each board and
commission shall be selected by each board and commission at the board or
commission’s first regular meeting in June of each year and shall serve until
the first regular meeting in June of the next year.
(Ord. 254, passed 3-19-12)
§ 30.12  MEETINGS.
   Each board and commission must hold its regular meetings at a time and
location established and approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 254, passed 3-19-12)
CHAPTER 31:  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
   
31.01   Policy and purpose
   
31.02   Definitions
   
31.03   Establishment of emergency management organization and Emergency
Operations Plan
   
31.04   Powers and duties of the Director
   
31.05   Local emergencies
   
31.06   Emergency regulations
   
31.07   Emergency management a government function
   
31.08   Participation in labor disputes or politics
   
31.09   Authorizing dispatch and use of city equipment and services by the
Director in emergency situations (mutual aid)
 
   
31.99   Penalty
   Appendix: Emergency Operations Plan
§ 31.01  POLICY AND PURPOSE.
   Because of the existing possibility of the occurrence of disasters of
unprecedented size and destruction resulting from fire, flood, tornado,
blizzard, destructive winds or other natural causes, or from sabotage, hostile
action, or from hazardous material mishaps of catastrophic measure; and in
order to insure that preparations of this city will be adequate to deal with
those disasters, and generally, to provide for the common defense and to
protect the public peace, health, and safety, and to preserve the lives and
property of the people of this city, it is hereby found and declared to be
necessary:
   (A)   To establish a city emergency management organization responsible for
city planning and preparation for emergency government operations in time of
disasters.
   (B)   To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during emergencies and
disasters.
   (C)   To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between this city and other
political subdivisions of this state and of other states with respect to the
carrying out of emergency-preparedness functions.
   (D)   To comply with the provisions of M.S. Chapter 12, as it may be amended
from time to time.  As such, insofar as it relates to cities, it is adopted by
reference.
(Ord. 275, passed 9-2-14)
§ 31.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DIRECTOR.  The Director of the City Emergency Management Organization
(referred to in the Emergency Operations Plan as the "Emergency Management
Director").
   DISASTER.  A situation that creates an actual or imminent serious threat to
the health and safety of persons, or a situation that has resulted or is likely
to result in catastrophic loss to property or the environment, and for which
traditional sources of relief and assistance within the affected area are
unable to repair or prevent the injury or loss.
   EMERGENCY.  An unforeseen combination of circumstances that calls for
immediate action to prevent a disaster from developing or occurring.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.  The preparation for and the carrying out of emergency
functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily
responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from
disasters, from acute shortages of energy, or from incidents occurring at
nuclear power plants that pose radiological or other health hazards. These
functions include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services,
medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services,
communications, radiological, chemical and other special weapons defense,
evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency human services, emergency
transportation, existing or properly assigned functions of plant protection,
temporary restoration of public utility services, implementation of energy
supply emergency conservation and allocation measures, and other functions
related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or
incidental to preparing for and carrying out these functions.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES.  The total personnel resources engaged in city-
level emergency management functions in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter or any rule or order thereunder. This includes personnel from city
departments, authorized volunteers, and private organizations and agencies.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION.  The staff responsible for coordinating
city-level planning and preparation for disaster response.  This organization
provides city liaison and coordination with federal, state, and local
jurisdictions relative to disaster preparedness activities and assures
implementation of federal and state program requirements.
   EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN.  A plan adopted by the City Council by resolution
setting forth the city's emergency management regulations.
(Ord. 275, passed 9-2-14)
§ 31.03  ESTABLISHMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION AND EMERGENCY
OPERATIONS PLAN.
   (A)   There is hereby created within the city government an Emergency
Management Organization which shall be under the supervision and control of the
Director, called the Emergency Management Organization.  The Director shall be
appointed by the City Administrator with approval of the City Council for an
indefinite term and may be relieved of the responsibility upon appointment of a
new Director.  The Director shall serve with a salary as established by the
City Council, and shall be paid his or her necessary expenses. The Director
shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration and
operation of the emergency preparedness organization, subject to the direction
and control of the Mayor.
   (B)   Emergency Operations Plan.  The City Council shall by resolution adopt
an Emergency Operations Plan.  The adopted Emergency Operations Plan is
incorporated into this section as if fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 275, passed 9-2-14)
§ 31.04  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR.
   (A)   Cooperation with other agencies.  The Director shall represent the
city on any regional or state conference for emergency management. The Director
shall develop proposed mutual aid agreements with other political subdivisions
of the state for reciprocal emergency management aid and assistance in an
emergency too great to be dealt with unassisted, and shall present these
agreements to the Council for its action.  These arrangements shall be
consistent with the State Emergency Plan.
   (B)   Resource assessment.  The Director shall make studies and surveys of
the human resources, industries, resources, and facilities of the city as
deemed necessary to determine their adequacy for emergency management and to
plan for their most efficient use in time of an emergency or disaster.  The
Director shall establish the economic stabilization systems and measures,
service staffs, boards and sub-boards required, in accordance with state and
federal plans and directions subject to the approval of the Mayor.
   (C)   Preparation of Comprehensive Emergency Plan.  The Director shall
prepare a Comprehensive Emergency Plan for the emergency preparedness of the
city and shall present the plan to the Council for its approval.  When the
Council has approved the plan, it shall be the duty of all city agencies and
all emergency preparedness forces of the city to perform the duties and
functions assigned by the plan as approved.  The plan may be modified in like
manner from time to time.  The Director shall coordinate the emergency
management activities of the city to the end that they shall be consistent and
fully integrated with the emergency plans of the federal government and the
state, and correlated with emergency plans of the county and other political
subdivisions within the state.
   (D)   Public awareness.  In accordance with the State and City Emergency
Plan, the Director shall institute training programs, public information
programs and conduct practice warning alerts and emergency exercises as may be
necessary to assure prompt and effective operation of the City Emergency Plan
when a disaster occurs.
   (E)   Coordination during an emergency.  The Director shall utilize the
personnel, services, equipment, supplies, and facilities of existing
departments and agencies of the city to the maximum extent practicable.  The
officers and personnel of all city departments and agencies shall, to the
maximum extent practicable, cooperate with and extend services and facilities
to the city's emergency management organization and to the Governor upon
request.  The head of each department or agency in cooperation with the
Director shall be responsible for the planning and programming of those
emergency activities as will involve the utilization of the facilities of the
department or agency.
   (F)   Recruiting emergency management personnel.  The Director shall, in
cooperation with those city departments and agencies affected, coordinate the
activity of municipal emergency management organizations within the city and
assist in the organizing, recruiting, establishing and conducting training
programs for emergency management personnel, as required to assure emergency
operational capability, all of which may be required on a volunteer basis to
carry out the emergency plans of the city and state. To the extent that
emergency personnel are recruited to augment a regular city department or
agency for emergencies, they shall be assigned to the departments or agencies
and shall be under the administration and control of the department or agency.
   (G)   Carry out orders.  The Director shall carry out all orders, rules, and
regulations issued by the Governor with reference to emergency management.
   (H)   Reports.  The Director shall prepare and submit reports on emergency
preparedness activities when requested by the City Administrator.
(Ord. 275, passed 9-2-14)
§ 31.05  LOCAL EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   Declaration of local emergency.  A local emergency may be declared
only by the Mayor or his or her legal successor.  It shall not be continued for
a period in excess of three days except by or with the consent of the Council. 
Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local
emergency shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed in the
office of the City Administrator.
   (B)   Local emergency response.  A declaration of a local emergency shall
invoke necessary portions of the response and recovery aspects of applicable
local or inter-jurisdictional disaster plans, and may authorize aid and
assistance thereunder.
   (C)   Role of inter-jurisdictional agency.  No jurisdictional agency or
official may declare a local emergency unless expressly authorized by the
agreement under which the agency functions.  However, an inter-jurisdictional
disaster agency shall provide aid and services in accordance with the agreement
under which it functions.
(Ord. 275, passed 9-2-14) Penalty, see §
31.99
§ 31.06  EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Promulgation of emergency regulations.  Whenever necessary, to meet a
declared emergency or to prepare for an emergency for which adequate
regulations have not been adopted by the Governor or the Council, the Council
may by resolution promulgate regulations, consistent with applicable federal or
state law or regulation, respecting: the conduct of persons and the use of
property during emergencies; the repair, maintenance, and safeguarding of
essential public services, emergency health, fire, and safety regulations,
drills or practice periods required for preliminary training, and all other
matters which are required to protect public safety, health, and welfare in
declared emergencies.
   (B)   Notice and form.  Every resolution of emergency regulations shall be
in writing; shall be dated; shall refer to the particular emergency to which it
pertains, if so limited, and shall be filed in the office of the City
Administrator.  A copy shall be kept posted and available for public inspection
during business hours.  Notice of the existence of these regulations and their
availability for inspection at the City Administrator's office shall be
conspicuously posted at the front of the City Hall or other headquarters of the
city or at other places in the affected area as the Council shall designate in
the resolution.  By resolution, the Council may modify or rescind a regulation.
   (C)   Duration of emergency regulations.  The Council may rescind any
regulation by resolution at any time.  If not sooner rescinded, every
regulation shall expire at the end of 30 days after its effective date or at
the end of the emergency to which it relates, whichever comes first.  Any
resolution, rule, or regulation inconsistent with an emergency regulation
promulgated by the Council shall be suspended during the period of time and to
the extent conflict exists.
   (D)   Powers of the Director during a declared emergency.  During a declared
emergency, as provided under M.S. § 12.37, as amended from time to time, and
notwithstanding any statutory or Charter provision to the contrary, the city is
empowered to act through its Council, within or without the corporate limits of
the city, to enter into contracts and incur obligations necessary to combat the
disaster by protecting the health and safety of persons and property and
providing emergency assistance to the victims of a disaster.  The city may
exercise these powers in the light of the exigencies of the disaster without
compliance with the time-consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law
pertaining to the performance of public work, entering into contracts
(including but not limited to rental equipment agreements), incurring
obligations, purchase of supplies and materials, limitations upon tax levies,
and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds, including, but not
limited to publication of ordinances and resolutions, publication of calls for
bids, provisions of civil service laws and rules, provisions relating to low
bids, and requirements for budgets.
(Ord. 275, passed 9-2-14) Penalty, see §
31.99
§ 31.07  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT A GOVERNMENT FUNCTION.
   All functions and activities relating to emergency management are hereby
declared to be governmental functions.  The provisions of this section shall
not affect the right of any person to receive benefits to which he or she would
otherwise be entitled under this chapter or under the worker's compensation
law, or under any pension law, nor the right of any person to receive any
benefits or compensation under any act of Congress.
(Ord. 275, passed 9-2-14)
§ 31.08  PARTICIPATION IN LABOR DISPUTES OR POLITICS.
   The emergency management organization shall not participate in any form of
political activity, nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for
political purposes, nor shall it be employed in a labor dispute.  The Director
may express professional opinions on legislative or other legal regulations
consistent with the provisions found in M.S. Chapter 12.
(Ord. 275, passed 9-2-14)
§ 31.09  AUTHORIZING DISPATCH AND USE OF CITY EQUIPMENT AND SERVICES BY THE
DIRECTOR IN EMERGENCY SITUATIONS (MUTUAL AID).
   (A)   Purpose.  The city finds it desirable and necessary to authorize the
Director to dispatch city equipment and personnel to local communities who
request aid to combat their emergency, disaster, or major incident consistent
with this section.
   (B)   Dispatch and use of mutual aid.  The Director must evaluate the
internal needs of the city, and dispatch appropriate available aid.  The
Director must immediately recall, order and terminate the use of any dispatched
equipment and personnel when the need for their use no longer exists, or
earlier, when it appears in the best interest of the city.  Aid requested from
outside the city limits, or extended local aid outside the city limits, will
require mutual agreement between the Director and the City Administrator or
their designee with input from the appropriate department supervisor.
   (C)   Authority of the Director.  The Director must be fully authorized by
an act of the city, and all provisions for compensation of personnel, rental of
equipment, liability insurance coverage, workman's compensation insurance and
all other safeguards and matters pertaining to the city, its equipment and
personnel, must apply in each case as if specifically authorized and directed
at such time, whether or not the governing body or authority of the place in
which the disaster, major incident, mutual aid, or other occurrence exists, has
previously requested and provided for assistance and the use of equipment and
personnel under a mutual protection agreement or other type protection
agreement within the city.
(Ord. 275, passed 9-2-14)
§ 31.99  PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any regulation
adopted thereunder relating to acts, omissions, or conduct other than official
acts of city employees or officers is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction may be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000, or by imprisonment
for not more than 90 days.
(Ord. 275, passed 9-2-14)
APPENDIX:  EMERGENCY OPERATION PLAN
Section
   
I   Forward
   
II   Reason for plan
   
III   Purpose of plan
   
IV   Legal basis, references and supporting plans
   
V   Organization
   
VI   Direction and control
   
VII   Emergency responsibility assignments
   
VIII   Operations policies
   
IX   Support
   
X   Plan updating, training and exercise
   
XI   Annex A, Notification and warning
   
XII   Annex B, Direction and control/EOC
   
XIII   Annex C, Emergency public information
   
XIV   Annex D, Search and rescue
   
XV   Annex E, Health/medical
   
XVI   Annex F, Evacuation, traffic control and security
   
XVII   Annex G, Fire protection
   
XVIII   Annex H, Damage assessment
   
XIX   Annex I, Congregate care
   
XX   Annex J, Debris clearance
   
XXI   Annex K, Utilities restoration
   
XXII   Annex L, Environmental hazard response
   
XXIII   Annex M, Resource management items
§ I  FORWARD.
   (A)   The purpose of this plan is to provide a guide for emergency
operations.  The plan is intended to assist key city officials and emergency
organizations to carry out their responsibilities for the protection of life
and property under a wide range of emergency conditions.
   (B)   Although an organization may have the foresight to plan for
anticipated situations, such planning is of little worth if the planning is not
reduced to written form.  Personnel familiar with unwritten plans may be
unavailable at the very time it becomes necessary to implement them.  A written
plan will furnish a documentary record which can be referred to as needed. 
This documentary record will serve to refresh the knowledge of key individuals
and can be used to inform persons who become replacements.
   (C)   
TRANSFER OF OFFICE
THIS DOCUMENT SHALL REMAIN PROPERTY OF
CITY OF NEW PRAGUE
   Upon termination of office by reason of resignation, election, suspension or
dismissal the holder of this document will transfer it to his/her successor or
the City of New Prague Emergency Management Coordinator.
Copy No:      Assigned to:
______________________________________________________________________________
Plan approval                        Date
Signature of the Mayor
§ II  REASON FOR PLAN.
   Tornadoes, floods, blizzards and other natural disasters can affect the City
of New Prague.  In addition, major disasters such as train wrecks, plane crash,
truck wrecks, explosions, accidental release of hazardous material, emergency
failures, major storms, terrorist attacks, and enemy attacks pose a potential
threat to the public in the City of New Prague.
§ III  PURPOSE OF PLAN.
   The City of New Prague has many capabilities and resources which could be
used in the response to any major disaster.  These include the facilities,
equipment, personnel and skills of both government and non-government
professions and groups in the city.  The purpose of this plan is to ensure the
effective, coordinated use of these resources so as to:
   (A)   Maximize the protection of life and property.
   (B)   Ensure the continuity of government.
   (C)   Sustain survivors.
   (D)   Repair essential facilities and utilities.
§ IV  LEGAL BASIS, REFERENCES AND SUPPORTING PLANS.
   (A)   Public Law 920, as amended.
   (B)   Public Law 99-499, (Superfund Amendments and Re authorization Act
(SARA) of 1986).
   (C)   Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 12, as it may be amended from time to
time.
   (D)   Minnesota Statutes, Section 104.03, as it may be amended from time to
time.
   (E)   City of New Prague Code Chapter 31.
   (F)   Minnesota Division of Emergency Management Bulletin Nos. 88-4; 90-2;
and 89-1.
   (G)   Scott County Common Organization Contract.
   (H)   Homeland Security Act of 2002.
   (I)   Mutual Assistance Agreement, June 5 1973.
§ V  ORGANIZATION.
   Existing government is the basis for emergency operations.  That is,
government agencies will perform emergency activities related to those they
perform on a day to day basis.  City organization as listed.
   (A)   Mayor and Council.
   (B)   City Administrator will relate to City Department Heads:
      (1)   Police Chief;
      (2)   Public Works Director;
      (3)   Ambulance President/Director;
      (4)   Fire Chief.
§ VI  DIRECTION AND CONTROL.
   (A)   The Direction and Control of Government Operations from a central,
protected facility with adequate communications and key personnel is essential
to the conduct of Emergency Operations.
   (B)   In the City of New Prague, the Mayor and Council is responsible for
providing overall Direction and Control of city government resources involved
in the response to a disaster.  The Mayor and Council will also serve as a
liaison with Scott County Emergency Management. The Mayor and Council will also
oversee the protection of essential records (tax records, vial statistics, and
the like) for the continuing and/or reconstitution of city government. The
computer records are backed up and copied regularly and paper records are
secured.
   (C)   Direction and Control of the city’s response to a major disaster will
take place from the New Prague Emergency Operations Center (EOC), which is
located at the Fire Station, 118 Central Ave. North.
§ VII  EMERGENCY RESPONSIBILITY ASSIGNMENTS.
   (A)   A summary of the city’s emergency responsibility assignment, by
function, is shown in the table below.  Heads of the various city government
departments and agencies will be responsible for carrying out the assignments
shown in this table.  Lastly, city departments and agencies are expected to
develop whatever standard operating guidelines they may need in order to carry
out these responsibilities.
   (B)   Responsibilities have been assigned by a code letter:  “P”, “S”, and
“C”.
      (1)   “P” indicates PRIMARY operational responsibility, which means the
official or agency is in charge of, and responsible to make provisions for,
that function.  As a rule, only city government officials can be assigned
primary responsibility for carrying out a function.
      (2)    “S” indicates SUPPORT responsibility, which means the agency so
assigned will, if possible, support and assist the official or agency
designated primarily responsible.
      (3).   “C” indicates COORDINATION responsibility, and is assigned when
several agencies have support capability but no specific official or agency has
obvious primary responsibility.  This will be especially true when non-
government agencies are involved.
 
EMERGENCY RESPONSIBILITY ASSIGNMENTS
Functions                  Responsible Agencies     Remarks
                           Police                   P
1.  Notification & WarningFire                     S
                           Scott Ct. Em. Mgmt.      S
2.  Direction and Control Mayor—City AdministratoP
3.  Emergency Public Info.Mayor—City AdministratoP
4.  Search and Rescue     Fire                     P
                           Police                   S
 
 
EMERGENCY RESPONSIBILITY ASSIGNMENTS
Functions                  Responsible Agencies    Remarks
                           Ambulance and Fire      P
5.  Health and Medical    Police                  S
                           Fire                    S
                           Scott County            S
6.  Evacuation, Traffic   Police                  P
    Control and Security Fire                    S
7.  Fire Protection       Fire                    P
                           City Admin. Office      P
8.  Damage Assessment     City Planning Dept.     S
                           Scott County            S
                           Councilperson           P
9.  Congregate Care       Scott County            S
                           LeSueur County          S
10.  Debris Clearance     Public Works Department P
                           Fire Department         S
                           Public Utilities        P
11.  Utilities RestorationMayor/Council           C
                           Scott County            S
12.  Environmental HazardFire Department         P
      Response          Scott County            S
13.  Hazardous Waste      Fire Department         P
      Generator Listing Scott Ct. Em. Mgmt.     S
14.  Resource Management City Administrator      P
      Items             Scott Ct. Em. Mgmt.     S
Codes:    P=Primary, S=Support  and  C=Coordination
 
§ VIII  OPERATIONS POLICIES.
   (A)   The Emergency Management Director or designee shall make
determinations necessary to implement the operations plan.
   (B)    Protection of life and property and alleviation of human distress
will be the primary goal of New Prague City Government Emergency Operations.
   (C)   In an emergency affecting more than one political jurisdiction,
officials of all jurisdictions involved will coordinate their services to the
maximum extent possible.
   (D)   The New Prague City Administrator will assist in providing resources
and coordination between government agencies and the private sector.
   (E)   City government resources will be utilized to the maximum before
requesting county, state or federal assistance.
   (F)   Each agency, department, or service of city government will provide
for the maintenance of records during an emergency.  These records should
include work hours, equipment hours, supplies and material consumed, injuries
to personnel and damage to public facilities and equipment.
   (G)   In the event of a major disaster, the mayor may declare a local
emergency.  Such a declaration will invoke necessary portions of this plan, and
will permit the city to take such actions as may be required to protect lives
and property.
§ IX  SUPPORT.
   (A)   County Government Support.  Information and assistance in securing
county government support may be obtained by contacting the Scott County
Emergency Management Director.
   (B)   State and Federal Government Support.
      (1)   General.  Information and assistance in securing state or federal
support should be obtained by contacting the Scott County Emergency Management
Director.  In addition, technical information and assistance can be supplied if
requested.
      (2)   Emergency assistance.  In the event of a major emergency/disaster
which exceed the resources and capabilities of both city and county government,
and which necessitates immediate state and/or federal assistance, the State
Duty Officer may be contacted.  This is to be done through the Scott County
Emergency Management Director.
      (3)   National Guard.  When a natural disaster or other major emergency
is beyond capabilities of local government, support from the National Guard may
be available.  Request for the National Guard must be made through the Scott
County Sheriffs Office.
         (a)   Operational policies.
            1.   National Guard assistance will complement, and not be a
substitute for city and/or county participation in Emergency Operations.
            2.  If made available, National Guard personnel will remain under
military command at all times, but will support and assist city and/or county
forces in accomplishment of a specific task or tasks.
         (b)   Request procedure.  In the case of counties, and all cities that
are not of the first class, the Sheriff is the only local government official
authorized to submit the request for the National Guard assistance.  Such
requests are to be submitted to the State Duty Officer.
      (4)   Federal Assistance for Serious Hazardous Materials Accidents/
Incidents.  If the party responsible for a serious hazardous materials accident
is unknown, or is not taking appropriate action, and the response is beyond the
capability of local and state government, the federal government may be able to
provide assistance.  Such assistance can be requested through the Scott County
Emergency Management Office.
§ X  PLAN UPDATING, TRAINING AND EXERCISE.
   (A)   For purposes of this plan, the Emergency Manager or Deputy Emergency
Manager shall serve as the planning coordinator.  As such, the Coordinator will
have overall authority and responsibility for the maintenance of the plan in
cooperation with the Scott County Emergency Management Office. 
   (B)   This plan will be updated and reviewed by the Emergency Manager or
Deputy.  The plan will be reviewed and approved by the Mayor and City Council
in a timely manner.  The plan is subject to review by Scott County Emergency
Management.
   (C)   This plan will be distributed to all city government departments and
agencies which have emergency assignments in the event of a major disaster in
the City of New Prague.  A plan distribution list will be maintained by the
Emergency Manager. (Attachment #12)
   (D)   The City of New Prague will comply with Public Law 99-499, (SARA)
training and exercise requirements, as published.  Information about both
scheduled and previously conducted training and exercises are available from
the Scott County Emergency Management Office.
§ XI  ANNEX A, NOTIFICATION AND WARNING.
   (A)   Purpose.  To provide an overview of the responsibilities and the
procedures whereby the notification of key officials and the warning of the
general public are accomplished.
   (B)   Responsibilities.
      (1)   The Scott County Sheriff’s Dispatch Center is the Scott County
Warning Point.  The county warning point is responsible for relaying emergency
notifications (such as severe weather, manmade emergencies) which it relays to
the New Prague Police Department, which serves as the City Warning Point.
      (2)   The City Warning Point is responsible for ensuring that all
emergency notifications which it receives are handled properly.  Specially, the
warning point will:
         (a)   New Prague Ambulance and Fire Dept’s will be paged.
         (b)   Notify key city department heads, by phone or personal contact:
Police Dept.
         (c)   Activate the city’s outdoor warning sirens by notifying Scott
Co. Dispatch: Police
         (d)   In the event of siren failure carry out route alerting (house to
house) with the use of public address system on law enforcement vehicles:
Police, Fire, and Ambulance Depts.
         (e)   Notify Scott County Emergency Management.
         (f)   Notify affected private and/or public facilities including
nursing homes, Queen of Peace Hospital, Schools, factories, special needs
population, by phone or  personal contact. Fire Dept.
   (C)   Support documents.  The City of New Prague Notification and Warning
Standard Guidelines (SOG) details the specific Notification and Warning
Procedures that will be followed by the New Prague City Warning Point.  The SOG
is on file at the New Prague Fire Dept. Office.
   (D)   Authentication.
      _______________         ______________________________
Date                                   Police Chief
§ XII  ANNEX B, DIRECTION AND CONTROL/EOC.
   (A)   Purpose.  To describe how direction and control of the City of New
Prague response to a disaster will be accomplished.
   (B)   Responsibilities.
      (1)   The Mayor and City Council of New Prague will be responsible for
providing overall direction and control of city government resources involved
in the response to a disaster.  The line of succession to the Mayor is as
follows:  Mayor/Vice President City Council/Ranking City Council Member.
      (2)   Mayor/Council.  The City Administrator in addition to the City
Council will serve in a staff capacity to the Mayor, will carry out his or her
policies and directives, and will coordinate Emergency Management Operations. 
Line of succession to the Mayor and City Council is as follows: 
         City Administrator (Emergency Management Coordinator)
         (a)   Deputy Emergency Manager
         (b)   Police Chief
         (c)   Fire Chief
         (d)   Public Works Director
         (e)   Ambulance President/Director
   (C)   City of New Prague Emergency Operating Center (EOC).  Direction and
control of New Prague’s response to a disaster will be carried out at the New
Prague EOC.  The EOC is located at 118 Central Ave. No.  (Fire Station)
Alternate EOC is located at 300 E. Main St. (N.P. Utilities Office)  Each EOC
can be activated within minutes of notification.
      (1)   Criteria for EOC Activation.  The degree of the City’s EOC
activation will be determined by the City Warning Officer (Police Dept.).
         (a)   The EOC may be partially activated due to a potential threat to
life of property from severe weather, (such as tornado, flooding, blizzard,
terrorist incident) or a hazardous materials incident/accident that is a
controlled release of a reportable product (Operations level 1).
         (b)   The EOC will be fully activated in response to an emergency
resulting in an actual threat to life and property.  This will include, but is
not limited to: a tornado touchdown, emergency levee failure, pipeline leak, or
flooding which causes damage to the public and private sector and requires a
coordinated response effort; a hazardous material incident/accident involving
the response agencies, (including federal and state, as well as surrounding
counties and municipalities, or enemy attack, or act of terrorism. (Operations
Level 2 and 3).
      (2)   Responsibility for EOC Activation.  In the event of a major
disaster, EOC staff will be expected to automatically report to the EOC. 
However, the City Emergency Management Coordinator or designee is responsible
for ensuring that the EOC is activated according to the previously described
criteria.
      (3)   Staffing of the EOC. 
         (a)   Staffing of the EOC will normally consist of the Mayor, City
Administrator, Deputy Emergency Manager, Police Chief, Fire Chief, Public Works
Director,  Utilities Department Head, Ambulance Coordinator, and anyone else
requested by the Mayor.  (The staffing list for the New Prague EOC is
attachment #1).  EOC staff is responsible for the operations of their
particular service or assignment.  Each department/agency which is represented
in the EOC is responsible for ensuring that its representative is familiar with
the duties which he/she is expected to perform at the EOC.
         (b)   Each department head will be responsible to ensure that a
department representative is capable to be relieved and replaced to ensure 24
hour staffing of the EOC. Cots and bedding material are available.
         (c)   Response to Terrorism Alert Information (see Attachment #10).
         (d)   The city will have an on-scene command post as necessary.  If
the EOC has been activated it will have oversight of all activities.  The EOC
will be kept informed on a timely basis of the response efforts.
      (4)   Communication capability.  The EOC Communications Capability is
limited to telephone, cell phone, radio, fax, and computers.
      (5)   Emergency power.  The primary EOC has Electrical Back-up Power
Provided by Eckles Telephone.  The secondary EOC is located at the municipal
electrical generation building which has power generation.
      (6)   EOC Equipment/supplies.  The Emergency Manager or designee is
responsible for ensuring that the EOC is operational, that the necessary maps,
displays, tables and chairs communications equipment, message logs, and the
like are on hand and available for use in the EOC.
      (7)   EOC Security.  Security at the EOC will be provided by the Police
Department, Police Reserve or with assistance from the Sheriff’s Office.
      (8)   EOC capabilities.  Each EOC has water and sanitation provided by
municipal service. Each department has access to alternate water sources.
   (D)   Authentication.
      ______________      _____________________________   
      Date            Emergency Manager
§ XIII  ANNEX C, EMERGENCY PUBLIC INFORMATION.
   (A)   Purpose.  To provide and overview of how emergency public information
will be disseminated in the event of a disaster.
   (B)   Spokesperson.  The only official authorized to serve as the Public
Information Officer (PIO) for the City of New Prague is the Mayor or his
designee.  If the Mayor is unavailable, the Vice-President of the City Council
or designee will serve as the alternate PIO.  These individuals will be given
access to all information necessary to carry out their role as PIO for the
city.
   (C)   Responsibilities.  The PIO is responsible for disseminating
information and instructions to the public on a timely basis, and for
coordinating all releases during pre-emergency, emergency, and post emergency
conditions.  In addition, the PIO is responsible for emergency conditions.  In
addition, the PIO is responsible for ensuring that the Emergency Alerting
System (EAS) is activated through the Scott County Emergency Management Office,
should that be necessary, and for reviewing and approving all information
release before they are disseminated. The PIO is responsible for public
inquires and rumor control regarding an emergency situation.
   (D)   Policies and procedures.
      (1)   If it becomes necessary to establish a news briefing room, the
Council Chambers will serve as an information center established and used for
this purpose.  News media personal will be asked to report to this facility.
      (2)   In the event of a protracted disaster/emergency, news releases will
be issued on a regular basis.
      (3)   Public information will be disseminated through radio and metro TV
outlets. (See attachment #3 for list)
   (E)   Authentication. 
      ____________      ______________________________         
      Date               Mayor
§ XIV  ANNEX D, SEARCH AND RESCUE.
   (A)   Purpose.  To describe how search and rescue will be accomplished in
the city following a disaster.
   (B)   Responsibility.  Within the City of New Prague, the primary
responsibility for search and rescue belongs to the Fire Department.  Back-up
assistance for search and rescue may be available from mutual aid Fire Depts.,
the Police and Public Works Department; Scott County Emergency Management
Office.
   (C)   Support agencies.  The following government and volunteer
organizations may be available to assist with major search and rescue
operations:  Police Reserve and Sheriff’s Offices and New Prague Ambulance.
   (D)   Support Standard Operating Guidelines (SOG).  The above mentioned
department/organizations will have SOG’s in place for their activities in
support or the overall Search and Rescue Project.
   (E)   Authentication.
      ______________         _____________________________
      Date               Fire Chief
§ XV  ANNEX E, HEALTH/MEDICAL.
   (A)   Purpose.  To provide an overview of how the health/medical care needs
of residents will be met in the event of a major disaster.
   (B)   Responsibilities. 
      (1)   Hospital Care:  Injured victims will be transported to Scott County
Hospital.  If the number of victims requires use of additional hospitals, the
Metro West Plan will be utilized.
      (2)   Ambulance Service:  The New Prague Ambulance Service will transport
disaster victims.  If additional ambulances are needed, the New Prague
Ambulance Service Mutual Aid Agreement will be invoked.
      (3)   Pre-Hospital Emergency Medical Care:  The New Prague Ambulance
Service will be available to provide immediate medical care to disaster victims
suffering minor/major injuries.
      (4)   Emergency Mortuary Operations:  These operations will be the
responsibility of Scott County Human Services.
      (5)   Health Threats-Serious potential or actual health problems
(epidemics, food and or water contamination, and the like) associated with a
disaster will be the responsibility of the Scott County Human Services. 
Support is available from the Minnesota Department of Health.
      (6)   Inquiry and Referral Service-This service will be the
responsibility of Scott County Emergency Management Office.
      (7)   Potential facilities that can be converted to emergency treatment
centers for victims of mass casualties or disease:
         (a)   Medical clinics;
         (b)   Mala Strana nursing home;
         (c)   Schools, public and private.
      (8)   Provide arraignments for and coordination of crisis counseling
(such as C.I.S.D.), mental health treatment, and grief counseling for emergency
workers and victims.
      (9)    Decontamination of victims:  Queen of Peace Hospital is equipped
with a De-con facility, which has a shower, which has a self contained water
disposal reservoir. Also the ventilation system is self contained.
   (C)   Coordination.  If a serious disaster resulting in multiple casualties
occurs in the City of New Prague, overall coordination of the various health/
medical organizations response to the disaster will take place at the New
Prague EOC, which will be coordinated by the New Prague Ambulance.  Scott
County Hospital and Ambulance Service are equipped with radio communications
equipment and can therefore communicate both among themselves and with the
EOC.  If mass casualties exceed five persons Scott County may be requested to
continue the effort.
   (D)   Local supporting plans/procedures and personal.
      (1)   Queen of Peace and St. Francis Hospitals maintain a disaster plan.
      (2)   Queen of Peace Hospital and the New Prague Ambulance Service have
established standard operating guidelines regarding which hospital an injured
victim should be transported to.  These operating guidelines are maintained at
Queen of Peace Hospital.
      (3)   The New Prague Ambulance Service has entered into a mutual aid
agreement with surrounding Ambulances Services.
      (4)   A listing of pharmacies, sources of medical supplies, doctors,
hospitals, ambulance service, and other health support services is located in
Scott County Emergency Management Office.
      (5)   Ambulance services and other medical service agencies/organizations
which report to the scene of a serious accident/incident are responsible for
developing and maintaining whatever standards operating guidelines (SOG) they
may need.  Such SOGs should include guidance and instructions for operating in
an environment in which hazardous material are present.  The following SOGs
have been developed, and are on file at New Prague Ambulance Office.
   (E)   State support.  Support is available from the Minnesota Department of
Health and from Scott County in responding to serious radiation incidents, as
well as other major health threats. 
   (F)   Authentication.
   ______________   ____________________________________
   Date         New Prague Ambulance Service Director/President
§ XVI  ANNEX F, EVACUATION, TRAFFIC CONTROL AND SECURITY.
   (A)   Purpose.  To outline how evacuation, traffic control, and security
will be carried out if they are required due to a disaster in the City of New
Prague.
   (B)   Responsibility.
      (1)   The following official(s) will be responsible for ordering
evacuation, shelter in place, and/or return, and for issuing recommendations:
      Official         Type(s) of Incident(s)
      Fire Chief         HAZMAT/Fire
      Police Chief         Floods/Others Incidents
      (2)   The New Prague Fire Department/Police Department will be
responsible for coordinating an evacuation effort as appropriate.
      (3)   The New Prague Police Department has primary responsibility for
traffic control and security in the affected area in order to protect private
and public property.
   (C)   Procedures.
      (1)   Residents to be evacuated would be notified of the need to evacuate
by normal warning procedures.
      (2)   The selection of specific evacuation routes will be based on the
extent of the evacuation required, weather and road conditions, and several
other factors.  The primary traffic arteries that will/can be used for
evacuating all/part of the city are as follows:
         (a)   North/South Roads:  TH 21 and Drexel Avenue;
         (b)   East/West Roads:  TH 19, 7th St NW/NE.
Depending upon which highways are used for evacuation, traffic control points
will be established at appropriate locations.
      (3)   Mobility-impaired and other individuals unable to evacuate
themselves can obtain assistance by contacting the Emergency 911 system.
Dispatch will notify the E.O.C. of the specific location and need.
      (4)   New Prague Fire Rescue will coordinate evacuation of non-
ambulatory, mobility impaired or others unable to evacuate themselves.
      (5)   Scott County Emergency Management with assistance from Scott County
Animal Control will coordinate for pet evacuation and sheltering.
   (D)   Resources available.
      (1)   Assistance for traffic control and security may be available from
the Scott County Sheriff’s Office, Le Sueur County Sheriff’s Office and
Minnesota State Patrol.
      (2)   The New Prague Area Public School transportation department can
provide transportation needs as requested
      (3)   Scott Co. Emergency Management can be contacted for additional
transportation resources.
   (E)   Authentication.
   ________________      ___________________________________
   Date               New Prague Fire Chief
      ___________________________________
                        New Prague Police Chief
Attachment #9  A New Prague city map depicting the primary traffic arteries
that will be used for an evacuation and the potential location of traffic
control points is located in the Fire Department Office, smaller map is
attached.
§ XVII  ANNEX G, FIRE PROTECTION.
   (A)   Purpose.  To summarize how fire protection is provided in the City of
New Prague.
   (B)   Responsibility.  Fire protection is provided by the New Prague Fire
Department.  This is a volunteer department, which provides fire suppression,
search and rescue and initial HAZMAT response.
   (C)   Mutual aid agreements.  The New Prague Fire Department participates in
mutual aid agreements that involves area Fire Departments.
   (D)   Communications capability.  The New Prague Fire Department vehicles
are equipped with radio and telephone communications equipment.
   (E)   Support documents.  The New Prague Fire Department is responsible for
developing and maintaining whatever Standard Operating Guidelines (SOGs) it may
need in order to carry out its fire protection responsibilities.  Such SOGs
should include guidance and instructions for responding to a fire scene which
involves hazardous materials.  Refer also to the Radiological/Hazardous
Materials Protection Annex to this plan.  SOG’s are on file in the office of
the Fire Chief, 118 Central Av. North.
   (F)   Authentication.   
   ___________            _____________________________
   Date               Fire Chief
§ XVIII  ANNEX H, DAMAGE ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   Purpose.  To provide an overview of how damage assessment will be
accomplished following a disaster in the city of New Prague.
   (B)   Responsibilities.
      (1)   The Emergency Management Coordinator is responsible for:
         (a)   Developing and maintaining a damage assessment “team” composed
of municipal and/or private sector agency representatives. (See attachment #3
for list).
         (b)   Maintaining an up-to-date listing of damage assessment team
personnel
         (c)   Maintaining the procedures to be followed for damage assessment.
         (d)   Coordinating the initial damage assessment process, following
the occurrence of a disaster. 
      (2)   The city of New Prague Government officials who, depending upon the
nature of the disaster, will participate in a damage assessment efforts:
         (a)   Public Works Director;
         (b)   Building Inspector;
         (c)   City Planner.
      (3)   The Scott County Emergency Management Coordinator will coordinate
the County Officials who will participate in the damage assessment efforts.
      (4)   Private Sector Agencies.  Private sector agencies that might be
available and that might be appropriate participants in damage assessment
effort.
         (a)   Realtors;
         (b)   Hazardous Materials clean-up contractors;
         (c)   Building Officials;
         (d)   Building Contractors.
   (C)   Policies and procedures.
      (1)   A damage assessment effort will be initiated as soon as practical
following the occurrence of a disaster.
      (2)   Where possible and when appropriate, pictures will be taken of
damaged areas, and city maps will be used to show the location of damage
sights.
      (3)   When damage assessment is carried out in conjunction with a request
for state or federal disaster assistance, the New Prague Emergency Management
Coordinator will contact the Scott County Emergency Director, who will
coordinate with the Minnesota Division of Emergency Management (DEM).
      (4)   When possible, the New Prague Emergency Management Coordinator and
other appropriate local government officials will participate in damage
assessment procedure training.
   (D)   Supporting documents.  For additional information and guidance, refer
to: Disaster Response and Recovery:  A Handbook for Local Government.
(Available from the Scott County Emergency Management Director.)
   (E)   Authentication.
   ______________            ______________________________
   Date                  City Administrator/Emergency Manager
§ XIX  ANNEX I, CONGREGATE CARE.
   (A)   Purpose.  To describe how the congregate care (emergency housing,
feeding, clothing and counseling) needs of the New Prague residents, as well as
incoming evacuees that may come from other communities, will be met in the
event of a disaster.
   (B)   Responsibilities.
      (1)   A city councilperson will be designated to serve as a liaison to
Scott County Human Services.
      (2)   Primary needs.  The following primary congregate care needs of
disaster victims will be met by the city and/or county government departments/
private sector agencies indicated as SCOTT COUNTY HUMAN SERVICES/RED CROSS.
         (a)   Emergency housing;
         (b)   Emergency feeding;
         (c)   Emergency clothing;
         (d)   Crisis Counseling.
      (3)   (See attachment #4 for a partial list of possible housing
locations).
      (4)   Additional needs.  The following additional congregate care need of
disaster victims will be met by the agencies/organizations indicated:
         (a)    Registration of victims-Scott County Human Services and Red
Cross;
         (b)   Inquiry and referral (regarding disaster victims) Red Cross;
         (c)   Decontamination of victims- New Prague Fire Department, Queen of
Peace Hospital.
   (C)   Coordination of congregate care.  Scott County Human Services will be
responsible for providing overall coordination of the congregate care
function.  In order to facilitate this coordination, Scott County
representative will work with and through the Council Liaison person in the
Emergency Operations Center (EOC).
   (D)   Supporting documents.
      (1)   Scott County Common Organization Contacts.
      (2)   The government agencies and private sector organizations that have
agreed to carry out the congregate care responsibilities listed in this annex
are expected to develop whatever standard operating procedures (SOG) they may
need.
      (3)   The government and private organizations are as follows:
         (a)   New Prague Ambulance Service;
         (b)   Queen of Peace Hospital.
   (E)   Authentication.
   _________________            ______________________________
   Date                  Congregate Care Liaison
                           Councilperson
§ XX  ANNEX J, DEBRIS CLEARANCE.
   (A)   Purpose.  To describe how debris clearance will be accomplished
following a disaster in the City of New Prague.
   (B)   Responsibilities.  The Public Works Department will be responsible for
debris clearance.
   (C)   Policies and procedures.
      (1)   Except in unusual circumstances, removal of debris from private
property will be the responsibility of the property owner.
      (2)   A temporary dump site will be available at the city dump site on
Columbus Ave. North.
      (3)   Debris will be disposed of at licensed and/or designated disposal
site.
      (4)   If additional debris clearance-type equipment/assistance is needed,
it can be requested through Scott County Emergency Management Office.
      (5)   Scott County Emergency Management will coordinate the disposal of
animal carcasses.
   (D)   Supporting documents.
      (1)   A listing of construction contractors which have debris removal-
type equipment, and which are located in the city, is on file at Scott County
Emergency Management Office.
      (2)   A listing of hazardous material cleanup contractors is located at
the Scott County Emergency Management Office.
   (E)   Authentication.
   ________________            ______________________________
   Date                  Public Works Director
§ XXI  ANNEX K, UTILITIES RESTORATION.
   (A)   Purpose.  To provide an overview of how utilities services will be
restored as a result of an emergency.
   (B)   Responsibilities.  The following government agencies/private sector
organizations are responsible for providing utilities services for the City of
New Prague.
      (1)   Electrical Services-New Prague Utilities, Excel Energy, and MVEC.
      (2)   Gas Services-Reliant Energy.
      (3)   Telephone Service-Eckles Telephone.
      (4)   Potable water Service-New Prague Utilities.
      (5)   Sanitary sewer -City of New Prague.
      (6)   Sanitation – Laker’s Sanitary.
   (C)   Service restoration.  In the event of a utility outage due to a
disaster, the above offices/agencies should be called in order to restore
services. (Contact numbers are in attachment #5).  The Public Works Director
will prioritize restoration of services based on the location of the event and
their need to continue Emergency and or, life support services. 
   (D)   Authentication.
   ________________               ________________________
   Date                     Public Works Director
§ XXII  ANNEX L, ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARD RESPONSE.
   (A)   Purpose.  To provide an overview of how the City of New Prague will
respond to a radiological hazardous materials accident/incident.
   (B)   Response to hazardous materials accident or incident.
      (1)   Radiological incidents/accidents.  In addition to Scott County, the
New Prague Fire Department is responsible for attempting to develop and
maintain the radiological protection response capability necessary to minimize
the threat to citizens in the event of a radiological accident/incident/enemy
attack.  This capability includes: monitoring, reporting, assessment,
containment, decontamination and  protective actions.  Specific
responsibilities are as follows:
         (a)   Peacetime accidents/incidents.  In all likelihood, most
peacetime accidents or incidents will be confined to a relatively small area,
and will be minor  in impact.  However, if an accident/incident is beyond the
capabilities of the city, the Scott County Emergency Management Director can be
called upon for assistance.  If the accident/incident is beyond the capability
of the County, the Minnesota Department of Health, Radiation Control Section,
has the trained personal, equipment and authority to provide assistance.  For
all accidents or incidents, the city will be responsible for: controlling 
access to the scene, providing medical care for victims, preventing the spread
of contamination by people and vehicles, obtaining basis information as to what
has happened, and notifying that State Duty Officer telephone number 651-649-
5451. 
         (b)   Enemy attack.  Although plans and preparations have been made at
the State and Federal levels to assist local governments during periods of
widespread radiological emergency causes by nuclear denotations, such
assistance would probably be slow in coming.  Therefore, the city should be
prepared to provide for its own radiological monitoring and decontamination
needs.
      (2)   Other hazardous materials incidents/accidents.
         (a)   Pre-identification and analysis of risk.  In response to the
requirements and recommendations contained in the Superfund Amendments and
            Re authorization Act (SARA) or 1986, as well as other legislation,
the following specific risk sites/locations within the city have been pre-
identified:
            1.   “Covered facilities.”  (Facilities that possess extremely
hazardous materials.) ( See attachment #6.)
            2.   Other facilities that may contribute to additional risk due to
their closeness to “covered facilities.” ( See Attachment #7.)
            3.   Facilities (schools, hospitals, nursing home, and the like) at
risk due to their facilities with extremely hazardous materials.  (See
Attachment #7.)
            4.   Transportation routes for extremely hazardous materials.  (See
Attachment #8.)
         (b)   Determination that a release of hazardous materials has
occurred.  Facilities located within the city that use, store, manufacture or
transport hazardous materials are responsible for developing systems and
training their employees so as to be able to promptly determine and report that
a release of hazardous materials has occurred. In the event a release occurs
the facility shall immediately contact 911. Similarly, city government
employees who respond to transportation and other accidents/incidents will
receive training designed to help them determine if hazardous materials are
present.
         (c)   Response to a release of hazardous materials.
            1.   Facilities within the city that possess extremely hazardous
materials are required to develop and maintain a procedure that their employees
will follow in the event of a release of those materials.  The city should have
the general outline of such a procedure available, should it be requested by
any of the above facilities.  The procedure consists of immediately contacting
911, advising the dispatcher of the following information:
               a.   A brief description of the incident (Fire, Explosion,
Release);
               b.   Give a specific location (Building number, side of
building);
               c.   Location where emergency vehicles are needed;
               d.   Any injuries;
               e.   Have an employee(s) meet and direct emergency responders,
with appropriate information as to the type of substance (chemical, gas and the
like) involved;
               f.   Contact the Minnesota Duty Officer (651) 649-5451;
               g.   Contact the National Response Center (1-800-424-8802).
In the event that the public is at risk, notification will be made through
media resources.  The procedure should be on file at the New Prague Fire
Department and updated on an annual basis.
            2.   The Scott County Emergency Management Office has conducted a
vulnerability analysis to determine potential populations and facilities which
might be affected by a hazardous materials emergency.  The approaches used to
decide the area of the city likely to be affected were the following: resource
manuals:  (Technical Guidance for Hazardous Analysis, or U.S. DOT Emergency
Response Guidebook), the CAMEO and facility preplan, and/or other systems.
         (d)   Hazardous materials response capabilities.
            1.   Within the city, the New Prague Fire Department has the
primary responsibility for responding to a serious hazardous materials accident
of incident.  Fire Department Personal are trained and equipped to handle the
following type of hazardous materials response;  Level I. 
            2.   In addition, other Mutual Aid Departments may participate in
the response.  These departments will have developed whatever Standard
Operating Guidelines (SOG) they may need in order to carry out the
responsibilities associated with the type of hazard.
            3.   City emergency “first responders” will begin their
determination of the area affected by a hazardous materials release by
identifying/verifying the hazardous materials involved, with the use of CAMEO,
ALOHA, MARPLOT  and the Emergency Response Guidebook.  ARCVIEW will be used to
aid in determining the plume coverage area.
         (e)   A listing of the major emergency equipment and facilities within
the city are located with the Scott County Emergency Management Department.
   (C)   State support.  In the event of other hazardous materials accidents/
incidents that are beyond the capabilities of local government, assistance from
the state hazardous materials response team can be requested.  Such requests
will be submitted to the State Duty Officer through the Scott County Emergency
Management Office.
   (D)   Supporting/reference documents.
      (1)   FEMA Civil Preparedness Guide 1-30.  Guide for the design and
development of a Local Radiological Defense Support System.
      (2)   The National Response Team’s Hazardous Materials Emergency Plan
Guide, and Technical Guidance for Hazard Analysis.
      (3)   U.S. DOT’s Emergency Response Guidebook 2000.
   (E)   Authentication.
   __________________         ______________________________
   Date                  Fire Chief
§ XXIII  ANNEX M, RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ITEMS.
   (A)   Purpose.  To identify and manage agencies and organizations that can
provide assistance to the City of New Prague in the event of a disaster.
   (B)   Responsibilities.
      (1)   It is the responsibility of the City Administrator to maintain
Mutual Aid agreements, memoranda of understanding, and/or letters of agreement
with:
         (a)   Scott County and all jurisdictions within.
         (b)   LeSueur County and all jurisdictions within.
      (2)   Scott County Emergency Management maintains a list of critical
emergency resources that include biological, chemical and radiological
decontamination/detection and monitoring, along with medical supplies and
additional equipment. Also the State Duty Officer may be contacted.
      (3)   A list of the emergency equipment at the (302 facilities) in the
community, along with the person responsible for the equipment, will be
maintained at the Fire Station.
      (4)   The City of New Prague maintains an Emergency Resource Management
List (See attachment #11).
      (5)   The City Administrator with the assistance of a Council Liaison
person will manage donations in the event of a disaster.
   (C)   Policies and procedures.  Mutual Aid agencies along with volunteers
will be directed to the staging area and will be managed and directed by
Incident Command.
   (D)   Authentication.
   ___________________            ______________________________
   Date                     City Administrator
CHAPTER 32:  CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND CHECKS
Section
   
32.01   Purpose
   
32.02   Criminal history background check authorized
   
32.03   Required disclosure
   
32.04   Questioned identity
   
32.05   Positions affected
§ 32.01  PURPOSE.
   The City Council finds that it is in the interest of public safety to
conduct criminal background checks on finalists for positions of employment.
(Ord. 194, passed 5-2-05)
§ 32.02  CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND CHECK AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   The Police Department is authorized to conduct a Minnesota
computerized criminal history and driving record background investigation on
applicants for positions with the city as provided by this section.  This
section applies only to applicants who are finalists for positions with the
city, where the City Administrator has determined that conviction of a crime
may relate directly to the position sought.
   (B)   The Police Department may not perform a background investigation
unless the applicant consents in writing to the investigation and to the
release of the investigation information to the City Administrator and other
staff as is appropriate.
   (C)   An applicant’s failure to provide consent may disqualify the applicant
for the position sought.  The background check will not be used for subsequent
determinations about the individual; a new background check must be run,
requiring consent of the individual.
(Ord. 194, passed 5-2-05)
§ 32.03  REQUIRED DISCLOSURE.
   If the city rejects the applicant’s application due, solely or in part, to
the applicant’s prior conviction of a crime, subject to the exception set forth
in M.S. § 364.09, the City Administrator must notify the applicant in writing
of the following:
   (A)   The grounds and reasons for the rejection;
   (B)   The applicable complaint and grievance procedure set forth in M.S. §
364.06;
   (C)   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment; and
   (D)   That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon
reapplication.
(Ord. 194, passed 5-2-05)
§ 32.04  QUESTIONED IDENTITY.
   This section acknowledges that questioned identity situations may occur and
the city will provide a process to allow for fingerprint verification in cases
where it is not clear if a record based on a name and date of birth search
actually belongs to the person.
(Ord. 194, passed 5-2-05)
§ 32.05  POSITIONS AFFECTED.
   This section shall apply to all positions within city departments, including
those represented by a bargaining unit, full-time, part-time, seasonal,
volunteer and paid on call, and also seasonal positions that are part of a
joint powers agreement.
(Ord. 194, passed 5-2-05)
CHAPTER 33:  OFFICIAL FEE SCHEDULE
Section
   
33.01   Adoption by reference
§ 33.01  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   The City Council hereby adopts by reference an Official Fee Schedule as
required pursuant to M.S. § 462.353.  The Official Fee Schedule shall include
all city license fees, user charges, and permit charges of the city.  The
Official Fee Schedule shall be amended from time to time and on an annual basis
as approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 211, passed 1-9-06)
CHAPTER 34:  SERVICE CHARGES
Section
   
34.01   Charges for emergency services; collection; and collection of unpaid
service charges and fees
§ 34.01  CHARGES FOR EMERGENCY SERVICES; COLLECTION; AND COLLECTION OF UNPAID
SERVICE CHARGES AND FEES.
   (A)   Authority.  This section is adopted pursuant to M.S. §§ 415.01,
366.011, and 366.012, as they may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Charges for emergency services; collection.
      (1)   The city or any other entity of the city (hereinafter collectively
referred to as the “city” throughout this §
34.01) may impose a reasonable service charge for emergency services, including
police, fire, rescue, medical, and related services provided by the city or
contracted for by the city.  If the service charge remains unpaid 30 days after
a notice of delinquency is sent to the recipient of the service or the
recipient’s representative or estate, the city or its contractor on behalf of
the city may use any lawful means allowed to a private party for the collection
of an unsecured delinquent debt.  The city may also use the authority of §
34.01(C) to collect unpaid service charges of this kind from delinquent
recipients of services who are owners of taxable real property in the city, or
areas served by the city for emergency services.
      (2)   The powers conferred by this section are in addition and
supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law for a city to impose a
service charge or assessment for a service provided by the city or contracted
for by the city.
   (C)   Collection of unpaid service charges and fees.  If the city is
authorized to impose a service charge or fee on the owner, lessee, or occupant
of property, or any of them, for a governmental service provided by the city,
the city may certify to the County Auditor, on or before October 15 for each
year, any unpaid services charges or fees which shall then be collected
together with property taxes levied against the property.  A charge or fee may
be certified to the Auditor only if, on or before September 15, the city has
given written notice to the property owner of its intention to certify the
charge or fee to the Auditor.  The service charges or fees shall be subject to
the same penalties, interest, and other conditions provided for the collection
of property taxes.  This section is in addition to any other law authorizing
the collection of unpaid costs and services charges or fees.
(Ord. 239, passed 8-3-09; Am. Ord. 255, passed 3-19-12)
TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
51.   WATERWORKS
      
52.   SEWERS
      
53.   REFUSE
CHAPTER 50:  GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
50.01   Use of water or sewer systems restricted
   
50.02   Application for service; procedure
   
50.03   Charges for service connections
   
50.04   Account billing and collecting
§ 50.01  USE OF WATER OR SEWER SYSTEMS RESTRICTED.
   No person shall make, use or repair any water or sewer service installation
connected to the city water or sewer system except pursuant to application and
permit as provided in this chapter.  No person shall make, use or repair any
water or sewer service installation contrary to the regulatory provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. 157, passed 10-20-80)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.02  APPLICATION FOR SERVICE; PROCEDURE.
   Application for a water or sewer service installation and for water service
shall be made to the City Administrator on forms prescribed by the city and
furnished by the city.  By his or her signature, the applicant shall agree to
conform to this chapter and to rules and regulations that may be established by
the city as conditions for the use of water and sewer hook-ups.
(Ord. 157, passed 10-20-80)
§ 50.03  CHARGES FOR SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   No connection shall be made to the city water or sanitary sewer
without a permit received from the City Administrator.  The fee for the permit
for both water main connections and the permit for sewer connections shall be
as set by the City Council from time to time by resolution.
   (B)   If no certificate can be issued, the applicant shall pay an additional
connection fee equal to the portion of the cost of construction of the main.
(Ord. 157, passed 10-20-80)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.04  ACCOUNT BILLING AND COLLECTING.
   All accounts shall be carried in the name of the owner.  The owner shall be
liable for utilities supplied to his or her property, whether he or she is
occupying the property or not, and any charges unpaid shall be a lien upon the
property.
(Ord. 157, passed 10-20-80)
CHAPTER 51:  WATERWORKS
Section
   
51.01   Shutdown of old water services when unused or unfit for use
   
51.02   Water conservation
§ 51.01  SHUTDOWN OF OLD WATER SERVICES WHEN UNUSED OR UNFIT FOR USE.
   (A)   All water connections and lines from the city's water mains are
considered private connections and lines belonging to the property owner, and
it shall be the property owner's responsibility to maintain the connections and
lines.
   (B)   In the event that water service lines to a building or property are no
longer in service or unfit for future service, it shall be the property owner’s
responsibility to shut down the services at the connection to the city’s water
main.  All expenses incurred are to be the property owner’s responsibility.
   (C)   Deficiency of water and shutting off water.  The city is not liable
for any deficiency or failure in the supply of water to customers whether
occasioned by shutting the water off for the purpose of making repairs or
connections or by any other cause whatever. In case of fire, or alarm of fire,
water may be shut off to insure a supply for the fire fighting. In making
repairs or construction of new works, water may be shut off at any time and
kept off so long as may be necessary.
   (D)   Repair of leaks.  It is the responsibility of the consumer or owner to
maintain the water service from the water main into the house or other
building. In case of failure upon the part of any consumer or owner to repair
any leak occurring in his or her water service within 24 hours after oral or
written notice has been given the owner or occupant of the premises, the water
may be shut off and will not be turned on until a reconnection charge has been
paid and the water service has been repaired.  When the waste of water is great
or when damage is likely to result from the leak, the water will be turned off
if the repair is not proceeded with immediately.
   (E)   Increasing size of water service.  When it is desired to increase the
size of water service from the main, a new permit shall be taken out and the
regular tapping charge shall be made as if this were a new service.
   (F)   Service pipes.  Every service pipe must be laid in such manner as to
prevent rupture by settlement. The service pipe shall be placed not less than
seven feet below the surface in all cases so arranged as to prevent rupture and
stoppage by freezing. Frozen service pipes between the main and the building
shall be the responsibility of the owner. Service pipes must extend from the
curb stops to the inside of the building, or if not taken into a building, then
to the hydrant or other fixtures which they are intended to supply. A valve,
the same size as the service pipe, shall be placed close to the inside wall of
the building, ahead of the meter and well-protected from freezing. Joints on
copper tubing shall be compression-fitted, and kept to a minimum. Not more than
one joint shall be used for a service up to 90  feet in length. All joints
shall be left uncovered until inspected. Minimum size connection with the water
mains shall be one inch in diameter.
   (G)   Private water supplies.  No water pipe of the city water system shall
be connected with any pump, well, pipe, tank or any device that is connected
with any other source of water supply and when such are found, the city shall
notify the owner or occupant to disconnect the same and, if not immediately
done, the city water shall be turned off. Before any new connections to the
city system are permitted, the city shall ascertain that no cross-connections
will exist when the new connections are made. When a building is connected to
the “City Water,” the private water supply may be used only for such purposes
as the city may allow.
   (H)   Opening hydrants.  It is unlawful for any person, other than members
of the Fire Department or other person duly authorized by the city, in
pursuance of lawful purpose, to open any fire hydrant or attempt to draw water
from the same or in any manner interfere therewith. It is also unlawful for any
person so authorized to deliver or suffer to be delivered to any other person
any hydrant key or wrench, except for the purposes strictly pertaining to their
lawful use.
   (I)   Water meters.
      (1)   All water meters shall be purchased and maintained by the city.
Costs for water meters in new construction will be billed to the property owner
as part of the building permit application.  Installation of new meters shall
be the responsibility of the property owner. All repairs to water meters not
resulting from normal usage shall be the responsibility of the property owner.
All repairs due to normal usage and replacement of non-functioning meters shall
be the city's responsibility.
      (2)   After installation of the water meter the city shall do testing of
such meter, from time to time, to determine accuracy. A fee, as determined by
the Commission, shall be imposed upon any consumer who requests a meter change.
If testing of a meter indicates that it registers in excess of 10% error, the
testing fee shall be reimbursed and the charge to the consumer for the billing
period within such test is made, shall be adjusted.
   (J)   Code requirements.  All piping, connections and appurtenances shall be
installed and performed strictly in accordance with the Minnesota Plumbing
Code, and only plumbers or authorized employees of the city shall be permitted
to do any work on service pipes or fixtures connected with the water system.
Plumbers requesting connection shall give notice at least 16 business hours in
advance of his or her need. Failure to install or maintain the same in
accordance therewith, or failure to have or permit required inspections shall,
upon discovery by the city, be an additional ground for termination of water
service to any consumer.
   (K)   Charges and fees.  No water will be turned on until all charges,
deposits and fees are paid in full, including any unpaid usage charges for the
premises.
(Ord. 151, passed 10-4-76; Am. Ord. 224, passed 7-9-07; Am. Ord. 274, passed 7-
21-14)
§ 51.02     WATER CONSERVATION.
   (A)   Water conservation is important and will be observed at all times
through the enforcement of a ban on the use of water outside of any residence,
business, or structure outside of the permitted days or hours. Normal use of
outside water will be at Level One. When the Public Works Director determines
that a shortage of water supply threatens the city, the Public Works Director
may, with the approval of the Mayor, raise the restriction to Level Two or
Three dependent upon the availability of water. A notice containing the
provisions of the upgraded level shall be delivered to each property owner
within the city limits and posted in the official newspaper, on the city's web
site and at City Hall.
   (B)   Level One.  Residents whose house number ends in an odd number shall
water lawns when necessary only on odd-numbered calendar days, and those with
even-numbered addresses shall water lawns on even-numbered days. On those days,
properties shall not water between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
   (C)   Exceptions.  The use of outside water will be permitted for the
watering of shrubs, flowers, plants, and new sod or seed planted within the
previous 30 days. The use of outside water is permitted for the cleaning of
vehicles and any other use needed specifically for sanitary purposes.
Reasonable recreational use of outside water will be permitted. The Fire
Department is exempt from these restrictions when used in the performance of
their duties for the city.
   (D)   Level Two.  The use of outside water is permitted as listed above,
except the permitted days and hours of use shall be set by the Director of
Public Works.  No recreational use of outside water will be permitted.
   (E)   Level Three.  A total ban of the use of all outside water within the
city. No recreational use of outside water will be permitted. The exceptions
listed in Level One will be permitted.
   (F)   Enforcement and citations.  City staff shall enforce this section and
are authorized to issue penalty citations to violators.  Municipal water
customers who have been notified of the said restrictions and who violate the
watering ban, shall be fined $50 on the first day and $100 each additional day.
The penalty shall be added to the property owner's city water bill. The penalty
amount will be set annually with the city's fee schedule.
(Ord. 223, passed 7-9-07)
CHAPTER 52:  SEWERS
Section
Sewer Use Regulations
   
52.01   Definitions
   
52.02   Use of public sewers required
   
52.03   Private sewage disposal
   
52.04   Building sewers and connections
   
52.05   Use of the public sewers
   
52.06   Protection from damage
   
52.07   Power and authority of inspectors
   
52.08   Violations
   
52.09   Adoption of Official Fee Schedule
   
52.10   Sanitary sewer charge calculations
Storm Water Drainage Utility
   
52.20   Storm water drainage utility established
   
52.21   Definition
   
52.22   Determination of storm water drainage fees
   
52.23   Credits
   
52.24   Exemptions
   
52.25   Fee payment procedures
SEWER USE REGULATIONS
§ 52.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD5.  The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20 degrees centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter.  It
represents the breakdown of carbonaceous materials as distinct from nitrogenous
materials.
   BUILDING DRAIN.  That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet, or one and one-half meters, outside the inner face of the
building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER.  The extension from the building drain to the public sewer
or other place of disposal.
   COMBINED SEWER.  A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
   ENGINEER.  The City Engineer or his or her authorized deputy, agent, or
representative.
   GARBAGE.  Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES.  The liquid, gaseous and solid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
Industrial waste may also result from the development, recovery and processing
of natural resources.
   MAY.  The action referred to is permissive.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT.  A permit
issued by the United States Environmental Protection Agency/State Pollution
Control Agency setting limits on pollutant strength that a permitee may legally
discharge into the waters of the U.S. pursuant to the federal and state water
pollution control regulations.
   NATURAL OUTLET.  Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other
body of surface or ground water.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTE.  Wastewater characterized by wastes created
in the preparation of foods, bathing, laundry facilities, and water carried
human waste whose characteristics do not exceed 300 mg/l BOD5 and 325 mg/l TSS,
and is identified for the purpose of determining surcharge rates.
   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
   pH.  The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams
per liter of solution.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE.  The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch, or 1.27 centimeters, in
any dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER.  A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights, and is controlled by public authority.
   SANITARY SEWER.  A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface
and ground waters are not admitted.
   SEWAGE.  A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with any
incidental ground, storm, and surface waters as may be present.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT.  Any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
   SEWAGE WORKS.  All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
   SHALL.  The action referred to is mandatory.
   SLUG.  Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-
hour concentration of flows during normal operation.
   STORM SEWER.  A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage,
but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.
   SUPERINTENDENT.  The Superintendent of sewage works and/or of water
pollution control of the city or his or her authorized deputy, agent, or
representative.
   TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS).  Solids that either float on the surface of,
or are suspended in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, latest edition, and referred to as “non- filterable
residue.”
   WATERCOURSE.  A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
(Ord. 138, passed 10-10-90)
§ 52.02  USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city or in any area under jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet or watercourse
within the city or in any area within the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage
or other polluted waters except where suitable treatment, as defined by state
and federal regulation and/or in accordance with the city’s NPDES permit, has
been provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, holding tank, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage, within the corporate limits of the
city.
   (D)   The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, and which by nature of
its use generates sanitary sewage or other water carried waste which is
amenable to conventional treatment processes, situated within the city and
abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or
may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer, is hereby required at his
or her expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect
the facilities, either new or existing, directly to the proper public sewer in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter within 90 days after date of
official notice by the City Council to do so, provided that the public sewer is
within 100 feet, or 30.48 meters, of the owner’s property line, except where
the City Council determines that the connection is not feasible due to
topography or subsurface conditions.
(Ord. 138, passed 10-10-90)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.03  PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
§
52.02(B) above, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage
disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the city.  The
application for the permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which
the applicant shall supplement with any plans, specifications, and other
information as are deemed necessary by the Engineer or County Board of Health
Officer.  A permit and inspection fee of $100 shall be paid to the city at the
time the application is filed.
   (C)   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city
and/or the County Board of Health Officer.  They shall be allowed to inspect
the work at any stage of construction, and the applicant for the permit shall
notify the city when the work is ready for final inspection before any
underground portions are covered.  The inspection shall be made within 24 hours
of the receipt of the notice.
   (D)   The type, capacities, locations, and layout of a private sewage
disposal system shall comply with State Pollution Control Agency Rule Chapter
7080.  No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system
employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is
less than 15,000 square feet.  No septic tank shall be permitted to discharge
to any natural outlet.
   (E)   At the time a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a
private system, as provided in §
52.02(B), a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 90 days
of notification by the City Council, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and
similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and removed, or
cleaned and filled with clean bank-run gravel.
   (F)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facility in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city.
   (G)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by any officially
recognized health office.
(Ord. 138, passed 10-10-90)
§ 52.04  BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the city.
   (B)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits.  One shall be
for residential and commercial service, and one shall be for service to
establishments producing industrial wastes.  In either case, the owner or his
or her agent shall make an application on a form furnished by the city.  The
permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other
information considered pertinent in the judgement of the city.  A permit and
inspection fee of $25 for a residential or commercial connection and $50 for an
industrial connection shall be paid at the time the application is filed.
   (C)   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.  The owner shall indemnify the
city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by
the installation of the building sewer.
   (D)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard, or driveway.  In this case
the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole considered as one building sewer.  Additional sewer service
availability, tap fee, and a hold harmless clause is necessary for separate
ownership.
   (E)   Existing building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings
only when they are found, on examination and test by the City Inspector, to
meet all the requirements of this chapter.
   (F)   The size, slope, alignment, and materials of construction of a
building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
testing, and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of
the State Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city.
   (G)   Whenever economically possible, the building sewer shall be brought to
the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in
which the building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by the building drain shall be lifted by an approved
means and discharged to the building sewer.
   (H)   No person shall make or have any connection of roof downspouts,
exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff
or groundwater, either directly or indirectly, to a building sewer or building
drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary
sewer.  Foundation drain ground water discharge shall be connected directly to
street underdrains where available.
   (I)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and
regulations of the city.  All building to sewer connections shall be made
gastight and watertight.  Any deviation from these prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the city before installation.
   (J)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the City
Plumbing Inspector when the building sewer is ready for final inspection and
connection to the public sewer.  The connection shall be made under the general
supervision of the City Engineer or his or her representative, or the City
Plumbing Inspector.
   (K)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. 
Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored to as good or better condition than before work
commenced.
   (L)   Future connections to the sewer system shall be limited in accordance
to the availability of sufficient treatment capacity in the publicly owned
treatment works.  The city will determine if the wastewater treatment facility
has sufficient capacity for additional capacity.
   (M)   All sewer connections and lines from the city's sewer mains are
considered private, belonging to the property owner, and it shall be the
property owner's responsibility to maintain the connections and lines.
(Ord. 138, passed 10-10-90; Am. Ord. 199, passed 7-5-05; Am. Ord. 274, passed
7-21-14)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.05  USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Storm water and all other unpolluted waters shall be discharged to the
sewers that are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet
approved by the city.  Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters
may be discharged, on approval of the city, to a storm sewer or natural outlet
subject to approval and the issuance of a discharge permit by the State
Pollution Control Agency.
   (C)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
      (1)   Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are, or may be, sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other
substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the
wastewater disposal system or to the operation of the system.  Prohibited
materials include, but are not limited to gasoline, kerosene, benzene, naptha,
fuel oil, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides,
chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides.
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids,
or gases as defined by Section 307(a) of the Clean Water Act in sufficient
quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or
interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals in spite of treatment, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard
in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not
limited to cyanides in excess of federal and state requirements in the wastes
as discharged to the public sewer.
      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0 or higher than 9.0,
or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment or personnel of the sewage works.
      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of a size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, sanitary napkins,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and fletching, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers and the
like, either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
   (D)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the
opinion of the Engineer and/or Superintendent that the wastes can harm either
the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on
the receiving waters, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or
constitute a nuisance. In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability of
these wastes, the Engineer and/or Superintendent will give consideration to
factors such as the city’s NPDES permit, the quantities of subject wastes in
relation to the flows and velocities in the sewers, materials and construction
of the sewers, nature of the treatment process, capacity of the treatment
plant, degree of treatability of the wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and
other factors deemed pertinent.  The substances prohibited are:
      (1)   Any wastewater that would directly or indirectly result in a
violation of the city’s NPDES permit;
      (2)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F, or 65°
C;
      (3)   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32° and 150° F, or between
0° and 65° C;
      (4)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.  The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths
horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Superintendent or his or her authorized representative;
      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes,
or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not;
      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc,
nickel, lead, cadmium, mercury, cyanide, PCB’s, and similar toxic or
objectionable substances to such a degree that the material received in the
composite sewage at the treatment works exceeds the limits established by the
State Pollution Control Agency for the materials;
      (7)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances in concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other
public agencies of jurisdiction for the discharge to the receiving waters;
      (8)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of a half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent, in compliance with
applicable state and federal regulations;
      (9)   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids such as, but
not limited to Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues, or of dissolved
solids such as, but not limited to sodium chloride and sodium sulfate;
         (b)   Excessive discoloration such as, but not limited to dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions;
         (c)   Unusual BOD5, chemical oxygen demand, or disinfecting
requirements in quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage
treatment works, except by special permit or agreement.
         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
slugs as defined herein.
      (10)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the treatment process employed, or are amenable to
treatment only to a degree that the treatment plant effluent cannot meet the
requirements of the agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge to the
receiving waters.
   (E)   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in divisions (C) and (D) above, and which in the
judgement of the Superintendent and/or Engineer may have a deleterious effect
upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which
otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Engineer
and/or Superintendent may:
      (1)   Reject the wastes;
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
public sewers;
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge;
      (4)   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer service charges under the
provisions of this chapter.
   (F)   If the Engineer and/or Superintendent permits the pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to review and approval by the city and subject to
the requirements of all applicable federal and state codes, ordinances, and
pretreatment standards established pursuant to Section 307 (b) of the Clean
Water Act.
   (G)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing constituents, as described in divisions (C) and (D)
above, in prohibited amounts.  All interceptors shall be of a design approved
by the city and shall be located as to be readily accessible for cleaning and
inspection.
   (H)   Where preliminary treatment or flow equalization facilities are
provided for any wastes or water, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.
   (I)   No user shall increase the use of process water or, in any manner,
attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in divisions (C)
and (D) above, or contained in the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
or any state requirements.
   (J)   When required by the Engineer and/or Superintendent, the owner of any
property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install
a suitable control manhole or manholes together with the necessary meters,
samplers, and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes.  The manhole shall be
easily accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance
with plans approved by the city.  The manhole shall be installed by the owner
at his or her expense, and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe
for use at all times.
   (K)   The owners of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes may, at the discretion of the city, be required to provide
laboratory measurements, tests, or analyses of waters or wastes to illustrate
compliance with this chapter and any special condition for discharge
established by the city or regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the
discharge.  The number, type, and frequency of sampling and laboratory analyses
to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated in writing by the city. 
The industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the
wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with federal, state and local
standards are being met.  The owner shall report the results of measurements
and laboratory analyses to the city at any times and in a manner as prescribed
by the city.  The owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analyses,
and reporting required by the city.  At times as deemed necessary, the city
reserves the right to take its own measurements and samples for analysis by an
independent laboratory.
   (L)   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association. 
Sampling methods, location, times, duration and frequencies are to be
determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the Superintendent and
Engineer.
   (M)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefore by the
industrial concern, providing that National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
and the city’s NPDES and/or state disposal system permit limitations are not
violated, and that payment for the operation, maintenance, and replacement
costs of wastewater treatment is in proportion to the industry’s contribution
of wastewater loadings to the treatment facilities, in accordance with 40 CFR S
35.2140 and this chapter.
(Ord. 138, passed 10-10-90)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.06  PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.
   No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the sewage works.  Any person violating this
provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly
conduct.
(Ord. 138, passed 10-10-90)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.07  POWER AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
   (A)   The Engineer and/or Superintendent and other duly authorized employees
of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
Except in emergency situations, no inspection shall occur without the
permission of the owner. In non-emergency situations, the Engineer and/or
Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city shall obtain an
administrative search warrant before entering any property if the owner refuses
to give permission to enter.  The Superintendent or his or her representatives
shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical,
chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industrial processes considered
the property of the industry beyond that point having a direct bearing on the
kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste
treatment.
   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in division (A) above, the Engineer, Superintendent, or duly authorized
employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the owner, and the owner shall be held harmless for injury or
death to the city employees, and the city shall indemnify the company against
loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims
and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the owner
and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as the same may
be caused by negligence or failure of the owner to maintain safe conditions as
required in §
52.05(J).
   (C)   The Engineer and/or Superintendent and other duly authorized employees
of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all private properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage
works lying within the property.  All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the
property shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated
easement pertaining to the private property involved.
(Ord. 138, passed 10-10-90)
§ 52.08  VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Any person found to be violating any provisions of this chapter, with
the exception of §
52.06, shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of
the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof.  The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
the notice, permanently cease all violations.
   (B)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in division (A) above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on
conviction thereof shall be fined.
   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city
by reason of the violation.
(Ord. 138, passed 10-10-90)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.09  ADOPTION OF OFFICIAL FEE SCHEDULE.
   The City Council hereby adopts by reference an Official Fee Schedule as
required pursuant to M.S. § 462.353.  The Official Fee Schedule shall include
all city license fees, user charges, and permit charges of the city.  The
Official Fee Schedule shall be amended from time to time on an annual basis as
approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 210, passed 12-19-05)
§ 52.10  SANITARY SEWER CHARGE CALCULATIONS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided by statute, or regulated by the city, all
rates and charges for sanitary sewer, including, but not by way of limitation,
rates for service, connection and meter reading fees, disconnection fees,
reconnection fees including penalties for nonpayment, if any, shall be fixed,
determined and amended by the Council and adopted by resolution. Such
resolution, containing the effective date of such resolution, shall be kept on
file and open to inspection in the office of the City Administrator and shall
be uniformly enforced.
   (B)   The water consumption as determined from the water meter shall be the
valid basis for computing the wastewater flow and sanitary sewer service
charges, all as set forth in this section.
   (C)   Sanitary sewer service user charges provided for in this division
shall be included as a separate item on the regular bill for water. Charges
shall be paid at the same time that the water charges of the person become due,
and payment for water services shall not be accepted without payment also of
the sewer service charge.
   (D)   The total charge for sanitary sewer service shall include a monthly
base rate plus a rate per 1,000 gallons of metered water usage as determined by
resolution, and calculated as follows:
      (1)   Residential customers shall be billed using a monthly sanitary
sewer base rate plus a rate per 1,000 gallons of metered water usage as
calculated by using a customer's November, December and January water
consumption and averaging the usage for those three months. However,
residential customers that have a zero water consumption usage in at least one
month during the months of November, December, or January, shall be billed the
city-wide residential "three month water average," or their actual monthly
water consumption, whichever is less.
      (2)   New accounts, builders and landlords shall be billed using their
actual monthly water consumption up to, but not to exceed, the city-wide
residential three-month (November through January) average of water consumption
plus a monthly base rate; until the next sewer calculation period of November
through January and then shall be billed using their three-month water
consumption average.
   (E)   For multiple dwellings in which separate water meters are not provided
for each residential unit, a monthly base rate shall be billed at the rate set
by resolution for each residential unit. Service to more than one sanitary
sewer customer through one water meter under a single billing will be allowed.
The sanitary sewer base rate will be multiplied by the number of residential
units served. The property owner shall receive only one bill for the multiple
occupancies.
   (F)   Commercial and industrial customers shall be billed using their actual
monthly water consumption.
   (G)   Customers may elect to install a secondary water meter at their
personal expense for purposes of irrigation that will not be subject to any
sanitary sewer charges.
(Ord. 266, passed 10-21-13; Am. Ord. 273, passed 6-16-14; Am. Ord. 289, passed
3-21-16)
STORM WATER DRAINAGE UTILITY
§ 52.20  STORM WATER DRAINAGE UTILITY ESTABLISHED.
   The city storm sewer system shall be operated as a public utility pursuant
to M.S. § 444.075, as it may be amended from time to time, from which revenues
will be derived subject to the provisions of this chapter and state statues. 
The storm water drainage utility will be under the administration of the City
Administrator.
(Ord. 178, passed 10-5-92)
§ 52.21  DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENT FACTOR (REF).  One REF is defined as the ratio of the
average volume of runoff generated by one acre of a given land use to the
average volume of runoff generated by one acre of typical single-family
residential land during a standard one-year rainfall event.
(Ord. 178, passed 10-5-92)
§ 52.22  DETERMINATION OF STORM WATER DRAINAGE FEES.
   (A)   Storm water drainage fees for parcels of land shall be determined by
multiplying the REF for a parcel’s land use by the parcel’s acreage and then
multiplying the resulting product by the storm water drainage rate.  The REF
values for various land used are as shown in the following table.
 
Classification Land Use                                             REF
1              Cemeteries, golf courses                             .25
2              Parks with parking facilities                        .75
3              Single-family and duplex residential                 1
4              Public and private schools                           1.25
5              Multiple-family residential, churches and government 2.5
               buildings
6              Commercial, industrial, warehouse                    5
7              Vacant land                                          As assigned
 
   (B)   For the purpose of calculating storm water drainage fees, all
developed single-family and duplex parcels shall be considered to have an
acreage of one-third acre.  The storm water drainage rate shall be as set by
resolution by the City Council.
(Ord. 178, passed 10-5-92)
§ 52.23  CREDITS.
   The Council may adopt policies, recommended by the City Engineer, by
resolution for adjustment of the storm water drainage fee for parcels based
upon hydrologic data to be supplied by the property owner, which data
demonstrates a hydrologic response substantially different from the standards. 
The  adjustment of storm water drainage fees shall not be made retroactively.
(Ord. 178, passed 10-5-92)
§ 52.24  EXEMPTIONS.
   The following land uses are exempt form storm water drainage fees:
   (A)   Public right of ways; and
   (B)   Vacant, unimproved land with ground cover.
(Ord. 178, passed 10-5-92)
§ 52.25  FEE PAYMENT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Statements for storm water drainage fees shall be computed monthly and
shall appear as part of the monthly utility bill from the city utilities.
   (B)   If a property owner or person responsible for paying the storm water
drainage fee questions the correctness of the fee, the person may have the
determination of the charge recomputed by written request to the City Engineer.
   (C)   Each monthly billing for storm water drainage fees not paid when due
shall incur a penalty charge of 10% of the amount past due.
   (D)   Any past due storm water drainage fees in excess of 90 days past due
on October 1 of any year may be certified to the County Auditor for collection
with real estate taxes in the following year, pursuant to M.S. § 444.075,
Subdivision 3, as it may be amended from time to time.  In addition, the city
shall also have the right to bring civil action or to take other legal remedies
to collect unpaid fees.
(Ord. 178, passed 10-5-92)
CHAPTER 53:  REFUSE
Section
   
53.01   Definitions
   
53.02   Collection of refuse and garbage
   
53.03   Vehicles for hauling refuse
   
53.04   Pickup site
   
53.05   License required
   
53.06   Application for license; fee
   
53.07   Revocation of license
   
53.08   Payment
§ 53.01  DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      REFUSE.  Includes any combustible waste material, trade waste, garbage,
paper, leaves or other similar substances as may be defined as refuse in the
State Pollution Control Agency Solid Waste Regulations, SWI (12),  which
definition is hereby adopted by reference pursuant to M.S. § 471.62, as it may
be amended from time to time.
      OPEN BURNING.  The burning of any material whereby the resultant
combustible product is emitted directly into the open atmosphere without
passing through an adequate stack, duct or chimney, in accordance with the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency Regulation 368.2, as amended.
   (B)   No person shall dispose of refuse by open burning, or cause, suffer,
allow or permit open burning of refuse in the city.
(Ord. 144, passed 8-2-71)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.02  COLLECTION OF REFUSE AND GARBAGE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      REFUSE AND GARBAGE.  Includes organic waste, empty metal cans, empty
glass bottles and jars remaining or resulting from the preparation of food for
household use, organic spoiled or decayed food, together with household paper
waste and residential lawn, tree and shrubbery cuttings and trimmings, clothing
and household refuse, and any other rejected or useless items fit only to be
thrown out or away.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of every tenant, lessee, owner or occupant of
every private dwelling house, store, hotel or restaurant, and the owner of
every other type of property and of every other person having refuse which is
on the premises, to at least once a week deposit the refuse with the refuse
collecting service.
      (1)   Garbage and refuse shall be kept in suitable and sufficient cars or
receptacles made of metal or plastic with suitable handles and tight fitting
covers.  The receptacles shall not be of more than a 30-gallon capacity, and
the aggregate weight of each receptacle and contents shall not be more than 75
pounds.  Each of the receptacles shall be maintained and clean, and kept in a
state of repair which will prevent leakage.  Tree branches shall be bound in
bundles not more than two feet in diameter and three feet in length.  All
organic garbage shall be tightly enclosed In a paper bag or wrapper before
depositing the same in the receptacle.
      (2)   No person shall accumulate or permit to accumulate any refuse which
shall constitute a nuisance by reason of appearance, odor, sanitation, possible
littering of neighboring properties or a fire hazard.
(Ord. 144, passed 8-2-71)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.03  VEHICLES FOR HAULING REFUSE.
   All persons hauling or conveying refuse for hire shall haul the same in
suitable vehicles provided with end and sideboards of sufficient height to
prevent any part of the load from falling or leaking into or upon any public
street or alley in the city.  The vehicles shall at all times, except when
loading or unloading, be kept covered with sufficient canvas, metal or wooden
covers.
(Ord. 144, passed 8-2-71)
§ 53.04  PICKUP SITE.
   All pickups of refuse and garbage shall be made in the curb.  The city may
direct other locations as practical.
(Ord. 144, passed 8-2-71)
§ 53.05  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business of refuse collection in the city
unless he or she shall first pay the licensing fee herein prescribed and secure
a license from the city to operate his or her business.
(Ord. 144, passed 8-2-71)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.06  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE.
   (A)   Applications for a license to haul or convey refuse and garbage in and
from the city shall be in writing and be filed with the City Administrator, and
shall state the number of vehicles proposed to be used, the type or name of
unit to be used, the name of the owner or the licensee, the charge which the
person proposes to make for the hauling of refuse and the kind of service
proposed to be given to customers, and the schedule of proposed residential and
business pickups.  Rates to be charged shall be filed with the City
Administrator and made available for public inspection.  The applicant shall
file with his or her application a certificate of liability insurance on each
vehicle involved.  Before the license shall be issued, the licensee shall agree
to hold the city harmless and shall agree to defend and indemnify the city, and
the city’s employees and agents, for any claims, damages, losses, and expenses
related to the work under the license.  The city shall be named as an
additional insured under that insurance for the services provided under the
license.  The licensee’s contract of insurance shall be the primary insurance
for the city and the license or insurance company shall provide a certificate
of insurance which verifies the existence of the insurance required, including
provisions to hold the city harmless and defend and indemnify the city.  The
insurance shall provide coverage up to $300,000 for any single claim and
$1,000,000 for any number of claims in a single occurrence.
   (B)   The annual license fee for the license is $100 for the first vehicle
proposed to be used in the hauling and conveying of refuse and $25 for each
additional vehicle used thereafter.  All licenses shall expire on the thirty-
first day of the thirty-sixth month following the issuance of the license.  One
license may be granted for every 7,000 residents of the city. 
(Ord. 144, passed 8-2-71; Am. Ord. 144A, passed 11-1-82)
§ 53.07  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The license to haul or convey refuse or garbage, after issued, may be
revoked by the City Council without notice in the case of the conviction in a
court of competent jurisdiction of the licensee on a complaint alleging the
violation of this chapter or alleging the violation of the provisions of the
city or the state regarding public health.  Further, the license may be revoked
at any time by the City Council upon a hearing, provided that the licensee
shall be given at least 30 days written notice of the hearing and shall have an
opportunity to appear in person or by agent or attorney and present evidence
relative to the matter under consideration.
(Ord. 144, passed 8-2-71)
§ 53.08  PAYMENT.
   The expense of refuse collection may be paid to the collector monthly by the
owner, agent, occupant, or tenant of the premises from which the refuse is
collected, and the fee as determined therefore shall be separately designated
and added to the monthly statement of the City Utilities Commission, and the
Commission shall monthly remit to the licensee the monies thereby collected.
(Ord. 144, passed 8-2-71)
TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
73.   SNOWMOBILES AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
      
74.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
75.   MOTORIZED GOLF CARTS
CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
70.01   Roller device regulations
§ 70.01  ROLLER DEVICE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The purpose of this section is to protect the public health and safety
arising out of the use of skateboards, roller blades, roller skates and roller
skis within the city.  The City Council finds that there are certain public
streets and public property wherein the operation and use of skateboards,
roller blades, roller skates and roller skis create an unnecessary potential
danger to either the user of the devices or the general public, and that the
use of the devices in an improper manner may cause destruction of property.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ROLLER DEVICE.  Any one of the following devices:
         (a)   ROLLER SKATES AND ROLLER BLADES. A shoe with wheels attached or
a device with wheels which is designed to be attached to a shoe.
         (b)   ROLLER SKIS. A pair of skis platformed with wheels attached
which is intended to simulate skiing.
         (c)   SKATEBOARDS.  A wheeled self-propelled and manually propelled
device to transport a rider, which device is not otherwise secured to the
rider’s feet or shoes.
   (C)   The City Council shall designate streets and public areas prohibited
from roller device use as is necessary.  This section, however, does not
prohibit roller device users from crossing prohibited streets at intersections
marked by a crosswalk.
   (D)   The City Council may, in the future and by resolution, prohibit the
use of devices defined in division (B) above in areas of the city in addition
to those prohibited in Traffic Schedule I upon recommendation of the Chief of
Police or the Parks and Recreation Director.
   (E)   Any person who is using any roller device on any of the streets or
roadways within the city which are not specified as prohibited must observe the
same rules of the road as required of bicycles pursuant to M.S. Chapter
169.222, as it may be amended from time to time.  Violation of this section is
a petty misdemeanor.
(Ord. 177, passed 9-8-92)  Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Exhibition driving prohibited
§ 71.01  EXHIBITION DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall turn, accelerate, decelerate or otherwise operate his or her
vehicle in any manner which creates or causes unnecessary engine noise or
backfire, tires squealing, skidding, sliding or swaying, even if the driving
does not constitute careless or reckless driving under the laws of the state.
(Ord. 150, passed 7-7-75)  Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 72:  PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
72.01   Responsibility of owner
   
72.02   Restricted parking
   
72.03   Limit semi parking
   
72.04   Recreational camping vehicle parking
   
72.05   Parking hours
   
72.06   Vehicle repair on street
   
72.07   Parking for the purpose of advertising or selling merchandise
   
72.08   Traffic control devices
§ 72.01  RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER.
   As to any vehicle parking in violation of Ch. 72, when the driver thereof is
not present, it shall be presumed that the owner or lessee of such vehicle
parked the same, or that the driver was acting as the agent of the owner or
lessee.
(Ord. 221, passed 7-9-07)
§ 72.02  RESTRICTED PARKING.
   (A)   Winter parking restriction. From 2:00 a.m. until 5:00 a.m. of each day
beginning November 1 of each year and until April 1 of the following year, no
motor vehicle, trailer, boat, snowmobile, recreational vehicle, all-terrain
vehicle, or any other vehicle, implement or equipment shall be placed, parked,
or permitted to stand on a public street or publicly-owned parking lot. This
prohibition is not applicable to on-duty city employee parking or to a city
vehicle. Parking is allowed outside of these hours on a public street or
publicly-owned parking lot provided it is not a violation of division (B)
below.
   (B)   Snow removal restriction. At any time during the year no motor
vehicle, trailer, boat, snowmobile, recreational vehicle, all-terrain vehicle,
or any other vehicle, implement or equipment shall be placed, parked, or
permitted to stand on a public street or publicly-owned parking lot, during a
snow event, until the snow has been plowed to the full width of the street
(curb to curb). This prohibition is not applicable to on-duty city employee
parking or to a city vehicle. For the purpose of this section the definition of
SNOW EVENT shall have the following meaning: When two or more inches of snow
has accumulated from a continuous or intermittent snowfall.
   (C)   On a case-by-case basis and after receiving a prior request from an
individual, the Police Department may exempt an individual from the
restrictions provided in division (A) of this section when requested for a
special event, holiday, or a unique circumstance of limited duration.
Exemptions under this division will not be granted when it is already snowing
or when the National Weather Service has forecasted a snow accumulation of two
or more inches for the city.
   (D)   On a case-by-case basis and upon an individual showing of undue
hardship, the Chief of Police, or his or her designee, may modify the
restrictions provided in division (A) of this section to allow an individual to
park on a public street or public alley after the public street or public alley
has been plowed to its full curb-to-curb width.
(Ord. 136A, passed 2-6-67; Am. Ord. 221, passed 7-9-07; Am. Ord. 240, passed 9-
17-09; Am. Ord. 278, passed 2-2-15)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.03  LIMIT SEMI PARKING.
   No person shall park a semi-tractor or trailer in any area of the city
unless it is zoned B-1, B-2, B-3, or I-1.
§ 72.04  RECREATIONAL CAMPING VEHICLE PARKING.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      RECREATIONAL CAMPING VEHICLE.  Any of the following:
         (a)   TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular, portable structure built on a
chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational,
and vacation uses, permanently identified TRAVEL TRAILER by the manufacturer of
the trailer.
         (b)   PICK-UP COACH.  A structure designed to be mounted on a truck
chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation.
         (c)   MOTOR HOME.  A portable, temporary building to be used for
travel, recreation and vacation, constructed as an integral part of a self-
propelled vehicle.
         (d)   CAMPING TRAILER.  A folding structure, mounted on wheels and
designed for travel, recreation and vacation uses.
         (e)   TRAILER.  A motor-less vehicle, including a boat, snowmobile
trailer or utility trailer equipped with one or more wheels and used for
carrying property on its own structure while being drawn by a motor vehicle,
not to include a construction-type trailer which is temporarily being used for
hire at an adjacent property.
   (B)   Unlawful act.  It is unlawful for any person to leave or park a
recreational camping vehicle on or within the limits of any street or right-of-
way for a continuous period in excess of 48 hours, except where signs are
erected designating the place as a campsite or in a mobile home park, provided,
however, that during such 48-hour period, such vehicle shall not be occupied as
living quarters.
(Ord. 221, passed 7-9-07; Am. Ord. 222, passed 7-23-07)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.05  PARKING HOURS.
   Parking on streets shall be limited as follows:
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to stop, park or leave standing any
vehicle upon any street or city- owned parking lot for a continuous period in
excess of 48 hours.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to stop, park or leave standing any
vehicle upon Main St., west city limits to east city limits, between the hours
2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. year-round.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to remove, erase or otherwise obliterate
any mark or sign placed upon a tire or other part of a vehicle by a police
officer for the purpose of measuring the length of time such vehicle has been
parked.
   (D)   For the purpose of enforcement of this section, any vehicle not
removed from a public street or alley for more than 24 hours shall be deemed to
have remained stationary.
(Ord. 221, passed 7-9-07)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.06  VEHICLE REPAIR ON STREET.
   It is unlawful for any person to service, repair, assemble or dismantle any
vehicle parked upon a street, or attempt to do so, except to service such
vehicle with gasoline or oil or to provide emergency repairs thereon, but in no
event for more than 24 hours.
(Ord. 221, passed 7-9-07)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.07  PARKING FOR THE PURPOSE OF ADVERTISING OR SELLING MERCHANDISE.
   It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on any street for the
purpose of advertising such vehicle for sale, for the purpose of advertising
for sale or selling merchandise thereon or therein, or advertising any
merchandise for sale or a forthcoming event.
(Ord. 221, passed 7-9-07)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.08  TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   The Minnesota Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MN MUTCD), as it
may be amended from time to time, that provides a uniform policy for the
placement and design of traffic control devices on all public streets, roads
and highways is hereby adopted by reference.  Traffic control devices shall be
defined as all signs, signals, markings and other devices used to regulate,
warn or guide traffic, placed on, over, or adjacent to a street, highway,
pedestrian facility, or bikeway by authority of a public agency having
jurisdiction.  The city shall install, maintain, relocate, and remove such
traffic control devices as it deems necessary in order to regulate, warn or
guide public traffic in order to promote the public health, safety, and
welfare.  In exercising the authority granted by this section, the Director of
Public Works shall consider such things as traffic volume, street design and
topography, pedestrian and bicycle use, speed of vehicles, and any other
matters related to the movement and safety of pedestrians and traffic.  Except
as otherwise provided by the city code, all traffic control devices installed
by the city must conform to the standards set forth in the MN MUTCD. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, any traffic control device
heretofore authorized and installed by the city shall continue in full force
and effect until removed by the city.  No person shall fail to obey the
instructions of any official traffic control device, sign, signal, or marking
upon any city street or right-of-way unless otherwise directed by a law
enforcement officer.  Any person violating the provisions of this section is
guilty of a petty misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided
by law.
(Ord. 221, passed 7-9-07; Am. Ord. 263, passed 10-15-12)
CHAPTER 73:  SNOWMOBILES AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
Section
   
73.01   Regulation
   
73.02   State snowmobile and all-terrain vehicle laws and statutes adopted
   
73.03   Prohibited operations
   
73.04   Direct crossings
   
73.05   Exceptions to prohibited use of roadways
   
73.06   Hours of operation
   
73.07   Required equipment
   
73.08   Unattended snowmobile or ATV
   
73.09   Minimum age of operator
§ 73.01  REGULATION.
   The use and operation of certain vehicles, commonly called SNOWMOBILES,
meaning a self- propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice steered by
skis or runners, and ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES or ATVs, meaning a motorized
flotation-tired vehicle of not less than three low pressure tires, but not more
than six tires, that is limited in engine displacement of less than 800 cubic
centimeters and total dry weight less than 900 pounds, and also, off-highway
motorcycles (licensed for highway use), amphibious vehicles, and similar
devices other than snowmobiles used at least partially for travel on natural
terrain but not “special mobile equipment” defined in M.S. § 168.011
Subdivision 22, which is hereby incorporated herein by reference, within the
city limits is hereby regulated as set forth in this part.
(Ord. 163, passed 2-16-88; Am. Ord. 209, passed 12-5-05)
§ 73.02  STATE SNOWMOBILE AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE LAWS AND STATUTES ADOPTED.
   (A)   The state snowmobile laws, M.S. §§ 84.81 through 84.915, as they may
be amended from time to time; the game laws relating to the use of snowmobiles,
M.S. §§ 100.26 and 100.29, as they may be amended from time to time; and Minn.
Rules Parts 6100.5000 to 6100.5800, as they may be amended from time to time,
are hereby adopted and made part of this chapter by reference.
   (B)   The state all-terrain vehicle laws, M.S. §§ 84.92 through 84.929, as
they may be amended from time to time; the game laws relating to the use of
all-terrain vehicles, M.S. §§ 100.26 and 100.29, as they may be amended from
time to time; and Minn. Rules Parts 6100.5000 to 6100.5800, as they may be
amended from time to time, are hereby adopted and made part of this chapter by
reference.
(Ord. 163, passed 2-16-88; Am. Ord. 209, passed 12-5-05)
§ 73.03  PROHIBITED OPERATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and punishable for any person to operate a
snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle within the city limits in violation of the
following restrictions:
      (1)   On private property without the permission or consent of the owner
or occupant;
      (2)   On the boulevard of any public street;
      (3)   On a sidewalk, except that a direct crossing may be made in the
same manner as provided for direct crossing of a city street;
      (4)   At a rate of speed in excess of 15 miles per hour;
      (5)   Other than single file on a roadway;
      (6)   Other than at the extreme right-hand side of a roadway along the
curb;
      (7)   On publicly owned land, including school land, park property,
playgrounds, golf courses, and cemeteries;
      (8)   Within 100 feet of any church property, nursing home, hospital,
skating rink or sliding area, or in any other area where the operation would
conflict or interfere with normal use of the property or would endanger persons
or property;
      (9)   To tow any person or object except through use of a rigid tow bar
attached to the rear of the snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle;
      (10)   To intentionally drive, chase, run over, or kill any animal with a
snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle;
      (11)   To operate an ATV on a public street without a valid driver’s
license.
   (B)   It is unlawful for the owner of a snowmobile or an ATV to permit the
snowmobile or ATV to be operated contrary to the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 163, passed 2-16-88; Am. Ord. 209, passed 12-5-05)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.04  DIRECT CROSSINGS.
   It is unlawful to operate a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle upon a roadway
except to make a direct crossing, and only as follows:
   (A)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick
and safe crossing.
   (B)   The snowmobile or ATV is brought to a complete stop before crossing
the shoulder or main traveled way of the highway.
   (C)   The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard.
   (D)   In crossing a divided highway, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of the highway with another public street.
(Ord. 163, passed 2-16-88; Am. Ord. 209, passed 12-5-05)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.05  EXCEPTIONS TO PROHIBITED USE OF ROADWAYS.
   Notwithstanding the prohibition of operating a snowmobile or ATV upon a
roadway to the contrary, the operation is hereby permitted only as follows:
   (A)   From the owner’s residence or place the snowmobile or ATV is generally
stored, in a direct route to and from a place of destination, provided the
place of destination is a place that the snowmobile may be lawfully operated.
   (B)   In an emergency during the period of time when and at locations where
snow upon the roadway renders travel by automobile impractical.
(Ord. 163, passed 2-16-88; Am. Ord. 209, passed 12-5-05)
§ 73.06  HOURS OF OPERATION.
   It is unlawful to operate a snowmobile or ATV within the city from 10:00
p.m. to 7:00 a.m. for any purpose other than in going to or returning from an
evening ride, except in an emergency as defined in §
73.05(B).
(Ord. 163, passed 2-16-88; Am. Ord. 209, passed 12-5-05)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.07  REQUIRED EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      SAFETY OR DEADMAN THROTTLE.  A device which, when pressure is removed
from the engine accelerator or throttle, causes the motor to be disengaged from
the driving mechanism.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile or ATV unless it
is equipped with the following:
      (1)   Standard mufflers which are properly attached and which reduce the
noise of operation of the motor to the minimum necessary for operation.  No
person shall use a muffler cut out, bypass, straight pipe, or similar device on
a snowmobile or ATV motor;
      (2)   Brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold the
snowmobile or ATV under any condition of operation;
      (3)   A safety or so-called deadman throttle in operating condition;
      (4)   When operated between the hours of one-half hour after sunset to
one-half hour before sunrise, or at times of reduced visibility, at least one
clear lamp attached to the front, with sufficient intensity to reveal persons
and vehicles at a distance of at least 100 feet ahead during the hours of
darkness under normal atmospheric conditions.  The headlamp shall be so aimed
that glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of an oncoming snowmobile or
ATV operator.  It shall also be equipped with at least one red tail lamp having
a minimum candle power of sufficient intensity to exhibit a red light plainly
visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear during hours of darkness under
normal atmospheric conditions;
      (5)   Reflective materials at least 16 square inches on each side,
forward of the handlebars, or steering device of a snowmobile or ATV, and at
the highest practical point on any towed object, so as to reflect light at a 90
degree angle.
(Ord. 163, passed 2-16-88; Am. Ord. 209, passed 12-5-05)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.08  UNATTENDED SNOWMOBILE OR ATV.
   Every person leaving a snowmobile or ATV unattended shall lock the ignition
and remove the key from the ignition and take the keys with them.
(Ord. 163, passed 2-16-88; Am. Ord. 209, passed 12-5-05)
§ 73.09  MINIMUM AGE OF OPERATOR.
   No person under the age of fourteen years shall operate a snowmobile on any
public land in the city. A person 14 years of age or older, but less than 18
years of age, may operate a snowmobile on streets and highways as permitted
under this chapter, and make a direct crossing of streets and highways only if
he or she has in his or her immediate possession a valid snowmobile safety
certificate issued by the Commissioner, and then only for purposes of travel
between his or her home, or the home location of the snowmobile, and a point
outside the city.  This travel must be accomplished by the shortest distance,
taking the most direct route while complying with applicable laws.
(Ord. 163, passed 2-16-88)  Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 74:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   I.   Prohibited streets for roller device use
SCHEDULE I.  PROHIBITED STREETS FOR ROLLER DEVICE USE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to propel himself or herself upon a
roller device, as defined in §
70.01, on the following streets, adjoining sidewalk, and public parking lots in
the city.  Violation is a petty misdemeanor.
 
Street                   Location
Highway 19 (Main Street) From Columbus Avenue, west to Highway 21 (Fourth
                         Avenue)
Central Avenue North     From Main Street to First Street North
First Street Northwest   Between Central Avenue and First Avenue N.W.
                         (emergency vehicle exits)
 
(Ord. 177, passed 9-8-92)  Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 75:  MOTORIZED GOLF CARTS
Section
   
75.01   Definitions
   
75.02   Permit required
   
75.03   Permits
   
75.04   Occupants
   
75.05   Designated roadways and intersections
   
75.06   Times of operation
   
75.07   Application of traffic laws
   
75.08   Slow moving vehicle emblem
   
75.09   Operation
   
75.10   Operation on sidewalks and trails
   
75.11   Suspension or revocation of a permit
   
75.12   Penalty
   
75.13   No assumption of liability
§ 75.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMUNITY EVENT.  An event organized by the city or a community-based
organization that is open to the general public.
   MOTORIZED GOLF CART.  An electric or gas-powered vehicle with four wheels
used primarily for light terrain slow moving operation.
(Ord. 241, passed 2-16-10)
§ 75.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate a motorized golf cart on streets in
the city without first obtaining a permit as provided herein. Persons who
obtain a permit as required below are authorized to operate a motorized golf
cart on designated roadways or portions thereof under the jurisdiction of the
city. With the exception of motorized golf carts that are being operated in
connection with a community event, every motorized golf cart operator must have
proof of insurance in possession while operating the motorized golf cart on
designated streets and shall produce such proof of insurance on demand of a
police officer as specified in M.S. § 169.791.
(Ord. 241, passed 2-16-10)  Penalty, see §
75.12
§ 75.03  PERMITS.
   (A)   Operator permits. All persons operating motorized golf carts that are
not being operated in connection with a community event must obtain an annual
operator permit from the city.
      (1)   Application.  The application shall be made on a form supplied by
the city and shall contain the following:
         (a)   The name and address of the applicant;
         (b)   The make, model name, year and serial number of the motorized
golf cart;
         (c)   The applicant's driver's license number;
         (d)   Proof of insurance complying with M.S. § 65B.48;
         (e)   Payment of an annual permit fee. The amount of the fee shall be
established from time to time by resolution of the City Council; and
         (f)   Such other information as the city may require.
      (2)   Term of permit.  Operator permits shall be granted for a period of
one year and may be renewed annually. Operator permits shall expire on December
31 of each year.
      (3)   Operator permit conditions. No operator permit shall be granted or
renewed unless the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The city is in receipt of a complete application and permit fee
as provided by this chapter;
         (b)   The applicant is over the age of 16 and provides a valid
driver's license;
         (c)   The applicant provides proof of insurance in compliance with
M.S. § 65B.48; and
         (d)   The motorized golf cart is in good working condition and safe
for the transportation of passengers.
      (4)   Operator permit display.  All operator permits shall be issued for
a specific motorized golf cart. A current city-issued operator permit tag shall
be plainly visible from the front of the motorized golf cart.
   (B)   Community event permits.  Operators of motorized golf carts in
connection with a community event are not required to obtain individual
operator permits so long as a community event permit is obtained by the
organizer of the community event from the city. The community event permit will
include all motorized golf carts being used in connection with the event.
      (1)   Application.  Every application for a community event permit under
this chapter shall be made on a form supplied by the city and shall contain the
following:
         (a)   The name and address of the organizer of the community event;
         (b)   A description of the community event, including how and where
the motorized golf carts will be utilized;
         (c)   The number of motorized golf carts to be used in the event;
         (d)   Proof of insurance in a form and amount acceptable to the city;
         (e)   Payment of a community event permit fee. The amount of the
permit fee shall be established from time to time by resolution of the City
Council; and
         (f)   Such other information as the city may require.
      (2)   Term of permit.  Community event permits shall be granted for the
length of the event and shall expire upon the conclusion of the event.
      (3)   Conditions of permit.  No community event permit shall be granted
unless the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The city is in receipt of a complete application and permit fee
as provided by this chapter; and
         (b)   The organizer must provide proof of insurance in a form and
amount acceptable to the city.
(Ord. 241, passed 2-16-10)  Penalty, see §
75.12
§ 75.04  OCCUPANTS.
   The number of occupants in the motorized golf cart shall not exceed the
design occupant load. Each occupant must be seated in a seat designed for
occupants.
(Ord. 241, passed 2-16-10)  Penalty, see §
75.12
§ 75.05  DESIGNATED ROADWAYS AND INTERSECTIONS.
   Motorized golf carts may be operated within the city on public roadways.
Motorized golf carts must not be operated on State Trunk Highways or county
roads, unless the road or highway is under the city's jurisdiction through the
issuance of a permit or approval to the city from the county or the Minnesota
Department of Transportation and the cart is listed on the community event
permit issued by the city. The operator of any motorized golf cart may make a
direct crossing of any intersecting roadways. Operators must exercise all due
care to avoid travel on roadways with a high frequency of automobile usage.
(Ord. 241, passed 2-16-10)  Penalty, see §
75.12
§ 75.06  TIMES OF OPERATION.
   Motorized golf carts may only be operated on designated roadways from
sunrise to sunset. They shall not be operated in inclement weather or when
visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog or other conditions, or at any
time when there is insufficient light to clearly see persons and vehicles on
the roadway at a distance of 500 feet.
(Ord. 241, passed 2-16-10)  Penalty, see §
75.12
§ 75.07  APPLICATION OF TRAFFIC LAWS.
   Persons operating motorized golf carts on designated roadways have all the
rights and duties applicable to drivers of any other motor vehicle under the
provisions of any ordinance of the city and M.S. Chapter 169, except when these
provisions cannot reasonably be applied to motorized golf carts and except that
provisions of M.S. Chapter 171 are not applicable to persons operating
motorized golf carts under permit on designated roadways. Except for M.S. §
169.70, the provisions of M.S. Chapter 169 relating to equipment on vehicles is
not applicable to motorized golf carts operating under permit on designated
roadways.
(Ord. 241, passed 2-16-10)
§ 75.08  SLOW MOVING VEHICLE EMBLEM.
   Motorized golf carts shall display the slow moving vehicle emblem provided
in M.S. § 169.522, when operated on designated roadways.
(Ord. 241, passed 2-16-10)  Penalty, see §
75.12
§ 75.09  OPERATION.
   Motorized golf carts shall be operated at all times as close to the right-
hand curb as possible, except when the driver is making a left-hand turn.
(Ord. 241, passed 2-16-10)  Penalty, see §
75.12
§ 75.10  OPERATION ON SIDEWALKS AND TRAILS.
   No person shall operate a motorized golf cart on a public sidewalk or trail
unless otherwise authorized by the city.
(Ord. 241, passed 2-16-10)  Penalty, see §
75.12
§ 75.11  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF A PERMIT.
   The Chief of Police may suspend or revoke a permit granted hereunder upon a
finding that the permit holder has violated any of the provisions of this
chapter or M.S. Chapter 169, or if there is evidence that the operator cannot
safely operate the motorized golf cart on designated roadways. A suspension or
revocation may be reviewed by appeal to the City Council.
(Ord. 241, passed 2-16-10)
§ 75.12  PENALTY.
   In addition to the revocation or suspension of the permit, any person
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 241, passed 2-16-10)
§ 75.13  NO ASSUMPTION OF LIABILITY.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as an assumption of liability by
the city for injuries to persons or property which may result from the
operation of any motorized golf cart by a permit holder or the failure by the
Chief of Police or City Council to suspend or revoke a permit.
(Ord. 241, passed 2-16-10)
TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMAL REGULATIONS
      
91.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
92.   PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY MATTERS; PUBLIC NUISANCES
      
93.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
94.   PREDATORY OFFENDER RESIDENCY REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 90:  ANIMAL REGULATIONS
Section
   
90.01   Compliance required
   
90.02   Running at large prohibited
   
90.03   License required; application
   
90.04   Properly displayed tags required
   
90.05   Vaccination against rabies
   
90.06   Nuisances
   
90.07   Quarantine of certain dogs
   
90.08   Control of feces
   
90.09   Dangerous animals
   
90.10   Dangerous animal requirements
   
90.11   Impounding
   
90.12   Release of dog from designated pound
   
90.13   Keeping of non-domesticated and farm animals prohibited
Cross-reference:
   Animals in parks, see §
91.01
§ 90.01  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   No dog or cat, male or female, shall be owned or kept by any person or
persons, company or corporation within the limits of the city unless the owner
or owners of the same or the person or persons who harbor the same comply with
the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 164A, passed - -89; Am. Ord. 206, passed 11-7-05)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.02  RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for the dog or cat of any person who owns, harbors, or
keeps a dog or cat, to run at large. A person, who owns, harbors, or keeps a
dog or cat which runs at large shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.  Dogs or cats
on a leash and accompanied by a responsible person or accompanied by and under
the control and direction of a responsible person, so as to be effectively
restrained by command as by leash, shall be permitted in streets or on public
land unless the city has posted an area with signs reading “Dogs Prohibited.”
(Ord. 164A, passed - -89; Am. Ord. 206, passed 11-7-05)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.03  LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person or other possessor of a dog over six
months of age to fail to obtain a proper city license therefor.  It shall be
the duty of the owner or possessor of a dog to obtain a license immediately on
acquiring the animal.  The owner of any dog picked up by the city without
license shall be subject to a penalty.
   (B)   The owner or persons harboring any dog or dogs within the city limits
in each year on the 15th day of April shall pay as a license fee thereof to the
City Administrator the sum of $5 annually for each dog or other amount as may
be established by City Council resolution.  The City Administrator, upon
receipt of the fee, shall issue to the person or persons paying the fee a
written receipt therefor, specifying the name, color, sex and breed of the dog
for which the fee has been paid.  The City Administrator shall also furnish to
the person tendering the fee a metallic place with a number thereon, together
with the year for which the tag is issued and valid, and the tag is to be
affixed on the collar above the dog’s neck.  The City Administrator shall keep
a record of all dog fees received and tags issued with the name of the person
to whom it was issued.
(Ord. 164A, passed - -89)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.04  PROPERLY DISPLAYED TAGS REQUIRED.
   All licensed dogs shall wear a collar and have a license, along with proof
of current rabies vaccination, firmly affixed to the collar.
(Ord. 164A, passed - -89)
§ 90.05  VACCINATION AGAINST RABIES.
   All dogs shall be vaccinated against rabies by a veterinarian duly licensed
in the state.  It is the duty of the owner of the animal to keep inoculations
current.  Any owner of a dog found not to have current rabies vaccination shall
be in violation of this chapter and subject to a petty misdemeanor.
(Ord. 164A, passed - -89)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.06  NUISANCES.
   The owner or custodian of any dog or cat shall prevent the dog or cat from
committing any of the following nuisances: habitually barking or crying,
frequenting school grounds and parks, chasing vehicles, molesting or annoying
any person away from the property of his or her owner or custodian, or to
damage, defile, or destroy public or private property.  Habitual barking or
crying shall be defined as barking or crying for repeated intervals of at least
five minutes with less than one minute of interruption. The barking or crying
must also be audible off of the owner’s or caretaker’s premises. Failure of the
owner or custodian to prevent the dog or cat from committing any of these
nuisances is in violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 164A, passed - -89; Am. Ord. 206, passed 11-7-05)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.07  QUARANTINE OF CERTAIN DOGS.
   Any dog which bites a person shall be quarantined for at least ten days by
the Animal Warden at the designated city pound at the owner’s expense.
(Ord. 164A, passed - -89)
§ 90.08  CONTROL OF FECES.
   It is unlawful for any owner or custodian of a dog to allow the animal to
drop and leave feces on any public or private property within the city.
(Ord. 164A, passed - -89)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.09  DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   Attack by an animal.  It shall be unlawful for any person’s animal to
inflict or attempt to inflict bodily injury to any person or other animal
whether or not the owner is present. This section shall not apply to an attack
by a dog under the control of an on-duty law enforcement officer or to an
attack upon an uninvited intruder who has entered the owner’s home with
criminal intent.
   (B)   Destruction of dangerous animal.  The Animal Control Officer shall
have the authority to order the destruction of dangerous animals in accordance
with the terms established by this chapter.
   (C)   Definitions.    For the purpose of this division, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      DANGEROUS ANIMAL.  An animal which has:
         (a)   Caused bodily injury or disfigurement to any person on public or
private property;
         (b)   Engaged in any attack on any person under circumstances which
would indicate danger to personal safety;
         (c)   Exhibited unusually aggressive behavior, such as an attack on
another animal;
         (d)   Bitten one or more persons on two or more occasions; or
         (e)   Been found to be potentially dangerous and/or the owner has
personal knowledge of the same, the animal aggressively bites, attacks, or
endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals.
      POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMAL.  An animal which has:
         (a)   Bitten a human or a domestic animal on public or private
property;
         (b)   When unprovoked, chased or approached a person upon the streets,
sidewalks, or any public property in an apparent attitude of attack; or
         (c)   Has engaged in unprovoked attacks causing injury or otherwise
threatening the safety of humans or domestic animals.
      PROPER ENCLOSURE. Securely confined indoors or in a securely locked pen
or structure suitable to prevent the animal from escaping and to provide
protection for the animal from the elements. A proper enclosure does not
include a porch, patio, or any part of a house, garage, or other structure that
would allow the animal to exit of its own volition, or any house or structure
in which windows are open or in which door or window screens are the only
barriers which prevent the animal from exiting. The enclosure shall not allow
the egress of the animal in any manner without human assistance. A pen or
kennel shall meet the following minimum specifications:
         (a)   Have a minimum overall floor size of 32 square feet.
         (b)   Sidewalls shall have a minimum height of five feet and be
constructed of 11-gauge or heavier wire. Openings in the wire shall not exceed
two inches, support posts shall be 1¼-inch or larger steel pipe buried in the
ground 18 inches or more. When a concrete floor is not provided, the sidewalls
shall be buried a minimum of 18 inches in the ground.
         (c)   A cover over the entire pen or kennel shall be provided. The
cover shall be constructed of the same gauge wire or heavier as the sidewalls
and shall also have no openings in the wire greater than two inches.
         (d)   An entrance/exit gate shall be provided and be constructed of
the same material as the sidewalls and shall also have no openings in the wire
greater than two inches. The gate shall be equipped with a device capable of
being locked and shall be locked at all times when the animal is in the pen or
kennel.
      UNPROVOKED. The condition in which the animal is not purposely excited,
stimulated, agitated or disturbed.
   (D)   Designation as potentially dangerous animal. The Animal Control
Officer shall designate any animal as a potentially dangerous animal upon
receiving evidence that the potentially dangerous animal has, when unprovoked,
then bitten, attacked, or threatened the safety of a person or a domestic
animal as stated in division (C)(2). When an animal is declared potentially
dangerous, the Animal Control Officer shall cause one owner of the potentially
dangerous animal to be notified in writing that the animal is potentially
dangerous.
   (E)   Evidence justifying designation. The Animal Control Officer shall have
the authority to designate any animal as a dangerous animal upon receiving
evidence of the following:
      (1)   That the animal has, when unprovoked, bitten, attacked, or
threatened the safety of a person or domestic animal as stated in division (C)
(1).
      (2)   That the animal has been declared potentially dangerous and the
animal has then bitten, attacked, or threatened the safety of a person or
domestic animal as stated in division (C)(1).
   (F)   Authority to order destruction. The Animal Control Officer, upon
finding that an animal is dangerous hereunder, is authorized to order, as part
of the disposition of the case, that the animal be destroyed based on a written
order containing one or more of the following findings of fact:
      (1)   The animal is dangerous as demonstrated by a vicious attack, an
unprovoked attack, an attack without warning or multiple attacks; or
      (2)   The owner of the animal has demonstrated an inability or
unwillingness to control the animal in order to prevent injury to persons or
other animals.
   (G)   Procedure. The Animal Control Officer, after having determined that an
animal is dangerous, may proceed in the following manner:  The Animal Control
Officer shall cause one owner of the animal to be notified in writing or in
person that the animal is dangerous and may order the animal seized or make
orders as deemed proper. This owner shall be notified as to dates, times,
places and parties bitten, and shall be given 14 days to appeal this order by
requesting a hearing before the City Council for a review of this
determination.
      (1)   If no appeal is filed, the orders issued will stand or the Animal
Control Officer may order the animal destroyed.
      (2)   If an owner requests a hearing for determination as to the
dangerous nature of the animal, the hearing shall be held before the City
Council, which shall set a date for hearing not more than three weeks after
demand for the hearing. The records of the Animal Control or City Clerk’s
office shall be admissible for consideration by the Animal Control Officer
without further foundation. After considering all evidence pertaining to the
temperament of the animal, the City Council shall make an order as it deems
proper. The City Council may order that the Animal Control Officer take the
animal into custody for destruction, if the animal is not currently in custody.
If the animal is ordered into custody for destruction, the owner shall
immediately make the animal available to the Animal Control Officer.
      (3)   No person  shall harbor an animal after it has been found by to be
dangerous and ordered into custody for destruction.
   (H)   Stopping an attack. If any police officer or Animal Control Officer is
witness to an attack by an animal upon a person or another animal, the officer
may take whatever means the officer deems appropriate to bring the attack to an
end and prevent further injury to the victim.
   (I)   Notification of new address. The owner of an animal which has been
identified as dangerous or potentially dangerous shall notify the Animal
Control Officer in writing if the animal is to be relocated from its current
address or given or sold to another person. The notification shall be given in
writing at least 14 days prior to the relocation or transfer of ownership. The
notification shall include the current owner’s name and address, the relocation
address, and the name of the new owner, if any.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.10  DANGEROUS ANIMAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Requirements. If the City Council does not order the destruction of an
animal that has been declared dangerous, the City Council may, as an
alternative, order any or all of the following:
      (1)   That the owner provide and maintain a proper enclosure for the
dangerous animal as specified in §
90.09(C)(3);
      (2)   Post the front and the rear of the premises with clearly visible
warning signs, including a warning symbol to inform children, that there is a
dangerous animal on the property as specified in M.S. § 347.51 as it may be
amended from time to time;
      (3)   Provide and show proof annually of public liability insurance in
the minimum amount of $300,000;
      (4)   If the animal is a dog and is outside the proper enclosure, the dog
must be muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash (not to exceed
six feet in length) and under the physical restraint of a person 16 years of
age or older. The muzzle must be of a design as to prevent the dog from biting
any person or animal, but will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with
its vision or respiration;
      (5)   If the animal is a dog, it must have an easily identifiable,
standardized tag identifying the dog as dangerous affixed to its collar at all
times as specified in M.S. § 347.51 as it may be amended from time to time;
      (6)   All animals deemed dangerous by the Animal Control Officer shall be
registered with the county in which this city is located within 14 days after
the date the animal was so deemed and provide satisfactory proof thereof to the
Animal Control Officer.
      (7)   If the animal is a dog, the dog must be licensed and up to date on
rabies vaccination. If the animal is a cat or ferret, it must be up to date
with rabies vaccination.
   (B)   Seizure. The Animal Control Officer shall immediately seize any
dangerous animal if the owner does not meet each of the above requirements
within 14 days after the date notice is sent to the owner that the animal is
dangerous. Seizure may be appealed to district court by serving a summons and
petition upon the city and filing it with the district court.
   (C)   Reclaiming animals. A dangerous animal seized under division (B)
above  may be reclaimed by the owner of the animal upon payment of impounding
and boarding fees and presenting proof to animal control that each of the
requirements under division (B) above is fulfilled. An animal not reclaimed
under this section within 14 days may be disposed of as provided under §
90.09(F), and the owner is liable to the city for costs incurred in confining
and impounding the animal.
   (D)   Subsequent offenses. If an owner of an animal has subsequently
violated the provisions under §
90.09 with the same animal, the animal must be seized by animal control. The
owner may request a hearing as defined in §
90.09(F). If the owner is found to have violated the provisions for which the
animal was seized, the Animal Control Officer shall order the animal destroyed
in a proper and humane manner and the owner shall pay the costs of confining
the animal. If the person is found not to have violated the provisions for
which the animal was seized, the owner may reclaim the animal under the
provisions of division (C) above. If the animal is not yet reclaimed by the
owner within 14 days after the date the owner is notified that the animal may
be reclaimed, the animal may be disposed of as provided under §
90.09(F) and the owner is liable to the animal control for the costs incurred
in confining, impounding and disposing of the animal.
§ 90.11  IMPOUNDING.
   Any dog found in the city without a tag or dog or cat running at large shall
be placed in the city pound.  Any cat or dog found in violation of this chapter
may be impounded.  All animals conveyed to the pound shall be kept, with humane
treatment and sufficient food and water for their comfort, at least five
regular business days, unless the animal is a dangerous animal as defined under
§
90.09 in which case it shall be kept for seven regular business days or the
times specified in §
90.09, and except if the animal is a cruelly-treated animal in which case it
shall be kept for ten regular business days, unless sooner reclaimed by their
owners or keepers as provided by this section. In case the owner or keeper
shall desire to reclaim the animal from the pound, the following shall be
required, unless otherwise provided for in this code or established from time
to time by resolution of the City Council.  Any animal which is not claimed
within five days after impounding may be sold to anyone desiring to purchase
the animal.  If unclaimed, the animal will be humanely destroyed and the
carcass disposed of unless it is requested by a licensed educational or
scientific institution under authority of M.S. § 35.71, as it may be amended
from time to time.
(Ord. 164A, passed - -89; Am. Ord. 206, passed 11-7-05)
§ 90.12  RELEASE OF DOG FROM DESIGNATED POUND.
   Dogs or cats shall be released to their owners or persons previously in
possession of them upon a sworn statement of ownership, proof that a license
has been issued for the impounded dog, proof that rabies inoculation is current
for a dog, and payment of impounding fees for the animal.
(Ord. 164A, passed - -89; Am. Ord. 206, passed 11-7-05)
§ 90.13  KEEPING OF NON-DOMESTICATED AND FARM ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      FARM ANIMALS. Those animals commonly associated with a farm or performing
work in an agricultural setting. Farm animals include, but are not limited to
members of the equestrian family (horses, mules), bovine family (cows, bulls),
sheep, poultry (chickens, roosters, turkeys), fowl (ducks, geese), swine
(including Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs), goats, bees and other animals
associated with a farm, ranch or stable.
      NON-DOMESTICATED ANIMAL.  Any wild animal, reptile or fowl which is not
naturally tame or gentle but is of a wild nature or disposition and which,
because of its size, vicious nature or other characteristics would constitute a
danger to human life or property.
   (B)   No person shall keep, maintain or harbor within the city any of the
following animals:
      (1)   Any animal or species prohibited by state or federal law; and/or
      (2)   Any non-domesticated animal or species, including but not limited
to the following:
         (a)   Any skunk, whether captured in the wild, domestically raised,
descented or not descented, vaccinated against rabies or not vaccinated against
rabies;
         (b)   Any large cat of the family Felidae such as lions, tigers,
jaguars, leopards, cougars and ocelots, except commonly accepted domesticated
house cats;
         (c)   Any member of the family Canidae, such as wolves, foxes,
coyotes, dingos and jackals, except domesticated dogs;
         (d)   Any crossbreed such as the crossbreeds between dogs and coyotes
or dogs and wolves, but does not include crossbred domesticated animals;
         (e)   Any poisonous pit viper such as a rattlesnake, coral snake,
water moccasin or cobra;
         (f)   Any raccoon;
         (g)   Any ferret;
         (h)   Any other animal which is not listed explicitly above, but which
can be reasonably defined as prohibited by the terms of this subchapter,
including bears and badgers.
      (3)   Any farm animals as defined in this section.
(Ord. 164A, passed - -89; Am. Ord. 288, passed 3-7-16)  Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 91:  PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
91.01   Use and occupancy of public parks and recreation areas
§ 91.01  USE AND OCCUPANCY OF PUBLIC PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS.
   The use and occupancy of public parks and recreation areas within the city
shall be subject to the following regulations:
   (A)   All public parks and recreation areas shall be closed between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.  The park and recreation areas shall not be
occupied by any persons during the above hours, except city personnel or other
authorized personnel of the Park Department.
   (B)   Overnight parking shall be prohibited in park and recreation areas.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in obscene, offensive,
or abusive language or boisterous and noisy conduct tending reasonably to
arouse alarm, anger, or resentment of others.
   (D)   Pets must be kept leashed or under control.  No person in any park or
recreation area shall hunt, harm, kill or trap any animal.  Horses shall only
be permitted on or beside park and recreation roadways.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully mark, deface, tamper
with, displace, or remove any buildings, bridges, playground equipment, tables,
benches, grills, railings, pavement, public utilities, trees, shrubbery, signs,
monuments, stakes, posts, equipment, facilities or park property or apertures,
whatsoever either real or personal.
   (F)   Drivers shall confine the operation of motorized vehicles to roads,
parking areas, or other areas specifically designated as areas for parking.
   (G)   The provisions for liquor and beer in parks and recreation areas are
as follows:
      (1)   Liquor and beer sales and consumption are prohibited in the
playground areas of all park and recreation areas.
      (2)   In all other park and recreation areas, glass bottles and kegs are
prohibited.
      (3)   Temporary 3.2% malt liquor licenses issued pursuant to §
110.15(H) are required for all groups using the park or recreation areas in
conjunction with a special event or tournament where 3.2% malt liquor is to be
sold.  Temporary 3.2% malt liquor licenses issued pursuant to §
110.15(H) shall be issued by the City Council only to a club, charitable,
religious or nonprofit organization.  There shall be a $25 application fee for
on-sale liquor licenses.
   (H)   No firearms, b.b. guns, air rifles, archery, sling shots, explosives,
or fireworks shall be brought into or used in park areas, except that archery
will be allowed in designated park areas only.
   (I)   No advertising, unapproved selling or commercial solicitation is
allowed in park or recreation areas.
(Ord. 175, passed 4-2-90; Am. Ord. 220, passed 7-23-07)  Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 92:  PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY MATTERS; PUBLIC NUISANCES
Section
Tree Diseases and Infestations
   
92.01   Tree diseases and infestations
Nuisances
   
92.15   General public nuisances
   
92.16   Public nuisances affecting health
   
92.17   Public nuisances affecting morals and decency
   
92.18   Public nuisances affecting peace and safety
Tall Grass and Weeds
   
92.35   Legislative intent
   
92.36   Definitions
   
92.37   Nuisance declared
   
92.38   Exemptions
   
92.39   Natural landscape permits
General Provisions
   92.50   Nuisance abatement procedure
Open Burning
   
92.60   Definitions
   
92.61   Prohibited materials
   
92.62   Permit required for open burning
   
92.63   Purposes allowed for open burning
   
92.64   Permit application for open burning; permit fees
   
92.65   Permit process for open burning
   
92.66   Permit holder responsibility
   
92.67   Revocation of open burning permit
   
92.68   Denial of open burning permit
   
92.69   Burning ban or air quality alert
   
92.70   Rules and laws adopted by reference
TREE DISEASES AND INFESTATIONS
§ 92.01  TREE DISEASES AND INFESTATIONS.
   (A)   Trees constituting nuisance declared.  The following are public
nuisances whenever they may be found within the city:
      (1)   Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected to any
degree with the Dutch Elm disease fungus Ceratocystis Ulmi (Buisman) Moreau or
which harbors any of the elm bark beetles Scolytus Multistriatus (Eichh.) or
Hylungopinus Rufipes (Marsh);
      (2)   Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including branches, stumps,
firewood or other elm material from which the bark has not been removed and
burned or sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle insecticide;
      (3)   Any living or standing oak tree or part thereof infected to any
degree with the Oak Wilt fungus Ceratocystis fagacearum;
      (4)   Any dead oak tree or part thereof which in the opinion of the
designated officer constitutes a hazard, including but not limited to logs,
branches, stumps, roots, firewood or other oak material which has not been
stripped of its bark and burned or sprayed with an effective fungicide;
      (5)   Any other shade tree with an epidemic disease or infestation of
pests which affects the health of a tree, including but not limited to Emerald
Ash Borer (EAB); and
      (6)   Any tree, branch or part thereof which in the opinion of the city
constitutes a public safety hazard within the public right-of-way.
(Am. Ord. 255, passed 3-19-12)  Penalty, see §
10.99
NUISANCES
§ 92.15  GENERAL PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   Whoever by his or her act or failure to perform a legal duty intentionally
does any of the following is guilty of maintaining a public nuisance, which is
a misdemeanor:
   (A)   Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys, injures or
endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort or repose of any considerable
number of members of the public;
   (B)   Interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous for passage any public
highway or right-of-way, or waters used by the public; or
   (C)   Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law or §§
92.16, 92.17 or 92.18, or any other part of this code to be a public nuisance
and for which no sentence is specifically provided.
(Am. Ord. 255, passed 3-19-12)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.16  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.
   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health:
   (A)   Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or vegetable
matter with the exception of designated sites that are maintained for the
purpose of composting;
   (B)   All diseased animals running at large;
   (C)   All ponds or pools of stagnant water with the exception of private or
municipal ponds that are maintained for the purpose of stormwater retention or
treatment;
   (D)   Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours after
death;
   (E)   Accumulations of manure, refuse or other debris;
   (F)   Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not rodent-free or fly-tight
or which are so maintained as to constitute a health hazard or to emit foul and
disagreeable odors;
   (G)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake, canal or
body of water by sewage, industrial waste or other substances;
   (H)   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders, in unreasonable
quantities;
   (I)   All public exposure of people having a contagious disease; and
   (J)   Any offensive trade or business as defined by statute not operating
under local license.
(Am. Ord. 255, passed 3-19-12)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.17  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY.
   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public morals
and decency:
   (A)   All gambling devices, slot machines and punch boards, except as
otherwise authorized by federal, state or local law;
   (B)   Betting, bookmaking and all apparatus used in those occupations;
   (C)   All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous sexual
intercourse, gambling houses, houses of ill fame and bawdy houses;
   (D)   All places where intoxicating or 3.2 malt liquor is manufactured or
disposed of in violation of law or where, in violation of law, people are
permitted to resort for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor, or where
intoxicating or 3.2 malt liquor is kept for sale or other disposition in
violation of law, and all liquor and other property used for maintaining that
place;
   (E)   Any vehicle used for the unlawful transportation of intoxicating or
3.2 malt liquor, or for promiscuous sexual intercourse, or any other immoral or
illegal purpose.
(Am. Ord. 255, passed 3-19-12)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.18  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.
   The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and
safety:
   (A)   All trees, hedges, signs or other obstructions which prevent people
from having a clear view of all traffic approaching an intersection;
   (B)   All wires and limbs of trees which are so close to the surface of a
sidewalk or street as to constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles;
   (C)   The participation in a party or gathering of people giving rise to
noise which disturbs the peace, quiet or repose of the occupants of adjoining
or other property;
   (D)   Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary public use of
streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds except under conditions as are
permitted by this code or other applicable law;
   (E)   Radio aerials or television antennae erected or maintained in a
dangerous manner;
   (F)   Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any use
of a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather,
obstructing traffic and the free use of the street or sidewalk, unless
otherwise permitted by ordinance;
   (G)   All hanging signs, awnings and other similar structures over streets
and sidewalks, so situated so as to endanger public safety, or not constructed
and maintained as provided by ordinance;
   (H)   The allowing of rain water, ice or snow to fall from any building or
structure upon any street or sidewalk or to flow across any sidewalk;
   (I)   Any barbed wire fence less than six feet above the ground and within
three feet of a public sidewalk or way;
   (J)   All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so situated
or operated on private property as to attract the public;
   (K)   Waste water cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets or other
public properties;
   (L)   Accumulations in the open of discarded or disused machinery, household
appliances, or other material in a manner conducive to the harboring of rats,
mice, snakes or vermin, or the rank growth of vegetation among the items so
accumulated, or in a manner creating fire, health or safety hazards from
accumulation;
   (M)   Any well, hole or similar excavation which is left uncovered or in
another condition as to constitute a hazard to any child or other person coming
on the premises where it is located;
   (N)   Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or a
public street drain, gutter or ditch with trash or other materials;
   (O)   The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk or other public
property of any glass, tacks, nails, bottles or other material which may injure
any person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire when passing over the
material;
   (P)   The depositing of garbage or refuse on a public right-of-way or on
adjacent private property;
   (Q)   All other conditions or things which are likely to cause injury to the
person or property of another;
   (R)   The operation of any device that creates vibration which is above the
vibration perception of an individual at or beyond the property of the source
if on private property or at 50 feet from the source if in a public space or
public right-of-way with the exception of essential service operations,
including, but not limited to, municipal electric generation operations.  For
the purpose of this section, “vibration perception threshold” means the minimum
ground or structure borne vibrational motion necessary to cause a reasonable
person to be aware of the vibration by such direct means as, but not limited
to, sensation by touch or visual observation of moving objects;
   (S)   Prohibited noises:
      (1)   Any distinctly and loudly audible noise that unreasonably annoys,
disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety, or
welfare of any person, or precludes their enjoyment of property or affects
their property’s value (this general prohibition is not limited by any specific
restrictions provided in this subsection);
      (2)   All obnoxious noises, motor vehicle or otherwise, in violation of
Minn. Rules part 7030, as it may be amended from time to time, are hereby
incorporated into this section by reference;
      (3)   The use of any vehicle so out of repair or so loaded as to create
loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise;
      (4)   The discharging of the exhaust or permitting the discharge of the
exhaust of any statutory internal combustion engine, motor boat, motor vehicle,
motorcycle, all terrain vehicle (ATV), snowmobile, or any recreational device,
except through a muffler or other device that effectively prevents loud or
explosive noises therefrom and complies with all applicable state laws and
regulations;
      (5)   The use or operation, or permitting the use or operation, of any
radio receiving set, television set, musical instrument, music device, paging
system, machine, or other device for producing or reproduction of sound in a
distinctly and loudly audible manner so as to disturb the peace, quiet, and
comfort of any person nearby, with the exception of operations in industrial
zoning districts during all hours and commercial zoning districts between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. until 12:00 a.m.
      (6)   The following operations that take place within residential zoning
districts are restricted to certain hours of operation:
         (a)   Domestic power equipment.  No person shall operate a power lawn
mower, power hedge clipper, chain saw, mulcher, garden tiller, edger, drill, or
other similar domestic power equipment, except between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 10:00 p.m.  Snow removal equipment is exempt from this provision.
         (b)   Refuse hauling.  No person shall collect or remove garbage or
refuse through the use of a truck except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:
00 p.m.
         (c)   Construction activities.  No person shall engage in or permit
outdoor construction activities involving the use of any kind of electric,
diesel, or gas-powered machine or other power equipment, except between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
         (d)   No person shall operate any device described above in §
92.18(S)(6) between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a manner so as to
be plainly audible at the property line of the structure or building in which
it is located, or at a distance of 50 feet if the source is located outside a
structure or building.
         (e)   No person shall cause excessive or loud noise from the loading,
unloading, or unpacking of a vehicle between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m.
      (7)   Exception for emergency work.  Noise created as a result of the
performance of emergency work to preserve the public health, safety, or welfare
or necessary to restore a public service or eliminate a public hazard shall be
exempt from the provisions of this section for a period not to exceed 24 hours
after the work is commenced.  Persons responsible for such emergency noise
shall take all reasonable actions to minimize the amount of noise.
   (T)   Motor vehicles defined as “abandoned,” “junk” or “unauthorized”
pursuant to M.S. § 168B.011.  These vehicles may be removed pursuant to the
procedure set forth in M.S. Chapter 168B, as it may be amended from time to
time.
   (U)   Depositing snow on public street, sidewalks or trails.  Unless acting
pursuant to an agreement with the city or without arrangement for immediate
removal, the taking of snow from private property and placing it on a public
street, sidewalk or trail in such quantity or in such a manner to cause a
hazard to travel.
   (V)   Depositing snow on city property.  Unless acting pursuant to an
agreement with the city, the taking of snow from private property and placing
it on city owned property.
(Am. Ord. 255, passed 3-19-12)  Penalty, see §
10.99
TALL GRASS AND WEEDS
§ 92.35  LEGISLATIVE INTENT.
   (A)   It is declared to be the purpose and intent of this subchapter to
protect and preserve the city’s neighborhoods and the public health, safety and
welfare of those who live there.  The City Council determines that keeping the
city free of tall grass and noxious weeds improves the quality of life of all
residents by improving aesthetics, by eliminating harbor for rodents and
insects, and by eliminating fire hazards.  At the same time, the City Council
recognizes that requiring the mowing of grasses and noxious weeds is sometimes
unreasonable or impractical under certain circumstances.
   (B)   The City Council also determines that a variety of properly maintained
landscaping treatment adds diversity and richness to the quality of life, and
does not want to discourage the preservation, restoration and maintenance of
diverse, biologically stable, and natural plant communities or environmentally
sound practices.  The City Council finds that the establishment of prairie,
naturalistic and meadow plant communities are acceptable landscape treatments. 
However, as a protection for the larger community, these types of landscaping
treatments must be properly planned, managed and maintained, and the length of
transition period must be minimized or they are likely to cause a public
nuisance.
   (C)   The City Council also determines that a variety of properly cultivated
agricultural crops on vacant lands, including platted but vacant commercial,
industrial and residential land within the city, is an acceptable interim use
for property prior to its permanent development.
(Ord. 255, passed 3-19-12)
§ 92.36  DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGRICULTURAL CROP.  A crop planted, grown and harvested according to normal
farming practices (corn, soybeans, alfalfa, wheat, and the like).
   BUFFER OR BUFFER STRIP.  A management area used to separate differing
landscapes and land uses in order to minimize the impact from adjacent land
uses.
   LANDSCAPING.  The encouragement of selected plants to grow on a site.
   MEADOW VEGETATION.  Grasses and flowering broad-leaf plants that are native
to, or adapted to, the State of Minnesota, and that are commonly found in
meadow and prairie plant communities, with the exception of weeds.
   NATIVE GRASSES.  Grasses that existed in the area prior to European
settlement (Beach Grass, Wood Chess Grass, Sand Reed Grass, Wheat Grass,
Bluestem Grass, Grama Grass, Brome Grass, Buffalo Grass, Switch Grass, Indian
Grass, Wild Rye).
   NATIVE PLANTS.  Plants that existed in the area prior to European
settlement.
   NATURAL LANDSCAPING.  The use of groups of native plants.
   NATURALISTIC LANDSCAPING.  The use of native and non-native plants.
   NATURAL PRESERVE.  A natural undisturbed area designated by the City Council
where the land and vegetation appears to not have been graded, landscaped or
otherwise disturbed by human or mechanical means in recent time.
   NOXIOUS WEEDS.  Plants designated by the Commissioner of Agriculture as
“noxious weeds” pursuant to M.S. § 18.77, Subdivision 8, as it may be amended
from time to time.
   PRAIRIE.  A plant community dominated by a diversity of native perennial
herbaceous plants and grasses.
   TEMPORARY EROSION CONTROL GRASSES.  Grasses (winter wheat, oats, annual rye
or regreen) that are used as single growing season cover or nurse crops to
assist in the establishment of permanent vegetation.
   TRANSITIONAL PERIOD.  The amount of time needed to change from one type of
landscaping to another.  A transitional period must not extend beyond three
growing seasons for any specific area.
   WEEDS.  All noxious weeds and any undesirable or troublesome plant that is
horticulturally out of place, especially plants that grow profusely where they
are not wanted.  For the purposes of this chapter, Taraxacum spp (common
dandelion) is not considered to be a weed.
   WETLANDS.  Lands that are transitional between terrestrial and aquatic
systems where the water table is near the surface.  The boundary of wetlands
for purposes of this subchapter shall be determined according to the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers Wetland Delineation Manual (1987).
(Ord. 255, passed 3-19-12)
§ 92.37  NUISANCE DECLARED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person having
control over any property in the city to permit or maintain on such property
any:
      (1)   Noxious weeds; or
      (2)   Growth of grass or weeds in excess of 12 inches in height, if the
growth of grass or weeds occupies an area of at least 144 square feet and is
located within 30 feet of a developed property line.  When a residential lot is
adjacent to other fully developed residential lots, the entire lot shall be
subject to this requirement, not just the portion of the lot that is within 30
feet of the developed residential property line.  Agricultural crops (excluding
crops grown in residential gardens and those grown outside of the city limits
but adjacent to a developed lot in the city) are also not permitted within 30
feet of a developed property line.
   (B)   No property owner shall permit such weeds and grass to be a public
nuisance.  Any such public nuisance must be immediately abated by the property
owner by cutting the grass and removing or cutting the weeds.
   (C)   No person shall dispose of grass clippings, leaves, dirt or other
landscaping debris into street, road, alley, catch basin, culvert, curb,
gutter, inlet, ditch, natural watercourse, pond, wetland, flood control
channel, canal or storm drain.
(Ord. 255, passed 3-19-12)
§ 92.38  EXEMPTIONS.
   The following are not considered to be public nuisances:
   (A)   Non-noxious weeds and grass vegetation in wetland areas including
wetland buffers;
   (B)   Non-noxious weeds, grasses and herbaceous vegetation that are within
50 feet of designated stormwater ponds (or their required buffers, whichever is
larger), natural or altered creeks, rivers and stream corridors, including
riparian buffer strips that covey water;
   (C)   Agricultural crops that are planted, maintained and harvested
according to normal farming practices;
   (D)   Temporary erosion control grasses;
   (E)   Prairie, meadow or natural landscape vegetation that is maintained and
includes the cultivation of native grasses and does not contain any noxious
weed growth, provided that a natural landscape permit is obtained from the
city;
   (F)   Grass and non-noxious weed vegetation growing in areas designated by
the City Council as a natural preserve; and
   (G)   Grass, non-noxious weed vegetation and ornamental grasses growing on
natural or altered slopes that are steeper than 2:1.
(Ord. 255, passed 3-19-12)
§ 92.39  NATURAL LANDSCAPE PERMITS.
   (A)   Permit required.  A natural landscape permit must be obtained from the
city by a property owner desiring to use prairie, meadow or natural landscape
vegetation which is not otherwise exempted by this subchapter and is expected
to exceed 12 inches in overall height.  The cost of the permit is set forth in
the city’s Official Fee Schedule, as amended from time to time.
   (B)   Permit application contents.  The natural landscape permit application
must contain the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   The legal description of the property;
      (3)   A site plan showing lot lines, public right-of-way, buildings and
the location of the proposed landscaping;
      (4)   A general description of the vegetation and plant types to be used
including the Latin and common names of all of the species; and
      (5)   A specific management and maintenance plan that includes the
following information:
         (a)   A planting diagram showing the location and mature height of all
species of vegetation;
         (b)   Detailed information on the upkeep of each species;
         (c)   The estimated transitional period, if applicable; and
         (d)   The plan for elimination of any non-native vegetation.
      (6)   The name, address, phone number and qualifications of the person or
company that will be responsible for the management and maintenance of the
vegetation.
   (C)   Permit issuance.
      (1)   The City Administrator or his or her designated representative will
review the application and issue the natural landscape permit unless:
         (a)   The application is incomplete;
         (b)   The management and maintenance plan is incomplete or
inconsistent with the requirements of this subchapter;
         (c)   The plan proposes use of non-native grasses; or
         (d)   The transitional period for the area to be landscaped is longer
than three growing seasons.
      (2)   A natural landscape permit shall be valid for five years from the
date of approval.
      (3)   The applicant shall be responsible for paying all fees associated
with the review of the permit application.
   (D)   Permit denial; appeal.  If the City Administrator or his or her
designated representative denies an application for a natural landscape permit,
he or she shall send written notice of the denial to the applicant.  The
applicant may appeal the decision to the City Council by filing notice of the
appeal with the City Administrator or his or her designated representative
within 20 days of the date of the notice.  Upon receipt of the notice of
appeal, the City Council shall set a public hearing date at which the applicant
and any other party wishing to be heard may have an opportunity to present
evidence as to the applicant’s compliance with this subchapter.  If the City
Council determines that the applicant has complied with the provisions of this
subchapter, it shall direct the City Administrator to issue the permit.  The
City Council must affirm the City Administrator’s denial of the permit if it
determines that the applicant has not complied with the provisions of this
subchapter.
   (E)   Permit revocation.  The City Administrator or his or her designated
representative may regularly inspect any property holding a natural landscape
permit.
      (1)   A natural landscape permit may be revoked by the City Administrator
or his or her designated representative, for any of the following reasons:
         (a)   Weeds are not removed;
         (b)   The vegetation is not being maintained to a height of 12 inches
or less in areas located within four feet of a public street, sidewalk, trail
or alley;
         (c)   The vegetation is not being maintained to a height of 12 inches
or less in areas located within 30 feet of a side or rear lot line, unless the
adjacent property owner has consented in writing; or
         (d)   The property owner fails to maintain the natural landscape area
in a manner consistent with the management and maintenance plan that was
submitted with the permit application.
      (2)   For any property that is not in compliance with this section, the
City Administrator or his or her designated representative shall give notice to
the holder of the permit by U.S. Mail stating that the property must be in
compliance within 30 days.  Should that period pass without action by the
holder of the permit, the City Administrator, or his or her designated
representative, shall:
         (a)   Revoke the natural landscape permit;
         (b)   Remove all improperly maintained vegetation;
         (c)   Declare the property ineligible for a natural landscape permit
unless sold for a period of two years; and
         (d)   Certify the service charges associated with the inspection of
the property and removal of improperly maintained vegetation to the County
Auditor for collection with property taxes in accordance with Chapter 34 of
this code.
(Ord. 255, passed 3-19-12)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.50  NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Notice.  Whenever the city determines that a public nuisance is being
maintained or exists on a premises in the city, the City Administrator or his
or her designated representative may abate the nuisance after providing written
notice to the affected record property owner.
      (1)   The notice shall be given to the affected record property owner by
U.S. mail or personal delivery.  Refusal by the recipient to accept the notice
shall not constitute a defense that the notice was not received.  If the record
owner is not able to be found, the city shall attach a copy of the notice or a
door hanger with the same information to main entrance door of the principal
structure on the property.  The notice shall state the following information:
         (a)   The date;
         (b)   The address or legal description of the property;
         (c)   A description of the nuisance and the section of the city code
which was violated;
         (d)   The steps to be taken in order to abate the nuisance;
         (e)   The date by which the nuisance must be abated (grass and weed
violations must be abated within five calendar days from the date of the
notice);
         (f)   That if the nuisance is not abated by the date stated, the city
will abate the nuisance and the costs incurred by the city will be charged, and
if left unpaid, will be certified to the County Auditor for collection with
property taxes or specially assessed;
         (g)   That the recipient has the right to request a hearing before the
City Council and the date the hearing request must be made by; and
         (h)   A description of the penalties that may apply if the condition
is not corrected.
   (B)   Abatement.  If the nuisance is not abated by the date stated in the
notice and no hearing has been requested, the city may abate the nuisance. 
City staff must keep a record of the total cost of the abatement attributable
to the property and report the information to the City Administrator.
   (C)   Abatement charges.  When the abatement has been completed and the cost
determined, the city shall prepare a bill and mail it to the record owner and
thereupon the amount shall be immediately due and payable.  If the record owner
fails to pay the bill, the total charges may be certified by the city to the
County Auditor for collection with property taxes as set forth in §
34.01 of this code or specially assessed in accordance with M.S. §§ 429.101 and
429.061, as they may be amended from time to time, whichever may be applicable.
   (D)   Emergency abatement.  Nothing in this subchapter shall prevent the
city, without notice or other process, from immediately abating any nuisance
condition in an emergency situation which poses an imminent and serious hazard
to the pubic health, safety, or welfare.  To proceed with immediate abatement,
the city official shall determine that a public nuisance exists or is being
maintained on the premises and that delay in abatement will unreasonably
endanger the public health, safety, or welfare.  If at all possible, the city
official shall attempt to notify the record owner of the nature of the nuisance
and the abatement prior to the abatement.  If notification prior to abatement
is not possible, the city official shall notify the record owner as soon as
practicable after abatement.
(Ord. 255, passed 3-19-12)
OPEN BURNING
§ 92.60  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIRE CHIEF, FIRE MARSHAL, and ASSISTANT FIRE MARSHALS.  The Fire Chief, Fire
Marshal, and Assistant Fire Marshals of the Fire Department which provides fire
protection services to the city.
   OPEN BURNING.  The burning of any matter if the resultant combustion
products are emitted directly to the atmosphere without passing through a
stack, duct or chimney, except a “recreational fire” as defined herein.  Mobile
cooking devices such as manufactured hibachis, charcoal grills, wood smokers,
and propane or natural gas devices are not defined as “open burning.” 
   RECREATIONAL FIRE.  A fire set with approved starter fuel no more than three
feet in height, contained within the border of a “recreational fire site” using
dry, clean wood; producing little detectable smoke, odor or soot beyond the
property line; conducted with an adult tending the fire at all times; for
recreational, ceremonial, food preparation for social purposes; extinguished
completely before quitting  the occasion; and respecting weather conditions,
neighbors, burning bans, and air quality so that nuisance, health or safety
hazards will not be created.  No more than one recreational fire is allowed on
any property at one time.
   RECREATIONAL FIRE SITE.  An area of no more than a three foot diameter
circle (measured from the inside of the fire ring or border); completely
surrounded by non-combustible and non-smoke or odor producing material, either
of natural rock, cement, brick, tile or blocks or ferrous metal only an which
area is depressed below ground, on the ground, or on a raised bed.  Included
are permanent outdoor wood burning fireplaces.  Burning barrels are not a
“recreation fire site” as defined herein.  Recreational fire sites shall not be
located closer than 25 feet to any structure.
   STARTER FUELS.  Dry, untreated, unpainted, kindling, branches, cardboard or
charcoal fire starter.  Paraffin candles and alcohols are permitted as starter
fuels and as aids to ignition only.  Propane gas torches or other clean gas
burning devices causing minimal pollution must be used to start an open burn.
   WOOD.  Dry, clean fuel only such as twigs, branches, limbs, “presto logs,”
charcoal, cord wood or untreated dimensional lumber. The term does not include
wood that is green with leaves or needles, rotten, wet, oil soaked, or treated
with paint, glue or preservatives.  Clean pallets may be used for recreational
fires when cut into three foot lengths.
§ 92.61  PROHIBITED MATERIALS.
   (A)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning oils, petro
fuels, rubber, plastics, chemically treated materials, or other materials which
produce excessive or noxious smoke such as tires, railroad ties, treated,
painted or glued wood composite shingles, tar paper, insulation, composition
board, sheetrock, wiring, paint or paint fillers.
   (B)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of hazardous
waste or salvage operations, open burning of solid waste generated from an
industrial or manufacturing process or from a service or commercial
establishment or building material generated from demolition of commercial or
institutional structures.
   (C)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of discarded
material resulting from the handling, processing, storage, preparation, serving
or consumption of food.
   (D)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of any leaves or
grass clippings.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.62  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR OPEN BURNING.
   No person shall start or allow any open burning on any property in the city
without first having obtained an open burn permit, except that a permit is not
required for any fire which is a recreational fire as defined in §
92.60.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.63  PURPOSES ALLOWED FOR OPEN BURNING.
   (A)   Open burn permits may be issued only for the following purposes:
      (1)   Elimination of fire of health hazard that cannot be abated by other
practical means.
      (2)   Ground thawing for utility repair and construction.
      (3)   Disposal of vegetative matter for managing forest, prairie or
wildlife habitat, and in the development and maintenance of land and rights-of-
way where chipping, composting, landspreading or other alternative methods are
not practical.
      (4)   Disposal of diseased trees generated on site, diseased or infected
nursery stock, diseased bee hives.
      (5)   Disposal of unpainted, untreated, non-glued lumber and wood shakes
generated from construction, where recycling, reuse, removal or other
alternative disposal methods are not practical.
   (B)   Fire Training permits can only issued by the Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.64  PERMIT APPLICATION FOR OPEN BURNING; PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Open burning permits shall be obtained by making application on a form
prescribed the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and adopted by the Fire
Department.  The permit application shall be presented to the Fire Chief, Fire
Marshal, and Assistant Fire Marshals for reviewing and processing those
applications.
   (B)   An open burning permit shall require the payment of a fee.  Permit
fees shall be in the amount established from time to time by Council
resolution, as it may be amended from time to time.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.65  PERMIT PROCESS FOR OPEN BURNING.
   Upon receipt of the completed open burning permit application and permit
fee, the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, or Assistant Fire Marshals shall schedule a
preliminary site inspection to locate the proposed burn site, note special
conditions, and set dates and time of permitted burn and review fire safety
considerations.
§ 92.66  PERMIT HOLDER RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Prior to starting an open burn, the permit holder shall be responsible
for confirming that no burning ban or air quality alert is in effect.  Every
open burn event shall be constantly attended by the permit holder or his or her
competent representative.  The open burning site shall have available,
appropriate communication and fire suppression equipment as set out in the fire
safety plan.
   (B)   The open burn fire shall be completely extinguished before the permit
holder or his or her representative leaves the site.  No fire may be allowed to
smolder with no person present.  It is the responsibility of the permit holder
to have a valid permit, as required by this subchapter, available for
inspection on the site by the Police Department, Fire Department, MPCA
representative or DNR forest officer.
   (C)   The permit holder is responsible for compliance and implementation of
all general conditions, special conditions, and the burn event safety plan as
established in the permit issued.  The permit holder shall be responsible for
all costs incurred as a result of the burn, including but not limited to fire
suppression and administrative fees.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.67  REVOCATION OF OPEN BURNING PERMIT.
   The open burning permit is subject to revocation at the discretion of DNR
forest officer, the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, or Assistant Fire Marshals. 
Reasons for revocation include but are not limited to a fire hazard existing or
developing during the course of the burn, any of the conditions of the permit
being violated during the course of the burn, pollution or nuisance conditions
developing during the course of the burn, or a fire smoldering with no flame
present.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.68  DENIAL OF OPEN BURNING PERMIT.
   If established criteria for the issuance of an open burning permit are not
met during review of the application, it is determined that a practical
alternative method for disposal of the material exists, or a pollution or
nuisance condition would result, or if a burn event safety plan cannot be
drafted to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, or Assistant Fire
Marshals, these officers may deny the application for the open burn permit.
§ 92.69  BURNING BAN OR AIR QUALITY ALERT.
   No recreational fire or open burn will be permitted when the city or DNR has
officially declared a burning ban due to potential hazardous fire conditions or
when the MPCA has declared an Air Quality Alert.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.70  RULES AND LAWS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The provisions of M.S. §§ 88.16 to 88.22 and the Minnesota Uniform Fire
Code, Minn. Rules Chapter 1510, as these statutes and rules may be amended from
time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
subchapter as if fully set forth at this point.
CHAPTER 93:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
Sidewalk Regulations
   93.01   Construction regulations
   
93.02   Removal of snow, ice, and rubbish
   
93.03   Repair of sidewalks
   
93.04   General provisions
Street Regulations
   
93.20   Weight restrictions
   
93.21   Lugs and cleats prohibited
Rights-of-Way Construction Regulations
   
93.45   Election to manage the public right-of-way
   
93.46   Definitions and adoption of rules by reference
   
93.47   Permit requirement
   
93.48   Permit applications
   
93.49   Issuance of permit; conditions
   
93.50   Permit fees
   
93.51   Right-of-way patching and restoration
   
93.52   Supplementary applications
   
93.53   Denial of permit
   
93.54   Installation requirements
   
93.55   Inspection
   
93.56   Work done without a permit
   
93.57   Supplementary notification
   
93.58   Revocation of permits
   
93.59   Mapping data; information required
   
93.60   Location of facilities
   
93.61   Damage to other facilities
   
93.62   Right-of-way vacation
   
93.63   Indemnification and liability
   
93.64   Abandoned facilities; removal of abandoned facilities
   
93.65   Appeal
   
93.66   Reservation of regulatory and police powers
   
93.67   [Reserved]
   
93.68   [Reserved]
   
93.69   [Reserved]
   
93.70   Right-of-way encroachments
SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
§ 93.01   CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS.
   (A)   All sidewalks which are constructed, reconstructed, or ordered to be
laid, rebuilt or reconstructed shall require a permit from the City Council. 
Application for the permit shall be made on forms to be approved by the Council
and shall sufficiently describe the contemplated improvements, the contemplated
date of beginning work and the length of time for completion of the same. 
However,  no permit shall be required for any improvement ordered to be
installed by the city.
   (B)   All sidewalks which are constructed, reconstructed, rebuilt or ordered
to be rebuilt, reconstructed or laid shall be constructed according to the
plans and specifications herein provided.  Before any construction work is
begun, the city will furnish at its own expense stakes for the established
grade and for the line of improvement.
   (C)   Whenever the City Council decides in favor of constructing, laying or
rebuilding any sidewalk, it shall pass a resolution ordering the same and shall
cause a notice to be given to the owners of real estate adjoining or abutting
upon the street, lane, alley, or highway where the improvement is proposed to
be made.  Service of the notice shall be through the mail.  A copy of the
resolution shall be published in the official paper of the city once each week
for two consecutive weeks.  The construction, laying or rebuilding of the
sidewalk in question shall be made within 20 days of the notice.
   (D)   If the work shall not be fully done and the sidewalk shall not be
fully constructed or rebuilt in the manner and within the time prescribed in
the resolution, then the City Council may order the same to be done by the
Street Commissioner or other designated official, or cause the same to be done
by contract to the lowest responsible bidder and the entire expense thereof to
be paid by the abutting property owners.
   (E)   Any and all temporary repairs of sidewalks, when necessary for public
safety, shall be made by the Street Commissioner or other designated official
without notice or publication thereof.
   (F)   The material used in each batch of cement shall be weighed or
accurately measured so as to give a uniform workable concrete which will have a
compressive strength of not less than 3,000 pounds per square inch at 28 days. 
The quality of the cement used shall conform to the latest Standard
Specifications for Standard Portland Cement of the American Society of Testing
Materials, or commercial ready mix sidewalk cement.
   (G)   The subgrade for sidewalks shall be firm, compact and of uniform
density.  All soft or spongy material or vegetable matter must be removed and
replaced with suitable material.  The subgrade shall be finished to a uniform
surface at the required depth below the established grade of the improvement.
   (H)   Sidewalks constructed along streets with curbing shall be 54 inches in
width as a minimum and not less than three and five-eighths inches in thickness
with an incline of one inch towards the curb.
   (I)   Sidewalks constructed along streets with no curb must follow the grade
line established by the City Engineer or the City Street Commissioner, and
shall meet the same specifications as outlined in division (H) above.
   (J)   The use of the commonly known sidewalk cement slab with dimensions of
approximately 18 inches by 18 inches and two inches thick is prohibited for use
in either new construction of sidewalks or repairing of existing sidewalks.
   (K)   Contraction joints shall be made not more than five feet apart
perpendicular to the center line and to the surface of the sidewalk.  Expansion
joints shall be at uniform intervals not to exceed 25 feet apart.  The
expansion materials are to consist of felt or fibrous material.  Expansion
joints shall also be placed between the walk and all abutting curbs, buildings
or other masonry and concrete work.
   (L)   The Council shall require inspection and supervision of all work done
hereunder as deemed necessary.  The inspection shall be carried out through the
office of the City Engineer or Street Commissioner.
(Ord. 137, passed 9-13-65)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.02  REMOVAL OF SNOW, ICE, AND RUBBISH.
   (A)   All snow, ice, and rubbish remaining on a public sidewalk more than 24
hours after its deposit thereon is a public nuisance.  The owner and the
occupant of any property adjacent to a public sidewalk shall not  allow snow,
ice, or rubbish to remain on the walk longer than 24 hours after it has ceased
to be deposited thereon.
   (B)   The Public Works Director, or his or her designated representative,
shall cause to have removed from all public sidewalks all snow, ice, or rubbish
as soon as possible beginning 24 hours after the completion of the event in
which the matter has been deposited thereon or in the event of a snowfall,
after the street directly adjacent to the premises has been plowed open after
snowfall has ceased, whichever comes later.  Snow, ice or rubbish must be
removed from public sidewalks within the Central Business Zoning District as
soon as possible but no later than eight hours after the completion of the
event in which the matter has been deposited thereon or in the event of a
snowfall, after the street directly adjacent to the premises has been plowed
open after snowfall has ceased, whichever comes later.
   (C)   If the snow, ice or rubbish is not removed within the timeframes
stated in this section, the Public Works Director or his or her designated
representative will give notice to the record owner in accordance with §
93.04 of this chapter.  If it is not removed by the time specified in the
notice, the city may remove it in accordance with §
93.04 of this chapter.
   (D)   The owner of property on which or adjacent to which the service
provided for in division (B) above has been performed shall be personally
liable for the cost of the service.  As soon as the service has been completed
and the cost determined, the city shall prepare a bill and mail it to the
owner, and thereupon the amount shall be immediately due and payable.  If the
record owner fails to pay the bill, the total charges may be certified by the
city to the County Auditor for collection with property taxes as set forth in §
34.01 of this code or specially assessed in accordance with M.S. §§ 429.101 and
429.061, as they may be amended from time to time, whichever may be applicable.
   (E)   Any person who maintains a nuisance in violation of this division (B),
and any person who interferes with a city employee or other authorized person
in the performance of any current service under this section shall be subject
to the penalties set forth in §
10.99 of the city code.
(Ord. 136, passed 12-3-62; Am. Ord. 255, passed 3-19-12)
§ 93.03  REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Duty of owner.  The owner of any property within the city abutting a
public sidewalk shall keep the sidewalk in good repair and in a safe condition
for pedestrians and non-motorized vehicles.  Repairs shall be made in
accordance with the standard specifications approved by the City Council and on
file in the office of the Public Works Director.  Bituminous trails are not
considered sidewalks for the purposes of this section.
   (B)   Inspections; notice.  The Public Works Director or his or her
designated representative shall make inspections as are necessary to determine
that public sidewalks within the city are kept in good repair and are safe for
pedestrians and non-motorized vehicles.  If it is found that any sidewalk
abutting private property is unsafe and in need of repairs, the City
Administrator or his or her designated representative shall provide notice to
the record owner in accordance with §
93.04 of this chapter.
   (C)   Repair by city.  If the sidewalk is not repaired by the date stated in
the notice, the City Administrator shall order the work done by using either
city or contract forces.  The City Administrator shall maintain an accounting
of the costs and expenses incurred.
   (D)   Personal liability.  The owner of the property that is adjacent to the
sidewalk where the repairs were performed shall be personally liable for the
cost of the repairs.  As soon as the repairs are completed and the cost
determined, the Public Works Director or his or her designated representative
shall prepare a bill and mail it to the owner and thereupon the amount shall be
immediately due and payable.  If the responsible party fails to pay the bill,
the total charges may be certified by the city to the County Auditor for
collection with property taxes as set forth in §
34.01 of this code or specially assessed in accordance with M.S. §§ 429.101 and
429.061, as they may be amended from time to time, whichever may be applicable.
(Ord. 255, passed 3-19-12)
§ 93.04  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Notice.  Notices required under §§
93.02 and 93.03 shall be given to the affected record property owner by U.S.
mail or personal delivery, unless the owner has authorized in writing that the
notice may be given by telephone or email.  Refusal by the recipient to accept
the notice shall not constitute a defense that the notice was not received.  If
the record owner is not able to be found, the city shall attach a copy of the
notice or a door hanger with the same information to the main entrance door of
the principal structure on the property.  The notice shall state the following
information:
      (1)   The date;
      (2)   The address or legal description of the property;
      (3)   A description of the condition and the section of the city code
which was violated;
      (4)   The steps to be taken in order to correct the condition;
      (5)   The date by which the condition must be corrected;
      (6)   That if the condition is not corrected by the date stated, the city
will correct the condition and the costs incurred by the city will be charged,
and, if left unpaid, will be certified to the County Auditor for collection
with property taxes or specially assessed.
      (7)   That the recipient has the right to request a hearing before the
City Council and the date the hearing request must be made by; and
      (8)   A description of the penalties that may apply if the condition is
not corrected.
   (B)   Correction.  If the condition is not corrected by the date stated in
the notice and no hearing has been requested, the city may correct the
condition.  City staff must keep a record of the total cost of the work
attributable to the property and report the information to the City
Administrator.
   (C)   Charges.  When the work has been completed and the cost determined,
the city shall prepare a bill and mail it to the record owner and thereupon the
amount shall be immediately due and payable.  If the record owner fails to pay
the bill, the total charges may be certified by the city to the County Auditor
for collection with property taxes as set forth in §
34.01 of this code or specially assessed in accordance with M.S. §§ 429.101 and
429.061, as they may be amended from time to time, whichever may be applicable.
   (D)   Emergency correction.  Nothing in this section shall prevent the city,
without notice or other process, from immediately correcting any condition in
an emergency situation which poses an imminent and serious hazard to the public
health, safety, or welfare.  To proceed with immediate correction, the Public
Works Director or his or her designated representative shall determine that an
imminent or serious hazard exists and that delay in correction will
unreasonably endanger the public health, safety or welfare.  If at all
possible, the Public Works Director shall attempt to notify the record owner of
the nature of the hazard and the correction prior to the work being performed. 
If notification prior to correction is not possible, the Public Works Director
shall notify the record owner as soon as practicable after abatement.
(Ord. 255, passed 3-19-12)
STREET REGULATIONS
§ 93.20  WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   The operation of all vehicles weighing in excess of seven tons per
axle weight is prohibited upon the improved portion of the public streets of
the city, except as to those streets within the city which are designated as
truck routes unless otherwise posted.
   (B)   The operation of vehicles upon the improved portions of the streets of
the city in excess of seven tons per axle weight is prohibited except upon the
issuance of a special permit signed by the City Street Commissioner.
(Ord. 132, passed 4-3-61)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.21  LUGS AND CLEATS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      LUGS OR CLEATS.  A metal projection or series of metal projections
attached or affixed to the tread or wheels of a tractor or vehicle over which
the tractor or vehicle moves.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, persons or corporation to operate
a motor vehicle on the bituminous surfaced portion of the streets of the city
when the motor vehicle is equipped with lugs or cleats.
(Ord. 121, passed 2-15-60)  Penalty, see §
10.99
RIGHT-OF-WAY CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS
§ 93.45  ELECTION TO MANAGE THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   In accordance with the authority granted to the city under state and federal
statutory, administrative, and common law, the city hereby elects pursuant to
this chapter to manage rights-of-ways within its jurisdiction.
§ 93.46  DEFINITIONS AND ADOPTION OF RULES BY REFERENCE.
   Minn. Rules Chapter 7819, as it may be amended from time to time, is hereby
adopted by reference and is incorporated into this code as if set out in full.
The definitions included in Minn. Rules part  7819.0100 Subparts 1 through 23,
as it may be amended from time to time, are the definitions of the terms used
in the following provisions of this subchapter.
§ 93.47  PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Permit required.  Except as otherwise provided in this code, no person
may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way without first having obtained the
appropriate permit from the city. 
      (1)   Excavation permit.  An excavation permit is required to excavate
that part of the right-of- way described in the permit and to hinder free and
open passage over the specified portion of the right- of-way by placing
facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified
therein. 
      (2)   Obstruction permit.  An obstruction permit is required to hinder
free and open passage over the specified portion of right-of-way by placing
equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the extent and for the
duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is not required if a person
already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same project.
   (B)   Permit extensions.  No person may excavate or obstruct the right-of-
way beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless the person makes a
supplementary application for another right-of- way permit before the
expiration of the initial permit, and a new permit or permit extension is
granted.
   (C)   Delay penalty.  In accordance with Minn. Rules part 7819.1000 Subpart
3, as it may be amended from time to time and notwithstanding division (B) of
this section, the city shall establish and impose a delay penalty for
unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or
restoration.  The delay penalty shall be a fee as established from time to time
by Council resolution, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (D)   Permit display.  Permits issued under this subchapter shall be
conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated
work site and shall be available for inspection by the Director. 
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.48  PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   Application for a permit shall contain, and will be considered complete only
upon compliance with the requirements of the following provisions:
   (A)   Submission of a completed permit application form, including all
required attachments, scaled drawings showing the location and area of the
proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed
facilities, and the following information:
      (1)   Each permittee’s name, gopher one-call registration certificate
number, address and e-mail address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile
numbers.
      (2)   The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone
and facsimile numbers of a local representative.  The local representative or
designee shall be available at all times.  Current information regarding how to
contact the local representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time
of registration.
      (3)   A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:
         (a)   Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the
registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, or a
form of self-insurance acceptable to the Director;
         (b)   Verifying that the registrant is insured against claims for
personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising
out of the use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the registrant, its
officers, agents, employees, and permittees, and placement and use of
facilities and equipment in the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers,
agents, employees, and permittees, including, but not limited to, protection
against liability arising from completed operations, damage of underground
facilities, and collapse of property;
         (c)   Naming the city as an additional insured as to whom the
coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will
be provided as to all coverages;
         (d)   Requiring that the Director be notified 30 days in advance of
cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage term;
         (e)   Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile
liability coverage, workers compensation and umbrella coverage established by
the Director in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the public and to
carry out the purposes and policies of this chapter.
      (4)   The city may require a copy of the actual insurance policies. 
      (5)   If the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate required
to be filed under M.S. § 300.06, as it may be amended from time to time as
recorded and certified to by the Secretary of State.
      (6)   A copy of the person’s order granting a certificate of authority
from the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other applicable state or
federal agency, where the person is lawfully required to have the certificate
from the Commission or other state or federal agency.
   (B)   Payment of money due the city for:
      (1)   Permit fees as established from time to time by Council resolution,
as may be amended from time to time, estimated restoration costs and other
management costs;
      (2)   Prior obstructions or excavations; 
      (3)   Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the city
because of the applicant’s prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-
way or any emergency actions taken by the city; or
      (4)   Franchise fees or other charges as established from time to time by
Council resolution, as may be amended from time to time, if applicable.
§ 93.49  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Permit issuance.  If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of
this chapter, the Director shall issue a permit.
   (B)   Conditions.  The Director may impose reasonable conditions upon the
issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to
protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-
of-way and its current use.
§ 93.50  PERMIT FEES.
   Permit fees shall be in an amount established from time to time by Council
resolution, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (A)   Excavation permit fee.  The city shall establish an excavation permit
fee as established from time to time by Council resolution, as may be amended
from time to time, in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs:
      (1)   The city management costs; and
      (2)   Degradation costs, if applicable.
   (B)   Obstruction Permit Fee.  The city shall establish the obstruction
permit fee as established from time to time by Council resolution, as may be
amended from time to time, and shall be in an amount sufficient to recover the
city management costs.
   (C)   Payment of permit fees.  No excavation permit or obstruction permit
shall be issued without payment of excavation or obstruction permit fees.  The
city may allow applicant to pay those fees within 30 days of billing.
   (D)   Non-refundable.  Permit fees as established from time to time by
Council resolution, as may be amended from time to time, that were paid for a
permit that the Director has revoked for a breach as stated in §
93.58 are not refundable.
   (E)   Application to franchises.  Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise,
management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to the
franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise.
   (F)   Consistent with Minnesota Rules.  All permit fees shall be established
consistent with the provisions of Minn. Rules part 7819.1000, as it may be
amended from time to time.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.51  RIGHT-OF-WAY PATCHING AND RESTORATION.
   (A)   Timing.  The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the
patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days
as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the
permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under this
subchapter.
   (B)   Patch and restoration.  The permittee shall patch its own work.  The
city may choose either to have the city restore the right-of-way or to restore
the right-of-way itself.
      (1)   City restoration.  If the city restores the right-of-way, the
permittee shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days of billing.  If following
the restoration, the pavement settles due to the permittee’s improper
backfilling, the permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing,
all costs associated with having to correct the defective work.
      (2)   Permittee restoration.  If the permittee restores the right-of-way
itself, it shall at the time of application for an excavation permit post a
construction performance bond in accordance with the provisions of Minn. Rules
part 7819.3000, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   Standards.  The permittee shall perform patching and restoration
according to the standards and with the materials specified by the city and
shall comply with Minn. Rules part 7819.1100, as it may be amended from time to
time. The Director shall have the authority to prescribe the manner and extent
of the restoration, and may do so in written procedures of general application
or on a case-by-case basis.
   (D)   Duty to correct defects.  The permittee shall correct defects in
patching, or restoration performed by the permittee or its agents.  The
permittee upon notification from the Director, shall correct all restoration
work to the extent necessary, using the method required by the Director.  The
work shall be completed within five calendar days of the receipt of the notice
from the Director, not including days during which work cannot be done because
of circumstances constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as
unseasonal or unreasonable under this subchapter.
   (E)   Failure to restore.  If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-
way in the manner and to the condition required by the Director, or fails to
satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the Director,
the Director at its option may do the work.  In that event the permittee shall
pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of restoring the right-of-
way.  If the permittee fails to pay as required, the city may exercise its
rights under the construction performance bond.
   (F)   Degradation fee in lieu of restoration.  In lieu of right-of-way
restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation fee as
established from time to time by Council resolution, as may be amended from
time to time.  However, the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for
patching and the degradation fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these
responsibilities.
§ 93.52  SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Limitation on area.  A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area
of the right-of-way specified in the permit.  No permittee may do any work
outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any
permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in the
permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater area
make application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees required
thereby, and be granted a new permit or permit extension.
   (B)   Limitation on dates.  A right-of-way permit is valid only for the
dates specified in the permit.  No permittee may begin its work before the
permit start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the end
date.  If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it must
apply for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the new
permit or an extension of the old permit before working after the end date of
the previous permit.  This supplementary application must be submitted before
the permit end date. 
§ 93.53  DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   The city  may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and
conditions of this chapter or if the city determines that the denial is
necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to
protect the right-of-way and its current use.
§ 93.54  INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other work
performed in the right-of- way shall be done in conformance with Minn. Rules
part 7819.1100, as it may be amended from time to time and other applicable
local requirements, in so far as they are not inconsistent with M.S. §§ 237.162
and 237.163, as they may be amended from time to time.
§ 93.55  INSPECTION.
   (A)   Notice of completion.  When the work under any permit hereunder is
completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in accordance
Minn. Rules part 7819.1300, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Site inspection.  The permittee shall make the work-site available to
city personnel and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all
reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the work. 
   (C)   Authority of Director.
      (1)   At the time of inspection, the Director may order the immediate
cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety,
or well-being of the public.
      (2)   The Director may issue an order to the permittee for any work which
does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable standards,
conditions, or codes.  The order shall state that failure to correct the
violation will be cause for revocation of the permit.  Within ten days after
issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to the Director that
the violation has been corrected.  If proof has not been presented within the
required time, the Director may revoke the permit pursuant to §
93.58.
§ 93.56  WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.
   (A)   Emergency situations. 
      (1)   Each person with facilities in the right-of-way shall immediately
notify the city of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be
an emergency.  The owner of the facilities may proceed to take whatever actions
are necessary to respond to the emergency.  Within two business days after the
occurrence of the emergency, the owner shall apply for the necessary permits,
pay the fees associated therewith and fulfill the rest of the requirements
necessary to bring itself into compliance with this chapter for the actions it
took in response to the emergency.
      (2)   If the city  becomes aware of an emergency regarding facilities,
the city will attempt to contact the local representative of each facility
owner affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency.  In any event, the
city may take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the emergency,
the cost of which shall be borne by the person whose facilities occasioned the
emergency.
   (B)   Non-emergency situations.  Except in an emergency, any person who,
without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a
right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit, and as a penalty pay double the
normal fee for the permit, pay double all the other fees required by this code,
deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct any damage to the right-of-
way and comply with all of the requirements of this chapter.
§ 93.57  SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION.
   If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends
sooner than the date given on the permit, the permittee shall notify the
Director of the accurate information as soon as this information is known.
§ 93.58  REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Substantial breach.  The city reserves its right, as provided herein,
to revoke any right-of-way permit, without a fee refund if there is a
substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule
or regulation, or any material condition of the permit.  A substantial breach
by the permittee shall include, but shall not be limited, to the following:
      (1)   The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit;
      (2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-
of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit
upon the city or its citizens;
      (3)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a
right-of-way permit;
      (4)   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner; unless a
permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to
reasons beyond the permittees control; or
      (5)   The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not
conform to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to §
93.55.
   (B)   Written notice of breach.  If the city determines that the permittee
has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute,
ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the permit the city shall make
a written demand upon the permittee to remedy that violation.  The demand shall
state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the permit.  A
substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city, at its discretion, to
place additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate and remedy the
breach. 
   (C)   Response to notice of breach.  Within 24 hours of receiving
notification of the breach, the permittee shall provide the city with a plan,
acceptable to the city, that will cure the breach.  The permittee’s failure to
so contact the city, or the permittee’s failure to submit an acceptable plan,
or the permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall be
cause for immediate revocation of the permit. 
   (D)   Reimbursement of city costs.  If a permit is revoked, the permittee
shall also reimburse the city
for the city’s reasonable costs, including restoration costs and the costs of
collection and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred in connection with the
revocation.
§ 93.59  MAPPING DATA; INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   Each permittee shall provide mapping information required by the city in
accordance with Minn. Rules parts 7819.4000 and 7819.4100, as it may be amended
from time to time.
§ 93.60  LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   Compliance required.  Placement, location, and relocation of
facilities must comply with applicable laws, and with Minn. Rules parts
7819.3100, 7819.5000 and 7819.5100, as they may be amended from time to time,
to the extent the rules do not limit authority otherwise available to cities.
   (B)   Corridors.  The city may assign specific corridors within the right-
of-way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of
facilities that is or, pursuant to current technology, the city expects will
someday be located within the right-of-way.  All excavation, obstruction, or
other permits issued by the city involving the installation or replacement of
facilities shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue.
   (C)   Limitation of space.  To protect the health, safety, and welfare or
when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use, the Director
shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional
facilities within the right-of-way.  In making those decisions, the Director
shall strive to the extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential
users of the right-of-way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of
the public interest, the public’s needs for the particular utility service, the
condition of the right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential
utilities, the protection of existing facilities in the right-of-way, and
future city plans for public improvements and development projects which have
been determined to be in the public interest.
§ 93.61  DAMAGE TO OTHER FACILITIES.
   When the city does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to
maintain, support, or move facilities to protect it, the Director shall notify
the local representative as early as is reasonably possible and placed as
required.  The costs associated therewith will be billed to that registrant and
must be paid within 30 days from the date of billing.  Each facility owner
shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the right-of-
way which it or its facilities damages.  Each facility owner shall be
responsible for the cost of repairing any damage to the facilities of another
registrant caused during the city’s response to an emergency occasioned by that
owner’s facilities.
§ 93.62  RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION.
   If the city vacates a right-of-way which contains the facilities of a
registrant, the registrant’s rights in the vacated right-of-way are governed by
Minn. Rules part 7819.3200, as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 93.63  INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.
   By applying for and accepting a permit under this chapter, a permittee
agrees to defend and indemnify the city in accordance with the provisions of
Minn. Rules 7819.1250, as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 93.64  ABANDONED FACILITIES; REMOVAL OF ABANDONED FACILITIES.
   Any person who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-way shall remove
them from that right-of- way if required in conjunction with other right-of-way
repair, excavation, or construction, unless this requirement is waived by the
Director.
§ 93.65  APPEAL.
   A right-of-way user that has been denied registration; has been denied a
permit; has had permit revoked; or believes that the fees imposed are invalid,
may have the denial, revocation, or fee imposition reviewed, upon written
request, by the City Council.  The City Council shall act on a timely written
request at its next regularly scheduled meeting.  A decision by the City
Council affirming the denial, revocation, or fee as imposition will be in
writing and supported by written findings establishing the reasonableness of
the decision.
§ 93.66  RESERVATION OF REGULATORY AND POLICE POWERS.
   A permittee's or registrant's rights are subject to the regulatory and
police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.
§ 93.67  [RESERVED]
§ 93.68  [RESERVED]
§ 93.69  [RESERVED]
§ 93.70  RIGHT-OF-WAY ENCROACHMENTS.
   (A)   Purpose.  The public welfare requires that the public rights-of-way
within the city, including highways, roads, streets and alleys, be reserved for
public uses. Public use of the full width of the rights- of-way is necessary to
public safety and the proper and efficient maintenance of the rights-of-way.
However, it is recognized that limited private use or encroachment onto the
rights-of-way is not necessarily inconsistent with public use. It is the
purpose of this section to provide for lawful private use of public rights-of-
way not inconsistent with public use.
   (B)   Permit to encroach.
      (1)   Permit required.  The right to use public rights-of-way within the
city for any private use or purpose other than the primary purpose of public
travel, whether the use constitutes a substantial or incidental use, may be
acquired only through issuance of a permit pursuant to this section.
      (2)   Application for permit.  Any person may apply to the City
Administrator or his or her designated representative for a permit to
construct, install or locate and maintain private property or improvements
within a publicly-owned right-of-way. The application shall be in writing and
must describe with specificity the private property or improvement and right-
of-way involved and the nature and extent of the requested encroachment. The
applicant shall further provide a hand made drawing (to scale) or survey
drawing showing the location of the proposed encroachment within the right-of-
way. The permit shall become effective upon an associated encroachment
agreement being duly recorded at the offices of the County Recorder. The city
shall be the party responsible for recording the encroachment agreement at the
offices of the County Recorder.
      (3)   Application fee.  Each application for a license required by the
provisions of this section shall be accompanied by an application fee in an
amount established by resolution of the City Council, which fee shall be
retained by the city whether or not a license is issued.
      (4)    Issuance of permit; conditions.  The City Administrator or his or
her designated representative may grant the permit and draft an encroachment
agreement if it is determined that the encroachment applied for is not
inconsistent with safe and efficient public use of the public right-of-way.
However, no permit will be issued until the landowner has agreed in writing to
waive any right to recover from the city for damage occurring to the item of
encroachment within the right-of-way. The landowner must also agree to hold the
city harmless from any claim of damage or liability against the city arising
out of the encroachment.
      (5)   Revocation of permit.  The city reserves the right to revoke any
permit and encroachment agreement granted under this section as may be required
by the public interest.
   (C)   Unlawful encroachments.  Any privately-owned property located within
or encroaching upon public rights-of-way which has not been authorized in
accordance with this section shall be unlawful and be subject to removal by the
city at the owner's expense.
   (D)   Exemptions from provisions.  The use of the public right-of-way for
the placement of the following items shall be exempt from the permit
requirements of this section:
      (1)   Mailboxes with the following conditions:
         (a)   The mailbox is positioned or clustered according to specific
directions of the city and/or United States Postal Service;
         (b)   Mailboxes servicing a planned unit development (PUD) are
positioned or clustered within the platted portion of the PUD;
         (c)    The location of the mailbox or mailboxes does not interfere
with the city's maintenance of the right-of-way.
      (2)   Grass, ground cover, or flowers that do not extend more than two
feet in height from the ground (trees and shrubs shall not be allowed).
      (3)   Sprinkler systems with an approved lawn sprinkler permit.
(Ord. 219, passed 4-16-07)
CHAPTER 94: PREDATORY OFFENDER RESIDENCY REGULATIONS
Section
   
94.01   Findings and purpose
   
94.02   Definitions
   
94.03   Prohibited acts
   
94.04   Measurement of distance
   
94.05   Penalties
   
94.06   Exceptions
   
94.07   Severability
§ 94.01  FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   Individuals who have been required to register as predatory offenders
pursuant to state law present an extreme threat to the public safety,
especially to children, females, and vulnerable populations. These offenders
are extremely likely to use physical violence and to repeat their offenses.
Many of these offenders also commit other crimes.
   (B)   The city has a compelling interest to take action to promote and
protect certain areas within the city from the risks to public safety posed by
predatory offenders. The city's compelling interest is furthered by the
creation of a regulatory scheme which establishes areas around locations where
children or vulnerable adults regularly congregate in concentrated numbers. The
purpose of this chapter is to create such a regulatory scheme to further the
city's compelling interest in maintaining public safety by prescribing where
predatory offenders may reside within the city.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-21-17)
§ 94.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meaning hereinafter ascribed to them:
   CHILDREN. Persons under the age of 18.
   DEDICATED VULNERABLE ADULT HOUSING. A residential facility that specializes
in providing housing for vulnerable adults, as defined in M.S. § 626.5572.
   DESIGNATED PREDATORY OFFENDER. Any person who has been categorized as a
Level III predatory offender under M.S. § 244.052, a successor statute, or a
similar statute from another state in which that person's risk assessment
indicates a high risk of re-offense.
   PARK. Any land, including improvements, established for the use by the
general public as a recreational area, including, but not limited to,
playgrounds, athletic fields, and golf courses.
   PERMANENT RESIDENCE. A place where the person abides, lodges or resides for
14 or more consecutive days.
   SCHOOL. Any public, private or parochial educational institution that offers
educational instruction to individuals under the age of 18.
   TEMPORARY RESIDENCE. A place where the person abides, lodges or resides for
a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year, and
which is not the person's permanent address or a place where the person
routinely abides, lodges or resides for a period of four or more consecutive or
non-consecutive days in any month, and which is not the person's permanent
residence.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-21-17)
§ 94.03  PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   No designated predatory offender may establish a permanent residence
or temporary residence within 1,500 feet of any school, park, library, place of
worship that provides regular educational programs for children (i.e. Sunday
school), dedicated vulnerable adult housing, or any other place where children
are commonly known to regularly congregate.
   (B)   No person shall let or rent any place, structure, or part thereof,
trailer or other dwelling, with the knowledge that it will be used as a
permanent residence or temporary residence by any person prohibited from
establishing such permanent residence or temporary residence pursuant to this
chapter, if such place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other dwelling,
is located within a prohibited zone described in §
94.03(A).
      (1)   If a property owner discovers or is informed that a tenant is a
designated predatory offender after signing a lease or otherwise agreeing to
let the offender reside on a property within the prohibited zone, the owner or
property manager should take measures to terminate the lease or to evict the
offender.
      (2)   A property owner's failure to comply with provisions of this
section shall constitute a violation and shall subject the property owner to
the enforcement provisions and procedures as provided in this chapter and the
city code.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-21-17)
§ 94.04  MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCE.
   For purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement
shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of
the permanent residence or temporary residence to the nearest outer property
line of the applicable prohibited location. The City Administrator shall
maintain an official map showing prohibited locations as defined by this
chapter. The City Administrator shall update the map at least annually to
reflect any changes in the location of prohibited zones.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-21-17)
§ 94.05  PENALTIES.
   A person who violates this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and may be
punished by a fine of not more than $1,000, by incarceration of not more than
90 days, or both. Each day a person maintains a residence in violation of this
chapter constitutes a separate violation. Additionally, the city may seek a
court order to enjoin any person in violation of this chapter from taking any
prohibited action hereunder.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-21-17)
§ 94.06  EXCEPTIONS.
   A designated predatory offender residing within a prohibited zone as
described in §
94.03(A) does not commit a violation of this chapter if any of the following
apply:
   (A)   The person established the permanent residence or temporary residence
and reported and registered the residence pursuant to M.S. §§ 243.166, 243.167,
or a successor statute, prior to the effective date of this chapter.
   (B)   The school, park, library, place of worship, or dedicated vulnerable
adult housing within 1,500 feet of the person's residence was designated or
opened after the person established the permanent residence or temporary
residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to M.S. §§ 243.166
or 243.167, or a successor statute.
   (C)   The person is a minor.
   (D)   The person was a minor when he or she committed all offenses leading
to his or her status as a dedicated predatory offender.
   (E)   The residence is also the primary residence of the person's parents,
grandparents, siblings, or spouse.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-21-17)
§ 94.07  SEVERABILITY.
   If any portion of this chapter, or its application to any circumstances, is
held invalid, the remaining provisions shall be considered severable, and shall
be given effect to the maximum extent possible.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-21-17)
TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
111.   AMUSEMENT CENTERS
      
112.   BUSINESSES USING EXPLOSIVE OR INFLAMMABLE SUBSTANCES
      
113.   CABLE SERVICES
      
114.   CHEMICAL LAWN SPRAYING FIRMS
      
115.   JUNK DEALERS
      
116.   PAWN BROKERS AND SECONDHAND GOODS DEALERS
      
117.   TOBACCO REGULATIONS
         
APPENDIX A:  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE TO SELL TOBACCO, TOBACCO PRODUCTS, AND
TOBACCO RELATED DEVICES AT RETAIL
         
APPENDIX B:  AFFIDAVIT OF COMPLIANCE CONCERNING EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS
      
118.   PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
      
119.   ADULT USE
      
120.   REGISTRATION PROCESS FOR RENTAL HOUSING
CHAPTER 110:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
110.01   Provisions of state law adopted
   
110.02   Nudity of the premises of licensed establishments prohibited
Sale and Consumption of Intoxicating Liquor
   
110.15   License required
   
110.16   Issuance of license
   
110.17   Financial responsibility
   
110.18   License fees
   
110.19   Ineligibility
   
110.20   Conditions of license
   
110.21   Consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages on streets, public
property, and private parking lots to which the public has access
   
110.22   Restriction on occupancy in licensed establishments
   
110.23   Suspension and revocation
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01  PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW ADOPTED.
   The provisions of M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time,
relating to the definition of terms, licensing, consumption, sales, financial
responsibility of licensees, hours and days of sale, and all other matters
pertaining to the retail sale, production, distribution, and consumption of
alcoholic beverages are adopted and made part of this chapter as if set out in
full.
(Ord. 179, passed 5-3-93; Am. Ord. 272, passed 3-17-14; Am. Ord. 298, passed 5-
1-17)
§ 110.02  NUDITY ON THE PREMISES OF LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The City Council finds that it is in the best interests of the public
health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the city that nudity is
prohibited as provided in this section on the premises of any establishment
licensed under this chapter. This is to protect and assist the owners,
operators, and employees of the establishment, as well as patrons and the
public in general, from harm stemming from the physical immediacy and
combination of alcohol, nudity, and sex. The Council especially intends to
prevent any subliminal endorsement of sexual harassment or activities likely to
lead to the possibility of various criminal conduct, including prostitution,
sexual assault, and disorderly conduct. The Council also finds that the
prohibition of nudity on the premises of any establishment licensed under this
chapter, as set forth in this section, reflects the prevailing community
standards of the city.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person or
persons on the licensed premises when the person does not have his or her
buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a non- transparent material.
It is unlawful for any person to be on the licensed premises when the person
does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a
non-transparent material.
   (C)   A violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable as provided by
law, and is justification for revocation or suspension of any liquor, wine,
brewer taproom, small brewer, or 3.2% malt liquor license or the imposition of
a civil penalty under the provisions of §
10.99.
(Am. Ord. 272, passed 3-17-14) Penalty, see §
10.99
SALE AND CONSUMPTION OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR
§ 110.15  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)    No person, except a wholesaler or manufacturer to the extent
authorized under state license, shall directly or indirectly deal in, sell, or
keep for sale in the city any alcoholic beverage without a license to do so as
provided in this subchapter.
   (B)   The Council may authorize the issuance of the following types of
licenses: brewer taproom, small brewer, on-sale intoxicating liquor, on-sale
wine, on-sale 3.2% malt liquor, off-sale intoxicating liquor, off-sale 3.2%
malt liquor, Sunday intoxicating liquor, club licenses and temporary 3.2% malt
liquor licenses.
   (C)   On-sale licenses permit the sale of alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the licensed premises only.  On-sale licenses may be issued only
to hotels, restaurants, bowling centers and exclusive liquor stores.
   (D)   On-sale wine licenses may be issued to restaurants having facilities
for seating at least 25 guests at  one  time  and  to  licensed  bed  and 
breakfast  facilities  under  the  conditions  specified  in M.S. § 340A.404,
Subdivision 5, as it may be amended from time to time.  A wine license permits
the sale of wine of up to 14% alcohol by volume for consumption with the sale
of food.  The holder of a wine license who is also holder of an on-sale 3.2%
malt liquor license and whose gross receipts are at least 60% attributable to
the sale of food may sell intoxicating malt liquor at on-sale without an
additional license.
   (E)   Off-sale licenses permit the sale of alcoholic beverages in original
packages for consumption off the licensed premises only.  Off-sale licenses may
be issued only to drug stores and exclusive liquor stores.
   (F)   A club license may be issued only to clubs or congressionally
chartered veterans' organizations which have been in existence for at least
three years.
   (G)   (1)   A special license authorizing sales of intoxicating liquor on
Sunday in conjunction with the serving of food may be issued to any hotel,
restaurant, bowling center or club which has facilities for seating at least 30
guests at one time, and which has an on-sale license.
      (2)   A restaurant, club, bowling center, or hotel with a seating
capacity for at least 30 persons which holds an on-sale intoxicating liquor
license may sell intoxicating liquor for consumption on the premises in
conjunction with the sale of food between the hours of 10:00 a.m. on Sundays
and 1:00 a.m. on Mondays.
      (3)   To the extent permitted by the Zoning Ordinance, a restaurant, as
defined in M.S. Chapter 340A, with seating capacity for at least 30 persons
that operates at the place of malt liquor manufacturing may be issued an on-
sale intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor license for consumption on the
premises in conjunction with the sale of food between the hours of 10:00 a.m.
on Sundays and 1:00 a.m. on Mondays.
   (H)   A temporary on-sale license to sell 3.2% malt liquor may be issued to
a club or charitable, religious or nonprofit organization.
   (I)   A brewer taproom license may be issued to any brewer for on-sale
consumption of the malt liquor manufactured at the adjoining brewery pursuant
to the requirements of M.S. Chapter 340A, and specifically M.S. § 304A.301,
Subdivision 6(b) and Subdivision 7(b), but only to the extent permitted by the
city code and Zoning Ordinance, and only during the hours permitted for on-sale
intoxicating liquor consumption.
   (J)   A small brewer license may be issued to any brewer for off-sale retail
purchases of the malt liquor manufactured at the adjoining brewery pursuant to
the requirements of M.S. Chapter 340A, and specifically M.S. § 304A.301,
Subdivision 6(d), but only to the extent permitted by the city code and Zoning
Ordinance. Off-sale of malt liquor shall be limited to the legal hours for off-
sale at exclusive liquor stores in the city.
   (K)   No license shall be issued until the applicant can provide sufficient
evidence to the satisfaction of the city that the applicant has complied with
the requirements of state law, city code, and the Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 179, passed 5-3-93; Am. Ord. 215, passed 10-16-06; Am. Ord. 264, passed
5-20-13; Am. Ord. 272, passed 3-17-14)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.16  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Each application shall be in the form prescribed by the Commissioner
of Public Safety.  The application shall state, in addition to any other
information required by the Council, the name of the applicant, the age of the
applicant, representations as to the character of the applicant with any
references as the Council may require, the citizenship of the applicant, the
type of license applied for, the business in connection with which the proposed
license would be issued and its location, whether the applicant is owner and
operator of the business, and how long the applicant has been in that business
at that location.  Every application for issuance or renewal of a license shall
also include a copy of each summons received by the applicant under M.S. §
340A.802, as it may be amended from time to time, during the previous year.
   (B)   On the initial application for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license
or an application for a transfer of an existing on-sale intoxicating liquor
license, the city shall conduct a preliminary background and financial
investigation of the applicant. If the Council, or the Commissioner on the
Commissioner's own initiative, determines that a comprehensive background
investigation of the applicant is necessary, the Council may conduct the
investigation itself or contract with the Commissioner for the investigation.
In addition, an investigation may be required prior to renewal of an existing
on-sale-license, when the Council deems it in the public interest.  An
investigation fee, as set forth in the fee schedule, shall be charged an
applicant by the city if the investigation is conducted within the state, or
the actual cost, not to exceed $10,000, if investigation is required outside
the state. No license shall be issued, transferred or renewed if the results of
the investigation show, to the satisfaction of the Council, that issuance,
transfer or renewal would not be in the public interest.
   (C)   Prior to approving an application for issuance of a license, the
Council shall provide an opportunity for interested persons to speak for or
against issuance of the license.  After full consideration of all relevant
factors, including results of the investigation conducted pursuant to division
(B) above and the comments of interested persons, the Council shall decide
whether or not to approve the application and issue the license.
   (D)   No on-sale wine license or off-sale intoxicating liquor license shall
become effective until approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
   (E)   Each license shall be issued only to the applicant and only for the
premises described in the application.  A license may not be transferred
without the prior approval of the Council.  Where a license is held by a
corporation, a change in the ownership of 10% or more of the stock of the
corporation must be reported in writing to the Council within ten days after
the transfer.
(Ord. 179, passed 5-3-93; Am. Ord. 272, passed 3-17-14)
§ 110.17  FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   No license under this subchapter may be issued, maintained or renewed unless
the applicant demonstrates proof of financial responsibility as required by
M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time.  Proof of financial
responsibility shall be filed with the Commissioner of Public Safety.  Unless
otherwise specified by the Council or Commissioner of Public Safety, the
minimum requirements for proof of financial responsibility specified in M.S. §
340A.409, Subdivision 1, as it may be amended from time to time, shall be
sufficient.  Operation of a licensed business without having on file with the
city at all times effective security as required in this section is cause for
revocation or suspension of the license.
(Ord. 179, passed 5-3-93)
§ 110.18  LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   The annual fee for each type of license granted under this subchapter
shall be fixed from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
   (B)   Each application for a license shall be accompanied by a receipt from
the City Treasurer for payment in full of the license fee and the fixed
investigation fee required under §
110.16(B), if any.  All fees shall be paid into the General Fund.  If an
application for a license is rejected, the Treasurer shall refund the amount
paid as the license fee but shall not be required to refund the investigation
fee.
   (C)   Each license shall be issued for a period of one year except that if
the application is made during the license year, a license may be issued for
the remainder of the year for a pro rata fee, with any unexpired fraction of a
month being counted as one month.  Every license shall expire on the last day
of March.
   (D)   No refund of any fee shall be made except as authorized by statute.
(Ord. 179, passed 5-3-93)
§ 110.19  INELIGIBILITY.
   (A)   No license may be issued to a person who, by state or federal law, is
made ineligible to receive a license.  No more than one off-sale intoxicating
liquor license may be directly or indirectly issued to any one person or for
any one place in the city.
   (B)   No license may be issued for any place which, under state or federal
law, is made ineligible for the license.  No license shall be granted for
operation on any premises on which taxes, assessments, or other financial
claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid.
(Ord. 179, passed 5-3-93)
§ 110.20  CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Every license is subject to the conditions of this section, all other
provisions of this subchapter, and of any other applicable ordinances, state
laws or regulations.
   (B)   Continuing compliance with the financial responsibility requirements
of state law and of this subchapter is a condition of any license granted
pursuant to this subchapter.
   (C)   Every licensee is responsible for the conduct in the licensed
establishment, and any sale of alcoholic beverages by any employee authorized
to sell the beverages in the establishment is the act of the licensee.
   (D)   Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health officer, or
properly designated office or employee of the city to enter, inspect, and
search the premises of the licensee during business hours without a warrant.
   (E)   No on-sale establishment shall display liquor to the public during
hours when the sale of intoxicating liquor is prohibited.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person or
persons from being on the licensed premises when the person does not have his
or her buttocks, anus, breasts and genitals covered with a non-transparent
material. 
(Ord. 179, passed 5-3-93; Am. Ord. 179A, passed 3-16-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.21  CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON STREETS, PUBLIC
PROPERTY, AND PRIVATE PARKING LOTS TO WHICH THE PUBLIC HAS ACCESS.
   It is unlawful for any person to consume, or possess in an unsealed
container, any alcoholic beverage on  any (1) city park playground area, (2)
street or highway, (3) sidewalk or (4) private parking lot to which the public
has access, except on such premises or location when and where permission has
been specifically granted or licensed by the Council. This section shall not
apply to the possession of an unsealed container in a motor vehicle when the
container is kept in the trunk of such vehicle if it is equipped with a trunk,
or kept in some other area of the vehicle not normally occupied by the driver
or passengers, if the motor vehicle is not equipped with a trunk.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, a utility or glove compartment shall
be deemed to be within the area occupied by the driver or passengers.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, a PLAYGROUND AREAis the area within a
city park designated for outdoor play or recreation, especially by children,
and containing recreational equipment such as slides and swings.
(Ord. 179, passed 5-3-93; Am. Ord. 221, passed 7-9-07)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.22  RESTRICTIONS ON OCCUPANCY IN LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   Neither the liquor licensee, the management, nor employees thereof
shall permit any person to remain in any on-sale intoxicating liquor, brewer
taproom, or 3.2% malt liquor establishment for more than 30 minutes after the
closing hour of the establishment.
   (B)   The liquor licensee, management, and employees thereof are hereby
excluded from the provisions of this section provided there are no customers in
the establishment.
(Ord. 155A, passed 3-2-81; Am. Ord. 272, passed 3-17-14)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.23  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   (1)   The city shall either suspend for up to 60 days or revoke any
license, or impose a civil fine of up to $2,000, or impose any combination of
these sanctions for each violation upon a finding that the licensee has failed
to comply with any applicable statute, regulation or ordinance relating to
alcoholic beverages. Except in cases of failure of financial responsibility, no
suspension or revocation shall be imposed by either the City Council or the
City Administrator until the licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a
hearing pursuant to the Administrative Procedure Act, the same being M.S. §§
14.57 through 14.70, as they may be amended from time to time. The penalties
shall be imposed and administrated by the City Administrator. The civil penalty
and/or suspension and revocation imposed pursuant to this section shall be
based on the licensee's total number of violations at the specific location at
which the violation occurred, within the preceding 36-month period as follows:
         (a)   First violation:  $500;
         (b)   Second violation:  $1,000, plus 2-day suspension of license;
         (c)   Third violation:  $2,000, plus 10-day suspension of license;
         (d)   Fourth violation:  The license will be revoked.
      (2)   These penalties are presumed to be appropriate for every case;
however, the city may deviate in an individual case where the city finds that
there exists substantial reason making it more appropriate to deviate. When
deviating from these standards, the city must provide written finding that
supports the penalty.
   (B)   Lapse of required dram shop insurance or bond, or withdrawal of a
required deposit of cash or securities, shall effect an immediate suspension of
any license issued pursuant to the subchapter without further action of the
City Council. Notice of cancellation, lapse of a current liquor liability
policy or bond, or withdrawal of the deposited cash or securities shall also
constitute notice to the licensee of the impending suspension of the license.
The holder of a license who has received notice of lapse of required insurance,
or withdrawal of a required deposit, or of suspension or revocation of a
license may request a hearing thereon, and if the request is made in writing to
the City Administrator, a hearing shall be granted within ten days or a longer
period as may be requested. Any suspension under this division shall continue
until the City Council determines that the financial responsibility
requirements of this subchapter have again been met.
   (C)   Payment of the civil penalty shall be made within 30 days of issuance
of the citation. All multiple-day license suspensions shall run consecutively
starting on the first Friday following the day of the expiration of the time to
request a hearing or following a decision of a hearing, and will begin at 8:00
a.m. on the first day of the suspension period and ending at 8:00 a.m.
following the last day of the suspension period.
   (D)   Any person whose license to sell alcoholic beverages is revoked under
this subdivision may not apply for a new license for at least 30 days after the
effective date of the revocation.
(Ord. 179, passed 5-3-93; Am. Ord. 225, passed 8-20-07)  Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 111:  AMUSEMENT CENTERS
Section
   
111.01   Definition
   
111.02   License required
   
111.03   Application
   
111.04   Fees
   
111.05   Amusement center restrictions
§ 111.01  DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMUSEMENT CENTER.  The operation by any person, firm, partnership or
corporation of six or more machines, for public use for a fixed sum of money,
and upon the premises solely within one enclosure.
   MACHINE.  An amusement device of any of the following types:
      (1)   A contrivance, whether electrical or mechanical, including pinball
machines, miniature pool tables, bowling machines, shuffle boards, rifle or gun
ranges, miniature devices and games or amusements patterned after baseball,
basketball, hockey, and similar games, foosball tables or T.V. electronic games
and any other similar type equipment.
      (2)   Music boxes which are coin operated.
(Ord. 152, passed 3-7-77)
§ 111.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall own or operate an
amusement center on premises owned or leased in the city unless an annual
amusement center license has been obtained.
(Ord. 152, passed 3-7-77)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.03  APPLICATION.
   The application for licenses shall contain the following information:
   (A)   The name and address of the applicant, and his or her age, date and
place of birth;
   (B)   Prior convictions of the applicant, if any;
   (C)   The place where the machine or device is to be displayed or operated
and the business conducted at that place;
   (D)   A description of the machine to be covered by the license, its
mechanical features, the name of the manufacturer and the serial number;
   (E)   If the interest of the applicant be that of a corporation or other
business entity, the names of any persons having a 5% or more interest in the
business entity shall be listed; and
   (F)   Any other and further information as may be requested by the City
Administrator.
(Ord. 152, passed 3-7-77)
§ 111.04  FEES.
   (A)   The annual fees for licenses required under this chapter shall be in
the amount of $15 per machine plus $15 per location.
   (B)   Licenses shall cover an annual period from July 1 through June 31 of
each year.
(Ord. 152, passed 3-7-77)
§ 111.05  AMUSEMENT CENTER RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No amusement center nor any coin operated amusement device or coin
operated musical device therein shall be operated so as to constitute a public
nuisance.
   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to maintain order on
the licensed premises at all times.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation
engaged in the business of operating an amusement center to sell, offer for
sale, or knowingly permit to be sold or offered for sale, dispensed, consumed
or knowingly brought on the licensed premises any alcoholic beverages, narcotic
drugs or controlled substances, or to knowingly allow any illegal activity upon
the licensed premises.
(Ord. 152, passed 3-7-77)  Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 112:  BUSINESSES USING EXPLOSIVE OR INFLAMMABLE SUBSTANCES
Section
   
112.01   Permit required
   
112.02   Application
   
112.03   Inspection
   
112.04   Duration and revocation of permit
§ 112.01  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to use or cause to
be fabricated within the corporate limits of the city any product, a component
part of which contains a plastic substance or a derivative of a plastic
substance, or any other highly inflammable or explosive substance or with a
noxious or offensive odor as its by-product, without a permit in writing from
the city.
(Ord. 128, passed 12-28-60)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.02  APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring a permit shall make an application in writing to the
city clerk on a form as the city council may prescribe.
(Ord. 128, passed 12-28-60)
§ 112.03  INSPECTION.
   Before any permit is issued, the Chief of the Fire Department shall be
notified that a permit is desired.  Upon the receipt of notification from the
City Clerk, the Chief shall inspect the premises to which the permit is
applicable.  After inspection by the Fire Chief, he or she shall endorse his or
her approval or disapproval upon the application, together with any
recommendations he or she may wish to make.  The Clerk shall, after inspection
has been made by the fire chief, submit the application to the City Council for
its approval or disapproval.  Upon due consideration by the City Council, the
Council shall direct the Clerk to issue a permit to the applicant or direct the
Clerk to notify the applicant of the disapproval.
(Ord. 128, passed 12-28-60)
§ 112.04  DURATION AND REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The permit so issued by the City Clerk shall be in effect for a period of
one year.  During the period for which the permit has been issued, the Council,
by its order, may revoke the permit upon the creation or existence of a
condition which would, in the opinion of the council, create a serious fire
hazard or be determined to affect adversely the general health and welfare of
the area.
(Ord. 128, passed 12-28-60)
CHAPTER 113:  CABLE SERVICES
Section
   
113.01   Short title
   
113.02   Findings of the Council
   
113.03   Definitions
   
113.04   Grant of authority; payment to the city
   
113.05   Requirements in construction
   
113.06   Further conditions of use
   
113.07   Indemnification and liability insurance
   
113.08   Operational and technical standards
   
113.09   Repairs and maintenance; consumer protection
   
113.10   Rates
   
113.11   Extent of service
   
113.12   Programming and public benefit services
   
113.13   Preferential or discriminatory practices prohibited
   
113.14   Transfer or assignment
   
113.15   Right to purchase
   
113.16   Redress
   
113.17   Term of franchise
   
113.18   Procedure upon termination
   
113.19   Acceptance
   
113.20   Administration
   
113.21   Less restrictive franchise terms
   
113.22   Renegotiation
§ 113.01  SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Cable System Franchise
Ordinance.”
(Ord. 186, passed 4-17-00)
§ 113.02  FINDINGS OF THE COUNCIL.
   The franchisee’s technical ability, financial condition, and legal
qualifications shall be considered and approved by the city in a full public
proceeding that afforded reasonable notice and a reasonable opportunity to be
heard.
(Ord. 186, passed 4-17-00)
§ 113.03  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.  When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in
the singular number include the plural number.
   BONA FIDE OFFER.  An offer to purchase the cable system which the franchisee
intends to accept.
   CABLE SERVICE.
      (1)   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or
other programming services;
      (2)   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection
or use of the video programming or other programming service.
   CABLE SYSTEM.  A facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths
and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is
designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is
provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but the term does not
include:
      (1)   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of
one or more television broadcast stations;
      (2)   A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-
of-way;
      (3)   A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in
part, to the provisions in this chapter, except that the facility shall be
considered a cable system, other than for purposes of 47 USC Section 541(c) to
the extent the facility is used in the transmission of video programming
directly to subscribers; unless the extent of the use is solely to provide
interactive on-demand services;
      (4)   An open video system that complies with 47 USC Section 573; and/or
      (5)   Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating
its electric utility system.
   CITY.  The City of New Prague.
   CLASS IV CABLE COMMUNICATIONS CHANNEL.  A signaling path provided by the
cable system to transmit signals of any type from a subscriber terminal to
another point in the communications system.
   COUNCIL.  The City Council of the City of New Prague.
   FRANCHISE.  An initial authorization, or renewal thereof, including a
renewal of an authorization which has been granted subject to this chapter,
issued by a franchising authority, whether the authorization is designated as a
franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or
otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system.
   FRANCHISEE.  The person, firm, corporation or company granted a franchise
under this chapter.
   FUNDAMENTAL CORPORATE CHANGE.  The sale or transfer of a majority of a
corporation’s assets; a merger, including the parent and its subsidiary
corporation; consolidation; or creation of a subsidiary corporation.
   GROSS OPERATING RECEIPTS.  All revenue actually received by the franchisee
from subscribers from the provision of cable services in the city including,
but not limited to cable installation and reconnection fees, upgrade and
downgrade fees and equipment rental fees.
   INSTALLATION.  the fixing for use or the putting in place of the equipment
necessary for reception of signals from the cable system, exclusive of
television or radio receivers.
   MULTICHANNEL VIDEO PROGRAMMING DISTRIBUTOR.  A person such as, but not
limited to a cable operator, a multichannel multipoint distribution service, a
direct broadcast satellite service, or a television receive-only satellite
program distributor, who makes available for purchase, by subscribers or
customers, multiple channels of video programming.
   PERSON.  Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company,
limited liability company, organization or individual of any kind.
   SUBSCRIBER.  Any person, other than a unit of government, who lawfully
subscribes to any service offered by the franchisee.
(Ord. 186, passed 4-17-00)
§ 113.04  GRANT OF AUTHORITY; PAYMENT TO THE CITY.
   (A)   The city hereby grants to the franchisee a nonexclusive franchise to
extend, maintain and operate a cable system in the city to provide cable
service to the inhabitants of the city 24 hours each day, subject to any
lawfully enacted local, state or federal laws, permits or regulations.  The
city further grants to the franchisee easements in, upon, over, under, across,
and along the streets and alleys of the city now laid out or dedicated and all
extensions thereof and additions thereto in the city, for its use for the
purpose of erecting, constructing, operating, maintaining, and repairing all
necessary poles, pole lines, posts, wires, coaxial cables, cross-arms, braces,
conduits, manholes, and all other useful fixtures and appurtenances necessary
to properly construct, extend, maintain, and operate a cable system in the
city.  Other easements necessary for the franchisee on other city grounds or
places may be obtained by the franchisee from the city.
   (B)   This chapter complies with the state franchise standards set forth in
M.S. § 238.084, as it may be amended from time to time.  The city and the
franchisee shall conform to state laws promulgated subsequent to the date of
this franchise within one year after the laws become effective.  The city and
the franchisee shall conform to federal laws and regulations as they become
effective, including 47 CFR Parts 11, 21, 63 and 76 regarding emergency alert
system requirements.
   (C)   Prior to any construction, reconstruction, or rebuilding of the cable
system, the franchisee shall comply with all city permitting laws.
   (D)   The franchisee shall pay to the city on or before April 1 of each year
an amount equal to 5% of the annual gross operating receipts within the city
during the previous year for the use of the streets and other facilities of the
city in the operation of the cable system and for the municipal supervision
thereof.
   (E)   Along with franchisee fee payments, the franchisee shall file with the
city an official annual report reflecting gross operating receipts.  Receipt by
the city shall not be deemed acknowledgment of accuracy of amounts owed.  The
city shall have the authority to audit the franchisee’s accounting and
financial records to verify the accuracy of the franchise fees so paid.  The
franchisee shall first be given three working days notice of the inspection and
description, to the best of the city’s ability, of the books, records and
documents it wants to inspect.
(Ord. 186, passed 4-17-00)
§ 113.05  REQUIREMENTS IN CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Whenever the city makes public improvements which affect the
franchisee’s cable equipment, the franchisee shall relocate or protect its
wires, conduits, cables and other property located in the street or public
rights of way, and the costs of the relocation or protection shall be paid for
by the franchisee.  If the city reimburses any utility for relocating its
property at the city’s request, the city will reimburse the franchisee in a
similar manner.
   (B)   The city shall endeavor to provide the franchisee reasonable written
notice of plans for street improvements which may affect the franchisee’s cable
equipment.  The Franchisee and the city shall cooperate to assure that the
notice gives the franchisee 60 days, considering seasonable working conditions,
in advance of the actual commencement of the work to permit the franchisee to
make any additions, alterations or repairs to its facilities deemed necessary.
   (C)   All wires, conduits, cables and other property and facilities of the
franchisee shall be maintained in compliance with technical standards
promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission, and so as not to endanger
or unnecessarily interfere with the usual and customary trade, traffic, and
travel upon the streets and public places of the city.
(Ord. 186, passed 4-17-00)
§ 113.06  FURTHER CONDITIONS OF USE.
   (A)   The franchisee shall, on the request of any person holding a building
moving permit, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of
buildings.  The expense of the temporary removal, raising, or lowering of wires
shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the franchisee shall have
the authority to require the payment in advance.  The franchisee shall be given
not less than ten business days advance notice to arrange for the temporary
wire changes.
   (B)   The franchisee shall have the authority to trim trees upon and over-
hanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the city so as to
prevent the branches of the trees from coming in contact with the wires and
cables of the franchisee.  All trimming is to be done under the supervision and
direction of the city, if requested, and at the expense of the franchisee.  If
the franchisee needs to trim any trees, it will notify the property owner in
advance.
   (C)   All cable shall be underground consistent with current regulations. 
However, in areas where facilities are above ground at the time of
installation, the franchisee may install its service above ground with the
understanding that at the time as those facilities are required to be placed
underground by the city, the franchisee shall likewise place its services
underground.
   (D)   Any public property damaged by the franchisee during the construction,
repair, replacement, relocation, operation, maintenance or reconstruction of
the cable system shall be promptly repaired by the franchisee, at its expense,
to a condition substantially the same as that prevailing prior to the damage.
(Ord. 186, passed 4-17-00)
§ 113.07  INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   (A)   The franchisee shall indemnify and hold harmless the city, the City
Council and all city employees and commissions, from any suit, claim or demand
whatsoever which may be asserted or recovered against it based upon or arising
out of the franchisee’s construction, maintenance or operation of the system or
any part thereof, including the city’s grant of this franchise to the
franchisee, provided that the suit, claim, or demand is not based upon the
city’s own intentional or negligent conduct.  The city agrees to immediately
notify the franchisee, in writing and within five business days, unless
notification within five business days would be unreasonable due to
extraordinary circumstances, of any claim or suit against the city for which
the franchisee may be required to indemnify the city.  In the event the
franchisee is required to defend the city in connection with this section, the
city agrees to tender control of its defense to the franchisee and the
franchisee shall have the right to select defense counsel.  The city agrees to
cooperate in its own defense.
   (B)   The franchisee shall maintain throughout the life of this franchise
public liability, property damage and liability insurance policies naming the
city, the City Council and all city employees and commissions as additional
insureds, and in the amount of:
      (1)   For property damage to any one person, $1,000,000;
      (2)   For property damage in any one occurrence, $1,000,000;
      (3)   For bodily injury to any one person, $1,000,000; and
      (4)   For bodily injury in any one occurrence, $1,000,000.
   (C)   The insurance policies shall be negotiated and paid for by the
franchisee.  A certificate of coverage shall be provided to the city. The
policy shall state that the city shall be notified in writing by the insurer 30
days in advance of any cancellation or termination of the policy.
(Ord. 186, passed 4-17-00)
§ 113.08  OPERATIONAL AND TECHNICAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   The cable system shall be upgraded to a minimum capacity of 550
Megahertz bandwidth or 77 channels.
   (B)   If at any time during the franchise term the city determines that
reasonable evidence exists of inadequate system performance, the city may
require the franchisee to perform tests and analyses directed toward the
inadequacies at the franchisee’s expense.  The franchisee shall fully cooperate
with the city in performing the testing, and any reports prepared by franchisee
shall include at least:
      (1)   A description of the problem in the system performance which
precipitated the special testing;
      (2)   The system component tested;
      (3)   The equipment used and procedures employed in testing;
      (4)   The method, if any, by which the system performance was resolved;
and
      (5)   Any other information pertinent to the tests and analyses which may
be required by the city, or determined when the test is performed.
   (C)   If, after receiving the franchisee’s report, the city determines that
reasonable evidence still exists of inadequate system performance, the city may
enlist an independent engineer to perform tests and analyses directed toward
the suspected inadequacies.  If independent testing establishes that the
franchisee is not meeting FCC technical standards, then the franchisee shall
reimburse the city for the expenses of the independent testing.
   (D)   No signals of a Class IV cable communications channel may be
transmitted from a subscriber terminal for purposes of monitoring individual
viewing patterns or practices without the express written permission of the
subscriber.  The request for this permission shall be contained in a separate
document with a prominent statement that the subscriber is authorizing the
permission in full knowledge of its provisions.  The written permission shall
be for a limited period of time not to exceed one year, which shall be renewed
at the option of the subscriber.  No penalty shall be invoked for a
subscriber’s failure to provide or renew the authorization.  The authorization
shall be revocable at any time by the subscriber without penalty of any kind
whatsoever.  The permission shall be required for each type or classification
of Class IV cable communications activity planned for the purposes of
monitoring individual viewing patterns or practices.
      (1)   No information or data obtained by monitoring transmission of a
signal from a subscriber terminal or any other means, including but not limited
to lists of the names and addresses of the subscribers or any lists that
identify the viewing habits of subscribers shall be sold or otherwise made
available to any party other than to the franchisee and its employees for
internal business use, or to the subscriber who is the subject of that
information, unless the franchisee has received specific written authorization
from the subscriber to make the data available.
      (2)   Written permission from the subscriber shall not be required for
conducting system wide or individually addressed electronic sweeps for the
purpose of verifying cable system integrity or monitoring for the purpose of
billing.  The information shall be kept confidential by the franchisee,
consistent with division (D)(1) above.
(Ord. 186, passed 4-17-00)
§ 113.09  REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE; CONSUMER PROTECTION.
   (A)   Any person may file complaints regarding quality of service, equipment
malfunction, billing disputes, or other matters pertaining to the cable system
by contacting the franchisee during normal business hours.
   (B)   Calls about service problems during normal business hours will be
handled by the franchisee’s Customer Service Representative (CSR).  When
possible, problems will be resolved over the phone. Subscribers may be charged
for service calls.  The franchisee will maintain and staff repair service
capable of responding within 24 hours.  Calls made outside normal business
hours may be answered by a pre-recorded message giving the subscriber the
option to speak to an operator.  The operator will attempt to resolve the
problem over the phone.  If unable to correct the problem, the operator will
have the call returned during normal business hours.
   (C)   The franchisee shall at all times comply with the obligations of the
FCC’s customer service at 47 CFR § 76.309, and nothing in this section shall be
construed to relieve franchisee from any obligations contained therein or the
enforcement of the FCC’s customer service standards by the city.
   (D)   The franchisee shall, upon request of the city and at times mutually
agreed upon by the parties, but no more frequent than once every three years,
conduct a survey of subscribers.  Each questionnaire shall be prepared and
conducted in good faith so as to provide a reasonably reliable measure of
customer satisfaction with:
      (1)   Audio and signal quality;
      (2)   Response to customer complaints;
      (3)   Billing practices;
      (4)   Programming; and
      (5)   Installation practices.
   (E)   At the request of the city, a company representative will attend a
City Council meeting annually to report on the status of the cable system.
(Ord. 186, passed 4-17-00)
§ 113.10  RATES.
   (A)   Current subscriber rates shall be available for inspection at the City
Hall at all times.
   (B)   Upon termination of service to any subscriber, the franchisee shall
have the right to promptly remove all of its facilities and equipment from the
premises of the subscriber.
   (C)   The city reserves the right to regulate rates to the extent not
prohibited by federal law, including, but not limited to the Cable Television
Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and rate regulations and
orders pursuant thereto adopted by the Federal Communications Commission.
(Ord. 186, passed 4-17-00)
§ 113.11  EXTENT OF SERVICE.
   The services provided by the franchisee under this franchise shall be made
available by it to all points within the corporate limits of the city also
served by city water and sewer facilities, provided that, to the extent not
inconsistent with applicable legal rate regulations, the distance from the
house to the tap does not exceed 200 feet and/or the construction costs do not
exceed $250.  Excess costs due to exceeding either of these thresholds shall be
borne by requester.  Cable service will be extended to new subdivisions within
the corporate limits of the city within 60 days of the installation of city
water and sewer services during the construction season.
(Ord. 186, passed 4-17-00)
§ 113.12  PROGRAMMING AND PUBLIC BENEFIT SERVICES.
   (A)   The franchisee shall make available a minimum of one access channel. 
The franchisee shall, to the extent of the cable system’s available channel
capacity, provide to each of the subscribers who receive some or all of the
services offered on the system, reception on at least one specially designated
access channel.  This specially designated access channel may be used by local
educational authorities and local government on a first-come, first served,
nondiscriminatory basis if the demand for that time arises.
   (B)   During those hours that the specially designated access channel is not
being used by the local educational authorities or local government, the
franchisee shall lease time to commercial or noncommercial users on a first-
come, first-served nondiscriminatory basis if the demand for that time arises. 
The franchisee may also use this specially designated access channel for local
origination or other programming during those hours when the channel is not in
use by local educational authorities, local government, or commercial or non-
commercial users who have leased time.  The franchisee shall establish rules
for the administration of the specially designated access channel. This section
shall not apply to subscribers receiving only non-video services, only alarm
services, or only data transmission services for computer functions.
   (C)   The franchisee shall provide, free of charge, one drop and converter
if needed to each city owned building and public school within 200 feet of
franchisee’s cable plant.  The franchisee shall also provide no-cost basic
service and the cable programming services tier to each city owned building and
public school served.  Any internal wiring and additional outlets requested by
the city or public school for these buildings will be paid for by the city or
school.  Installation of a cable drop to any city or public school beyond 200
feet from franchisee’s cable plant that the city or public school wishes to
have served with cable service will be paid for on a time and materials basis
by the city or public school, but the basic and cable programming service tiers
for the building shall be free of charge the same as if the building were
located within 200 feet of franchisee’s cable plant.
(Ord. 186, passed 4-17-00)
§ 113.13  PREFERENTIAL OR DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED.
   The franchisee shall not, as to rates, charges, service facilities, rules,
regulations or in any other respect make or grant any preference or advantage
to any person, nor subject any person to any prejudice or disadvantage,
provided that nothing in this franchise shall be deemed to prohibit either the
establishment of special contracts predicated upon contract or bulk rates, or
the use of temporary promotional rates.
(Ord. 186, passed 4-17-00)
§ 113.14  TRANSFER OR ASSIGNMENT.
   (A)   A sale or transfer of this franchise, including a sale or transfer by
means of a fundamental corporate change, or a mortgage, lease, or assignment of
the franchise, requires the prior written consent of the city by resolution of
the Council and according to all terms and conditions set forth in the
resolution, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld.  Any sales or
transfer of the franchise shall be completed pursuant to M.S. § 238.083, as it
may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   This agreement, and state statutes referenced herein shall be subject
to all federal statutes and regulations.
(Ord. 186, passed 4-17-00)
§ 113.15  RIGHT TO PURCHASE.
   If the cable system is offered for sale, the city shall have the non-
exclusive right to purchase the cable system under the following conditions:
   (A)   Within 30 days after the city receives notification that the
franchisee has received a bona fide offer from a third party for the purchase
of the cable system, the city shall notify the franchisee whether the city
intends to purchase the system.
   (B)   If the city elects to purchase the cable system, the price, terms, and
conditions of the city’s purchase shall be the same as those set forth in the
bona fide offer.  If the city fails to offer to purchase the cable system on
terms and conditions which match or exceed those of the bona fide offer within
30 days after the city receives notification of the bona fide offer, then the
franchisee is free to sell the system to a third party.
   (C)   The city’s right to purchase the cable system pursuant to this section
is triggered only when the assets of the cable system are offered for sale. 
The city’s rights pursuant to this section are not triggered by the sale or
transfer of stock that creates a new controlling interest in the franchisee,
and are not triggered by any fundamental corporate change in the franchisee.
(Ord. 186, passed 4-17-00)
§ 113.16  REDRESS.
   In case of the failure of the franchisee to substantially perform and carry
out any material provision of this chapter, attempts by the franchisee to evade
the provisions of this chapter, or practices of fraud or deceit upon the
franchising authority, the city may, after a public hearing, determine the
failure.  If the franchisee has not cured any failure upon the expiration of
the 30-day period, the city may take any steps as it deems necessary to
terminate the franchise.  However, before the franchise may be terminated, the
franchisee shall be provided with an opportunity to be heard before the City
Council and to contest the city’s determination, which may include the
opportunity for alternative dispute resolution proceedings.  Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary, no penalty or sanction of any kind including
revocation or termination may be imposed when the action or omission is due to
acts of God or reasons beyond the control of the franchisee.
(Ord. 186, passed 4-17-00)
§ 113.17  TERM OF FRANCHISE.
   The franchise and rights herein granted shall take effect and be in force
from and after the effective date of this franchise and shall expire in 15
years.
(Ord. 186, passed 4-17-00)
§ 113.18  PROCEDURE UPON TERMINATION.
   (A)   Upon the expiration (and denial of any renewal), termination, or
revocation of this franchise, the franchisee shall enter upon the public ways
and public places of the city for the purpose of removing therefrom all of its
plants, structures, and equipment, and shall promptly remove all of its
facilities and equipment from the premises of all subscribers at a time
convenient to both the franchisee and the subscriber.  In the event the
franchisee fails to remove the cable system within a reasonable time, the city
shall have the right to remove the cable system and seek reimbursement from the
franchisee.
   (B)   The franchisee may not abandon any geographic portion of the cable
communications system without having given three months prior written notice to
the city.  The franchisee may not abandon any portion of the system without
compensating the city for damages resulting to it from the abandonment.
(Ord. 186, passed 4-17-00)
§ 113.19  ACCEPTANCE.
   This chapter and its terms and provisions shall be accepted by the
franchisee by written instrument executed and acknowledged by the franchisee
and filed with the City Administrator.  The written instrument shall state and
express the acceptance of this chapter and its terms, conditions, and
provisions, and the franchisee shall agree in the instrument to abide by, to
observe and perform the same, and declare that statements and recitals herein
are correct and that it has made and does make the agreements, statements and
admissions in this chapter recited to have been or to be made.
(Ord. 186, passed 4-17-00)
§ 113.20  ADMINISTRATION.
   The City Council is responsible for the continuing administration of the
franchise.
(Ord. 186, passed 4-17-00)
§ 113.21  LESS RESTRICTIVE FRANCHISE TERMS.
   (A)   The city shall not grant a franchise to another franchisee to operate
a cable system on terms and conditions which are less burdensome or more
favorable than the terms and conditions of this agreement.
   (B)   If another multichannel video programming distributor operates in the
city’s streets and rights- of-way without a franchise agreement and the city
has clear and express authority under applicable laws to impose a franchise
agreement on that multichannel video programming distributor but fails to do
so, then the franchisee shall not be required to comply with those terms of
this chapter which are not also imposed upon the multichannel video
distributor.
   (C)   If the city makes a decision to commence construction and operation of
a cable system in the city, or should construction of a cable system by the
city commence without an identifiable final decision, then franchisee may seek
modification of this agreement as of the date of the final decision to commence
construction and operation, or at the commencement of construction if it begins
without an identifiable final decision, in the manner described below:
      (1)   Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary contained in this
chapter, the franchisee shall not be required to provide the city with
proprietary information or to respond for information that require it to
release proprietary information where it reasonably believes that the release
of the  information would provide the city a competitive advantage, except as
required by applicable laws;
      (2)   Any audits of franchise fees must be conducted by an independent
auditor who has agreed in advance in writing not to disclose any portion of the
franchisee’s books and records or other proprietary information to the city,
other than the aggregate amount of gross revenues, without disclosing the
amounts of underlying categories of gross revenues used to calculate the
franchise fees payable hereunder; and
      (3)   If the franchisee shall be required to move, relay, or relocate any
of its facilities in connection with the construction or preparation for
construction of a cable system by the city, regardless of whether the removal,
relaying, or relocation is required under the terms of this chapter or under
any applicable pole attachment agreement to which the franchisee and the city
are parties, then the city shall be obligated to pay all of the franchisee’s
reasonable costs for labor and materials to effect the work.
   (D)   If the city and the franchisee cannot mutually agree on appropriate
modifications to this chapter as outlined above, the franchisee may seek
resolution of the matter in a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 186, passed 4-17-00)
§ 113.22  RENEGOTIATION.
   Neither the city nor the franchise shall unilaterally modify the terms and
conditions of this franchise.  Any changes to this franchise must be mutually
agreed upon by both the city and the franchisee in writing.
(Ord. 186, passed 4-17-00)
CHAPTER 114:  CHEMICAL LAWN SPRAYING FIRMS
Section
   
114.01   Applicability
   
114.02   Operating permit
   
114.03   Insurance or bond required
   
114.04   [Reserved]
   
114.05   Possession of license
   
114.06   State and city regulations
   
114.07   Application posting
§ 114.01  APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall apply only to commercial lawn herbicide and pesticide
applications, and to bulk storage of herbicides or pesticides within the city.
(Ord. 162, passed 1-1-89)
§ 114.02  OPERATING PERMIT.
   (A)   No person shall engage in the commercial application of lawn herbicide
or lawn pesticide without an annual permit issued by the city.
   (B)   Applications for a lawn herbicide or lawn pesticide applicator permit
shall be filed at least 30 days in advance of the proposed initial lawn
herbicide or lawn pesticide applications each year with the City Administrator.
   (C)   Commercial lawn spraying permit applications are available at the city
offices and shall include the following:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the commercial
applicator;
      (2)   The names of employees applying herbicides or pesticides on lawns;
      (3)   A copy of the State Department of Agriculture herbicide and
pesticide applicator license; and
      (4)   The annual fee for a commercial lawn herbicide or lawn pesticide
applicator firms, which shall be $30.
(Ord. 162, passed 1-1-89)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.03  INSURANCE OR BOND REQUIRED.
   (A)   No license may be issued, maintained or renewed by a licensee unless
the licensee demonstrates proof of financial responsibility by providing with
the application form either of the following:
      (1)   Liability insurance that is in effect for the license period issued
by an insurer licensed to do business in the State of Minnesota providing at
least $300,000 of coverage because of bodily injury to any one person in any
one occurrence, $600,000 because of bodily injury to two or more persons in any
one occurrence, $100,000 because of injury to or destruction of property of
others in any one occurrence; or
      (2)   A performance bond in the amount of $1,000.
   (B)   A liability insurance policy required by this section must provide
that it may not be canceled for:
      (1)   Any cause, except for nonpayment of premium, by either the insured
or the insurer, unless the canceling party has first given 60 days of notice in
writing to the city of intent to cancel the policy; and
      (2)   Nonpayment of premium, unless the canceling party has first given
ten days of notice in writing to the issuing authority of intent to cancel the
policy.  A bond required by this section must be conditional upon compliance
with the city code and all city regulations, rules and requirements. Any action
to collect the bond proceeds shall not prevent the city from filing criminal
complaints for ordinance violations.
(Ord. 162, passed 1-1-89; Am. Ord. 279, passed 3-2-15)
§ 114.04 [RESERVED].
§ 114.05  POSSESSION OF LICENSE.
   The commercial lawn fertilizer license shall be in the possession of any
employees working for the lawn fertilizing company making fertilizer
applications in the city limits.
(Ord. 162, passed 1-1-89)
§ 114.06  STATE AND CITY REGULATIONS.
   The licensee shall comply with the provisions of M.S. Chapters 18B, 18C and
18D and rules promulgated thereunder, and amendments thereto. The licensee
shall carry a valid copy of the state license at all times when making
fertilizer applications in the city limits.  The licensee shall comply with the
city code and all city regulations, rules and requirements.
(Ord. 162, passed 1-1-89; Am. Ord. 279, passed 3-2-15)
§ 114.07  APPLICATION POSTING.
   (A)   All commercial applicators who apply lawn pesticides/herbicides within
the city limits are required by state statutes to post warning markers on the
borders of the property being treated.  The warning markers shall be a minimum
of 18 inches above the top of the grass line or grade line, whichever is
higher.  The warning notices must be no more than five feet from all of the
borders of the affected property.  The markers must remain posted for 24 hours
after the application.
   (B)   The markers must contain at least the following information:
      (1)   The name of the company applying the pesticides/herbicides; and
      (2)   A warning that persons should stay off the lawn for 24 hours after
it has been sprayed.
(Ord. 162, passed 1-1-89)
CHAPTER 115:  JUNK DEALERS
Section
   
115.01   License required
   
115.02   Application
   
115.03   Duration of license
   
115.04   Regulations for storage
§ 115.01  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person, persons, or corporations to
buy, sell, or store any type of secondhand metal within the corporate limits of
the city without the person, persons, or corporation having first obtained the
license to do so from the City Council in accordance with the terms and
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 114, passed 5-12-59)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.02 APPLICATION.
   (A)   The applicant for a license to operate and conduct a junk business
within the corporate limits of the city shall make application therefor to the
City Clerk.  At this time, the applicant shall tender unto the City Clerk the
sum of $50 as a license fee for the ensuing year, and the fee is to be returned
to the applicant if the license is not granted.  The application shall be
submitted to the City Council at its next regular meeting from the date on
which the application is made.  The applicant, upon the request of the City
Council, shall appear before the Council in support of his or her application. 
Prior to the Council’s considering the application, the applicant must file a
bond with the City Clerk in the penal amount of $100,000, with the bond running
to the city.
   (B)   The bond shall include at least two sureties or a corporate surety and
be approved by the Mayor.  The condition of the bond is that the applicant
conduct his or her junk business in a peaceable and orderly manner, and that
city ordinances relative to junk dealers shall be conformed to by the applicant
and license holder.
(Ord. 114, passed 5-12-59)
§ 115.03  DURATION OF LICENSE.
   The license to conduct a junk business in the city shall be issued annually,
the application therefor being made to the City Council and, in like manner,
the penal bond as set forth in §
115.02 shall be operative only for the duration of the license.
(Ord. 114, passed 5-12-59)
§ 115.04  REGULATIONS FOR STORAGE.
   The property upon which the junk is stored by the license holder must be
enclosed by a tight board fence not less than eight feet high.  The fence shall
be painted white, shall have no advertisement of any manner appearing thereon,
and no items of junk or other debris shall be affixed or hung over the fence.
(Ord. 114, passed 5-12-59)
CHAPTER 116:  PAWN BROKERS AND SECONDHAND GOODS DEALERS
Section
   
116.01   Purpose
   
116.02   Adoption of state statutes
   
116.03   Definition
   
116.04   License required
   
116.05   Application procedure and licensee eligibility
   
116.06   Records required
   
116.07   Inspection
   
116.08   Holding of property
   
116.09   Report of stolen or lost goods
   
116.10   Redemption period
   
116.11   Prohibited transactions
   
116.12   Signage
   
116.13   Permitted charges and hours of operation
   
116.14   Storage of firearms
   
116.15   Ineligibility
   
116.16   Method of payment
   
116.17   Denial, suspension or revocation of license
§ 116.01  PURPOSE.
   (A)   The City Council finds that pawnbrokers and secondhand goods dealers
potentially provide an opportunity for the commission of crimes and their
concealment because these businesses have the ability to receive and transfer
stolen property quickly and easily, and consumer protection warrants the
regulation of transactions involving pawnbrokers and secondhand goods dealers
as defined herein.
   (B)   Furthermore, the City Council finds that based upon the experiences of
other communities which have pawnbrokers and secondhand goods dealers within
their communities, there is a significant increase in the time spent by local
law enforcement personnel in the checking and regulating of the businesses
through record checking, patrol, checking of inventory, searches and the like.
(Ord. 184, passed 5-18-98)
§ 116.02  ADOPTION OF STATE STATUTES.
   M.S. Chapter 325J, as the same may be amended from time to time, is hereby
adopted in its entirety and incorporated herein and made a part hereof the same
as if completely set forth in full, and is referenced herein as the
“Pawnbrokers Regulations.”
(Ord. 184, passed 5-18-98)
§ 116.03  DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, and in addition to the definition set forth
in the Pawnbrokers Regulations, the following definition shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SECONDHAND GOODS DEALER.  A person whose regular business includes selling
and/or receiving tangible personal property and whose business is organized for
the sales, excluding motor vehicles, furniture, childrens toys, kitchen
appliances and clothing and related accessories previously used, rented, owned
or leased.  The SECONDHAND GOODS DEALER shall obtain a secondhand goods
dealer’s license as herein provided.
(Ord. 184, passed 5-18-98)
§ 116.04  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   In addition to the provisions of the Pawnbrokers Regulations, the following
requirements must be met:
   (A)   No person shall engage in or carry on the business of pawnbroker or
secondhand goods dealer without a license issued therefore by the city for each
and every separate office or place of business operated by the licensee within
the corporate limits of the city.
   (B)   The annual fee for a pawnbroker’s license shall be the sum of $10,000,
and each license shall expire on December 31 of the year of issuance.  After
the initial year, each license shall commence on January 1 of each year and
terminate on December 31 of the year of issuance.
   (C)   The annual license fee shall be paid in full before the application
for a license is accepted. In the event the initial license is for less than a
full year, the annual license fee shall be prorated on a monthly basis, or any
part thereof exceeding 15 days. In the event a license is terminated during the
license year, there shall be no refunding of the unused portion of the license
fee.
   (D)   In the event an application for a pawnbroker’s license is not issued
for any reason, including a background investigation of the applicants as
hereinafter provided, the license fee shall be refunded, less the sum of $250
for the investigation.  Together with and in addition to the license fee above
provided, a $500 fee for a background check, as provided by §
116.05, shall accompany all applications.
   (E)   A license under this section shall authorize the licensee to carry on
a pawnbroker’s business only at the permanent place of business designated in
the license.  No license may be transferred to a different location or to a
different licensee without approval of the city.  Any change, directly or
beneficially, in the ownership of any licensee or licensed business location
shall require the application for a new license, and the new owner must meet
all the qualifications and eligibility requirements hereunder, and any fees
required hereunder shall be paid.
   (F)   Any and all property or buildings used for storage of items related to
the business of a pawnbroker must be identified in the application.
   (G)   A pawnbroker may not operate or engage in the business of a secondhand
goods dealer without having obtained a separate license therefore in addition
to a pawnbroker’s license, and a secondhand goods dealer may not conduct,
operate or engage in the business of pawnbroker without having first obtained a
pawnbroker’s license.  The procedures and fees for obtaining a secondhand goods
dealer’s license shall be the same as for a pawnbroker’s license.
   (H)   The aforementioned license requirements do not apply to or include the
following:
      (1)   The sale of secondhand goods where all of the following conditions
are present:
         (a)   The sale is held on property occupied as a dwelling by the
seller, or owned, rented or leased by a charitable or political organization;
         (b)   The items offered for sale are owned by the occupant;
         (c)   The sale does not exceed a period of 72 consecutive hours;
         (d)   Not more than two sales are held either by the same person or on
the same property in any 12-month period; and
         (e)   None of the items offered for sale have been purchased for
resale or received on consignment for purpose of resale.
      (2)   Sales by a person licensed as a motor vehicle dealer;
      (3)   The sales of secondhand books, magazines, sound or video recordings
or films;
      (4)   The sale of goods at an auction held by a licensed auctioneer;
      (5)   The business of buying or selling only those secondhand goods taken
as part or full payment for new goods, and where the business is incidental to
and not the primary business of a person;
      (6)   A bulk sale of property from a merchant, manufacturer or wholesaler
having an established place of business or of goods sold at open sale from
bankrupt stock;
      (7)   Goods sold at a public market;
      (8)   Goods sold at an exhibition;
      (9)   The sale of furniture, children toys, kitchen appliances, clothing
and related accessories; and/or
      (10)   Antique dealers and antique shops engaged in the business of
buying and selling antique goods of the type commonly found in antique shops.
   (I)   No pawnbroker’s license or secondhand goods dealer license approved by
the city grants to the licensee a property right or entitlement to the
license.  The city may refuse to issue, renew or revoke the license for any
reason and will not incur liability for any damages including, but not limited
to direct, consequential, or incidental damages, deprivation of property, loss
of income, loss of profits or loss of livelihood.
(Ord. 184, passed 5-18-98)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 116.05  APPLICATION PROCEDURE AND LICENSEE ELIGIBILITY.
   In addition to the requirements of Pawnbrokers Regulations, the following
shall apply:
   (A)   All applicants requesting a license pursuant to this chapter shall be
required to submit to a comprehensive background investigation, including a
criminal history check, and pay the fee therefore in accordance with this
section.
   (B)   Every applicant for a license to maintain, operate or conduct a
pawnbroker business or a secondhand goods dealer business shall file a
completed application under oath with the city upon a form provided by the
office of the City Clerk and pay a non-refundable $500 application fee.  In
addition to the application fee, applicants will be responsible for all costs
involved in the required background investigation that exceed the application
fee.  A good faith estimate of the costs will be provided to the applicant
prior to the start of the background investigation.  The application, once
accepted, shall be referred to the City Police Department for investigation. 
Copies of this application shall be forwarded to any other city departments as
shall be necessary for verification and the investigation of the facts set
forth in the application.
   (C)   The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall make a written
recommendation as to the issuance or non-issuance of the license within 30
days.  The completed application form shall contain all information indicated,
including:
      (1)   The full name, place and date of birth and street residence of the
applicant;
      (2)   The business address and the name and address of the owner of the
premises;
      (3)   A statement as to whether, within the preceding five years, the
applicant has been convicted of any law relating to the theft, damage or
trespass to property or sale of a controlled substance, and the nature of the
offense and the penalty assessed;
      (4)   Whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation, limited
liability company or partnership, and:
         (a)   If the applicant is a corporation, the state of the
incorporation and the names and addresses of all officers and directors, and if
a limited liability company, the state of organization and the names and
addresses of all offices, managers, governors and members; or
         (b)   If the applicants is a partnership, the names and addresses of
all partners.
      (5)   The name of the manager or proprietor of the business;
      (6)   Each application shall be accompanied by a bond in the amount of
$5,000 executed by a corporation authorized to do business in this state and
conditioned that in conducting the business the licensee will observe all laws
in relation to pawnbrokers and will conduct business in conformity thereto, and
that the licensee will account for and deliver to any person legally entitled
any goods which have come into the licensee’s possession through the licensee’s
business as a pawnbroker, or in lieu thereof, will pay the reasonable value in
money to the person.  The bond shall be maintained so long as the pawnbroker
does business and shall be for the benefit of the city or any person who shall
suffer any damage through the act of the pawnbroker and shall not be terminable
without the bond company giving written notice 30 days in advance of
termination to the City Clerk.
      (7)   Copies of the applicant’s federal and state tax returns for the
preceding three years for the applicant, each officer of a corporation or each
partner or each officer and manager of a limited liability company; and
      (8)   A personal financial statement for each applicant, partner,
shareholder of a corporation or member of a limited liability company,
whichever is applicable.
   (D)   If the applicant is a natural person, the application shall be signed
and sworn to by the applicant.  If the applicant is a corporation or limited
liability company, the application shall be signed by an officer or other agent
authorized to sign.  If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall
be signed by a general partner.
   (E)   No person shall make any material false statement in the application. 
In addition to other penalties, the licensee’s license may be revoked by the
City Council for giving false information on the application.
   (F)   A new application fee shall be required whenever there is any change
in the facts presented by the application other than the date, the applicant(s)
home address or building owner(s) address.  A new application fee shall be
charged whenever a license is not renewed prior to its expiration.
(Ord. 184, passed 5-18-98)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 116.06  RECORDS REQUIRED.
   In addition to the requirements of Pawnbrokers Regulations, the following
shall apply:
   (A)   Every pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer purchasing or receiving on
deposit for a loan any article of personal property shall give to the person
selling or depositing the articles a plain written or printed ticket or receipt
for the article sold or deposited, showing the terms of the sale or loan.  The
following shall be printed on all pawn tickets:
      (1)   The statement that “Any personal property pledged or sold to a
pawnbroker within this city is subject to sale or disposal when there has been
no payment made on the account for a period of not less than 120 days past the
date of the pawn transaction, renewal, or extension; no further notice is
necessary.  There is no obligation for the pledgor to redeem pledged goods;”
      (2)   The statement that “The pledgor of this item attests that it is not
stolen, the pledgor attests the property belongs to him/her, it has no liens or
encumbrances against it, and the pledgor has the right to sell or pawn the
item;”
      (3)   The statement that “This item is redeemable only by the pledgor to
whom the receipt was issued, or any person identified in a written and
notarized authorization to redeem the property identified in the receipt, or a
person identified in writing by the pledgor at the time of the initial
transaction and signed by the pledgor.  Written authorization for release of
property to persons other than the original pledgor must be maintained along
with the original transaction record;” and
      (4)   A blank line for the pledgor’s signature.
   (B)   Each licensee shall keep a record of each transaction made.  These
records shall be in a form prescribed by the Chief of Police, at his or her
discretion and shall, in all instances, be legibly made in ink and be in the
English language.  In the case of computerized records, data shall be
accurately entered.  The pawnbroker shall maintain the records on the premises
for all pawn transactions for a least three years from the date of each
transaction.  The records kept shall include the following information about
each transaction:
      (l)   The full name, residence address, residence telephone number and
date of birth of the pledgor or seller;
      (2)   The time and date of the transaction;
      (3)   A complete and accurate description of the item pledged or sold,
including all indemnifying numbers and identifying marks;
      (4)   A physical description of the person pawning or selling the item,
including:
         (a)   Sex;
         (b)   Height;
         (c)   Weight;
         (d)   Race;
         (e)   Color of eyes;
         (f)   Color of hair; and
         (g)   Identifiable right thumbprint and left thumbprint.
      (5)   The amount of money paid or loaned for the item, including the
following:
         (a)   The maturity date if a pawn transaction and the amount due; and
         (b)   The monthly and annual interest rates, including all pawn fees
and charges.
      (6)   The signature of the person pledging or selling the item;
      (7)   The identification number from any of the following forms of
identification of the seller:
         (a)   A valid state picture driver’s license;
         (b)   A current valid state picture identification card; or
         (c)   A current valid photo identification card issued by another
state or a province of Canada.
      (8)   In the event that the property is stored at a place other than the
permanent place of business designated in the license, the location of the
property or buildings used for the storage of the item must be identified in
the application for the pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer license as set
forth in §
116.04;
      (9)   Any other information the Chief of Police shall require.  Every
pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer shall make available to the Chief of
Police every day, before the hour of noon, a complete, legible and correct copy
of the records required by this section for all transactions which occurred on
the previous day.  In addition, a computer disk compatible with City Police
Department computer records will be made available to the Chief of Police
weekly, before the hour of noon on Tuesday for all transactions occurring the
previous week.  The records required herein shall be kept at the licensed place
of business for three years and shall be available for police inspection at any
reasonable time; and
      (10)   A clearly recognizable photograph or video of the person pledging
or selling the item.
   (C)   For the following items, regardless of resale price, a secondhand
goods dealer or pawnbroker must make out, on forms approved by the appropriate
law enforcement agency and sent daily by mail to the appropriate law
enforcement agency, a legible description of the goods received during the
preceding day together with the time received and a description of the person
from whom the goods were received:
      (1)   Items with a serial number identification, or an operation
identification symbol;
      (2)   Cameras;
      (3)   Electronic audio or video equipment;
      (4)   Precious jewelry or gems and precious metals;
      (5)   Artist-signed or artist-attributed works of art;
      (6)   Guns and firearms; and
      (7)   Items not included in the above, except furniture and kitchen or
laundry appliances, which the secondhand goods dealer intends to sell for more
than $200.
   (D)   The licensee shall participate in the automated pawn system (APS) and
shall pay all expenses connected with this program.
(Ord. 184, passed 5-18-98)
§ 116.07  INSPECTION.
   Any person, firm or corporation licensed under the provisions of this
chapter shall, at all times during the terms of the license, allow the officers
of the police force of the city to enter the premises where the licensee is
carrying on the business, or at any property or buildings used for the storage
of items related to the business, for the purpose of inspecting the premises
and inspecting the goods, wares and merchandise therein for the purpose of
locating goods suspected or alleged to have been stolen or otherwise improperly
disposed of.
(Ord. 184, passed 5-18-98)
§ 116.08  HOLDING OF PROPERTY.
   In addition to the requirements of Pawnbrokers Regulations, the following
shall apply:
   (A)   When the Chief of Police or any member of the police force designated
by the Chief of Police notifies any pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer not
to sell any property received on deposit or purchased by him or her, or not to
permit the same to be redeemed.  The pawnbroker shall not sell nor permit the
property to be redeemed until the property is released in writing by the Chief
of Police or his or her designee.
   (B)   No personal property deposited with or purchased by any licensee under
this section shall be sold from the place of business of the licensee until 120
days after the copy of the records required by this chapter have been made
available to the Chief of Police, except upon written permission of the Chief
of Police.
   (C)   No personal property deposited with or purchased by any licensee under
this chapter shall be permitted to be redeemed from the place of business of
the licensee until three working days after the copy of the records required
under this chapter have been made available to the Chief of Police, except upon
written permission of the Chief of Police.
   (D)   In addition to the other requirements of this section, a pawnbroker
who holds a title to a motor vehicle as part of the pawn transaction shall:
      (1)   Be licensed as a used motor vehicle dealer under M.S. § 168.27, as
it may be amended from time to time, and post the license on the pawn shop
premises;
      (2)   Verify that there are no liens or encumbrances against the motor
vehicle with the Department of Public Safety; and
      (3)   Verify that the pledgor has automobile insurance on the motor
vehicles, as required by law.
   (E)   A pawnbroker may not sell a motor vehicle covered by a pawn
transaction until 120 days after recovery of the motor vehicle.
(Ord. 184, passed 5-18-98)
§ 116.09  REPORT OF STOLEN OR LOST GOODS.
   If any goods, articles or things shall be advertised in any public newspaper
in general circulation in the city as having been lost or stolen, and the
goods, articles or things shall then be or shall thereafter come into the
possession of any licensee under the terms hereof, the licensee shall, upon
actual notice of the fact, immediately thereafter, as a supplement to the
licensee’s daily report for that day to the Chief of Police, give information
in writing that the goods, articles or things advertised are in the licensee’s
possession and the licencee shall not thereafter dispose of the same except
upon written authority to do so from the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 184, passed 5-18-98)
§ 116.10  REDEMPTION PERIOD.
   Any person who pawns an item shall have 120 days to redeem the item before
it may be sold.
(Ord. 184, passed 5-18-98)
§ 116.11  PROHIBITED TRANSACTIONS.
   In addition to the requirements of the Pawnbrokers Regulations, the
following shall apply:
   (A)   No pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer shall purchase, receive on
deposit or pledge anything of value as security for a loan of money from any
person, male or female, under age 18, nor knowingly from an intoxicated person
or one of unsound mind.
   (B)   A pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer may not receive goods unless
the seller presents identification in the form specified in §
116.06(B)(7).
   (C)   No person may pawn, pledge, sell, leave or deposit any article of
property not their own,  nor shall any person pawn, pledge, sell, leave or
deposit the property of another, whether with permission or without, nor shall
any person pawn, pledge, sell, leave or deposit any articles of property in
which another has a security interest with any licensee.
   (D)   No person seeking to pawn, pledge, sell, leave or deposit any article
of property with any  licensee shall give a false or fictitious name, nor give
a false date of birth, nor give a false or out-of-date address of residence or
telephone number, nor present a false driver’s license or identification card
to any licensee.
   (E)   No person, other than an employee of a licensee acting within the
scope of his or her employment, shall participate in a pawn transaction more
than five times in a 12-month period.
(Ord. 184, passed 5-18-98)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 116.12  SIGNAGE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ADEQUATE SIGNAGE.  At least one sign, of not less than four square feet
in surface area, comprised of lettering of not less than three-quarters of an
inch in height, posted in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises and
stating substantially the following:
         TO PAWN OR SELL PROPERTY:  YOU MUST BE AT LEAST 18 YEARS OF AGE.  YOU
CANNOT PAWN ANY PROPERTY FOR ANOTHER PERSON.  YOU MUST BE THE TRUE OWNER OF THE
PROPERTY.  THE PROPERTY MUST BE FREE OF ALL CLAIMS AND LIENS. YOU MUST PRESENT
VALID PHOTO IDENTIFICATION.  VIOLATION OF ANY OF THESE REQUIREMENTS IS A CRIME!
      SEPARATE WRITTEN NOTICE.  Either the receipt, as required in this
chapter, or a printed form, incorporating a statement to the effect that the
person pawning, pledging, selling, leaving or depositing the article is at
least 18 years of age, is the true owner of the article, is not pawning the
property for another person, and that the article is free of all claims and
liens, which is acknowledged by the way of signature of the person pawning,
pledging, selling, leaving or depositing the article.
   (B)   All exterior signage shall comply with the City Zoning Ordinance, and
in addition thereto a licensee shall, by adequate signage and separate written
notice, inform persons seeking to pawn, pledge, sell, lease or deposit articles
of property with the licensee of the requirements of division (A) above.
(Ord. 184, passed 5-18-98)
§ 116.13  PERMITTED CHARGES AND HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other statute, ordinance, rule, regulation, or
M.S. § 325J.13, as it may be amended from time to time, a pawnbroker may
contract for and receive a pawn shop charge not to exceed 3% per month of the
principal amount advanced in the pawn transaction, plus a reasonable fee for
storage and services.  A fee for storage and services may not exceed $20 if the
property is not in the possession of the pawnbroker.
   (B)   The pawn shop charge allowed under the above paragraph shall be deemed
earned, due and owing as of the date of the pawn transaction and a like sum
shall be deemed earned, due and owning on the same day of the succeeding
month.  However, if full payment is made more than two weeks before the next
succeeding date the pawnbroker shall remit one-half of the pawn shop charge for
that month to the pledgor.
   (C)   Interest shall not be deducted in advance, nor shall any loan be
divided or split so as to yield greater interest or fees than would be
permitted upon a single, consolidated loan or for otherwise evading any
provisions of this section.
   (D)   Any interest, charge or fees contracted for or received, directly or
indirectly, in excess of the amount permitted under this section, shall be
uncollectible and the pawn transaction shall be void.
   (E)   A schedule of charges permitted by this section shall be posted on the
pawn shop premises in a place clearly visible to the general public.
   (F)   Hours of operation shall be from 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.  Transactions
on legal holidays and Sundays shall be prohibited.
(Ord. 184, passed 5-18-98)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 116.14  STORAGE OF FIREARMS.
   (A)   A pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer holding for sale a firearm or
other dangerous weapon shall, during normal working hours, store the firearm or
dangerous weapon in an unloaded state in a locked and opaque compartment except
when being viewed by a customer following a request to view the firearm or
dangerous weapon.  During non-business hours the firearms or dangerous weapons
shall be stored and secured in an unloaded state in a locked safe or other
container made of steel and at least one-quarter-inch thick, or the equivalent
thereof, or in any other place as approved by the Chief of Police.
   (B)   Any pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer holding for sale any firearm
or other dangerous weapon shall have the place of business where the firearms
or dangerous weapons are stored equipped with a silent alarm system connected
to the Scott County Sheriff’s Department.
(Ord. 184, passed 5-18-98)
§ 116.15  INELIGIBILITY.
   In addition to the provisions of the Pawnbrokers Regulations, the following
shall apply:
   (A)   A pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer license will not be issued or
re-issued to:
      (1)   A person not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien;
      (2)   A person under 21 years of age;
      (3)   Subject to the provisions of law, a person who within ten years of
the license application date has been convicted of receiving stolen property,
sale of stolen property or of a controlled substance, burglary, robbery, damage
or trespass to property, felony, theft, larceny, fraud or any law or ordinance
regulating the business of pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer;
      (4)   A person who, within five years of the license application date,
had a pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer license revoked;
      (5)   A person who has been convicted of any crime directly related to
the occupation licensed
as prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, Subdivision 2, as it may be amended from time
to time, unless the person has shown competent evidence of sufficient
rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of a licensee under
this section as prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, Subdivision 3, as it may be
amended from time to time;
      (6)   A person whom the City Council determines not to be of sufficient
good moral character and repute; or
      (7)   When the City Council determines, after investigation and public
hearing, that issuance or renewal of the license would adversely affect the
public health, safety or welfare.
   (B)   A license will not be issued or renewed under this section for any
place or for any business:
      (1)   If taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the city or the
state on the licensee’s business premises are delinquent and unpaid; or
      (2)   If the premises is located within 300 feet of a school or church;
or
      (3)   Where operation of a licensed premises would violate zoning
ordinances; or
      (4)   If the premises is located within ten driving miles of any gambling
casino.
(Ord. 184, passed 5-18-98)
§ 116.16  METHOD OF PAYMENT.
   When a pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer accepts an item for purchase or
as security for a loan, payment shall be made by check only, made payable to
the actual intended seller or borrower.
(Ord. 184, passed 5-18-98)
§ 116.17  DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Any license issued hereunder may be denied, suspended or revoked for
any of the following reasons:
      (1)   Any conflict with the City Zoning Ordinance;
      (2)   Any conflict with any health, building, or building maintenance or
provision of this code or any other city ordinance or state law;
      (3)   Failure by the applicant to comply with one or more provisions of
this chapter;
      (4)   Fraud, misrepresentation or bribery in securing a license;
      (5)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements in the course of the
applicant’s business;
      (6)   The applicant was convicted of violating any law relating to theft,
damage or trespass to property, sale of a controlled substance or unlawful
operation of business within the preceding ten  years.
   (B)   The appropriate local law enforcement agency shall be notified by the
city of any licensee whose license has expired or been surrendered, suspended
or revoked.
(Ord. 184, passed 5-18-98)
CHAPTER 117:  TOBACCO REGULATIONS
Section
   
117.01   Purpose
   
117.02   Definitions
   
117.03   License required
   
117.04   License fee
   
117.05   Prohibited sales
   
117.06   Mobile sales
   
117.07   Compliance checks
   
117.08   Violations
   
117.09   Administrative penalties
   
117.10   Administrative penalty procedure
   
Appendix A:   Application for License to Sell Tobacco, Tobacco Products, and
Tobacco Related Devices
   
Appendix B:  Affidavit of Compliance Concerning Educational Materials
§ 117.01  PURPOSE.
   The City Council finds that substantial scientific evidence exists that the
use of tobacco or tobacco products causes cancer, heart disease, and various
other medical disorders.  It is the further finding of the City Council that
the present legislative scheme of prohibiting sales of tobacco related products
to persons under the age of 18 has proven ineffective in preventing persons
under 18 from using tobacco and tobacco products.  The City Council has
concluded that minors have ready access to self-service merchandising,
including vending machines, which sell tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco
related  devices.  The City Council has also concluded that the prohibition of
the sale or dispensing of tobacco or tobacco related  devices through vending
machines and the regulation of sales through self-service merchandising will
thereby promote the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city,
particularly those residents under 18 years of age.
(Ord. 183, passed 9-2-97)
§ 117.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT.  A person 18 years of age or older.
   APPLICANT.  A person, as defined herein, who completes or signs an
application for a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related
devices individually or on behalf of a business.
   BUSINESS.  The business of selling tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco
related devices.
   LICENSE HOLDER or LICENSEE.  The owner of the business licensed to sell
tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related devices.
   MOVABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS.  A business whose physical location is not
permanent or is capable of being moved or changed.
   PERSON.  Includes one or more natural persons, a partnership, limited
liability company, corporation, including a foreign, domestic, or nonprofit
corporation, a trust, a political subdivision of the state, or any other
business organization.
   SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING.  A method of displaying tobacco, tobacco
products or tobacco related devices so that they are accessible to the public
without the intervention of an applicant, license holder or their agents or
employees.
   TOBACCO OR TOBACCO PRODUCT.  Includes cigarettes and any products
containing, made, or derived from tobacco that is intended for human
consumption, whether chewed, smoked, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted,
sniffed, or ingested by any other means, or any component, part, or accessory
of a tobacco product; cigars; cheroots; stogies; perique; granulated, plug cut,
crimp cut, ready, rubbed and other smoking tobacco; snuff, snuff flour;
cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine cut and other chewing tobaccos; shorts;
refuse scripts; clippings, cuttings, and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds
and forms of tobacco.  “Tobacco” or “tobacco product” does not mean a tobacco
product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence
product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely
for such an approved purpose.
   TOBACCO RELATED DEVICES.  Cigarette papers or pipes for smoking.
   VENDING MACHINE.  Any mechanical or electric or electronic self-service
device which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment
dispenses tobacco products, and the term includes vending machines equipped
with manual, electric or electronic locking devices.
(Ord. 183, passed 9-2-97; Am. Ord. 247, passed 2-22-11)
§ 117.03  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall keep for retail sale, sell or offer to sell at retail,
or otherwise dispense any tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco related device at
any place in the city without first obtaining a license and paying a license
fee.
   (B)   An application for a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, or
tobacco related devices shall be made on a form provided by the city.  The
application shall include, but is not limited to requiring the full name of the
applicant, the applicant’s residential and business address and telephone
numbers, the name of the proposed license holder, the business location for
which the license is sought, and a copy of the educational materials the
applicant intends to use to educate employees.  The completed application along
with the license fee shall be submitted to the City Administrator or his or her
designee for approval.  If the City Administrator determines that an
application is incomplete, he or she shall return the application to the
applicant with notice of the deficiencies.
   (C)   The City Administrator may either approve or deny the license, or may
delay action for a reasonable period of time as is required to permit the city
to complete any investigation of the application or the applicant deemed
necessary.  If the Administrator approves the application, a license shall be
issued to the applicant.  If the Administrator denies the application, a notice
of denial shall be issued to the applicant at the business address provided on
the application along with the reasons for the denial. The notice shall also
inform the applicant of their right to appeal the Administrator’s decision to
the City Council.  The appeal must be taken within 20 days after receipt of a
notice of denial, and if so taken, the appeal shall be scheduled to be heard at
the next Council meeting.  If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to an
applicant or license holder, it shall be revoked by the City Administrator upon
the discovery that the person, applicant or license holder was ineligible for
the license under this section.
   (D)   All licenses are issued for a period of one year.  The license period
is from January 1 to December 31.  The initial license term will expire at the
end of the calendar year during which the license was issued.
   (E)   Any license issued under this section may be revoked or suspended, as
provided in §§
117.08 through 117.09, or as specifically provided elsewhere in this chapter.
   (F)   All licenses issued under this section shall be valid only on the
business premises for which the license was issued and only for the person to
whom the license was issued.  No transfer of any license to another location or
person shall be valid without the prior approval of the City Administrator.
   (G)   Every license shall be conspicuously posted at the place of business
for which the license is issued, and shall be exhibited to any person upon
request.
   (H)   The renewal of a license under this section shall be handled in the
same manner as the original application.  The request for renewal shall be made
at least 30 but no more than 60 days before the expiration of the current
license.  The issuance of a license under this chapter shall be considered a
privilege and not an absolute right of the applicant, and shall not entitle the
holder to an automatic renewal of the license.
   (I)   No person shall be issued a license or renewal license to sell
tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related devices unless an applicant or
license holder has an approved program for instructing all employees at the
business premises for which the license was issued, in the legal requirements
pertaining to the sale of tobacco, tobacco products and tobacco related
devices, including, but not limited to, reviewing the law on the sale of
tobacco, tobacco products and tobacco related devices, providing information on
the health risks of using tobacco or tobacco products, and requiring employees
to request identification from every customer who appears to be under 27 years
of age.  No license shall be issued unless the applicant or license holder has
received training and instruction on the sale of tobacco, tobacco products and
tobacco related devices.  The training shall include information that the sale
of tobacco, tobacco products and tobacco related devices to minors is illegal,
explains what proof of age is legally acceptable, and that a sale to a minor
can subject the applicant or license holder and their employees to criminal
and/or civil liability.
   (J)   The following shall be grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of
a license under this section.  The following list is not exhaustive or
exclusive:
      (1)   The applicant is under the age of 18 years.
      (2)   The applicant has been convicted within the past five years of a
violation of any provisions of this chapter or a violation of a federal, state,
or local law, ordinance provision, or other regulation relating to tobacco or
tobacco products, or tobacco related devices.
      (3)   The applicant or license holder has had a license to sell tobacco,
tobacco products or tobacco related devices revoked within the preceding 12
months of the date of application.
      (4)   The applicant fails to provide any information required on the city
license application, or provides false or misleading information.
      (5)   The applicant or license holder has. outstanding fines, penalties
or property taxes owed to the city.
(Ord. 183, passed 9-2-97)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 117.04  LICENSE FEE.
   The license fee shall be determined by the City Council, and shall be paid
at the time of application. License fees are not pro rated.
(Ord. 183, passed 9-2-97)
§ 117.05  PROHIBITED SALES.
   (A)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, give away, furnish, or otherwise
deliver any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device:
      (1)   To any person under the age of 18 years;
      (2)   By means of any type of vending machine;
      (3)   By any other means, or to any other person prohibited by federal,
state, or other local law, ordinance provisions, or other regulation;
   (B)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, give away, furnish or otherwise
deliver any tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco related device by means of
self-service merchandising or by any means whereby the customer may have access
to the items without having to request the item from the license holder, their
agents or employees.  All tobacco, tobacco products and tobacco related devices
shall be stored behind a counter or other area not freely accessible to
customers.
(Ord. 183, passed 9-2-97)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 117.06  MOBILE SALES.
   No license shall be issued for the sale of tobacco, tobacco products or
tobacco related devices at a movable place of business, including, but limited
to motorized vehicles, mobile sales kiosks, or trailers.
(Ord. 183, passed 9-2-97)
§ 117.07  COMPLIANCE CHECKS.
   All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by the city police or
other authorized city officials during regular business hours.  From time to
time, but at least once per year, the city shall conduct compliance checks by
engaging, with the written consent of their parents or guardians, minors over
the age of 15 years but less than 18 years, to enter the licensed premise to
attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices. 
Minors used for the purpose of compliance checks shall be supervised by city
designated law enforcement officers or other designated city personnel.  Minors
used for compliance checks shall not be guilty of unlawful possession of
tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices when these items are
obtained as a part of the compliance check.  No minor used in compliance checks
shall attempt to use a false identification misrepresenting the minor’s age,
and all minors lawfully engaged in a compliance check shall answer all
questions about the minor’s age asked by the licensee or his or her employee
and shall produce any identification, if any exists, for which he or she is
asked.  Nothing in this section shall prohibit compliance checks authorized by
state or federal laws for educational, research or training purposes, or
required for the enforcement of a particular state or federal law.
(Ord. 183, passed 9-2-97)
§ 117.08  VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   In addition to violations specified elsewhere in this chapter, the
following acts shall be a violation of this chapter:
      (1)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any minor to have in
his or her possession any tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco related device. 
This subdivision shall not apply to minors lawfully involved in a compliance
check.
      (2)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any minor to smoke,
chew, sniff, ingest or otherwise use any tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco
related device.
      (3)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any minor to purchase
or attempt to purchase or otherwise obtain any tobacco, tobacco product or
tobacco related device, and it shall be a violation of this chapter for any
person to purchase or otherwise obtain these items on behalf of a minor.  It
shall further be a violation for any person to coerce or attempt to coerce a
minor to illegally purchase or otherwise obtain or use any tobacco, tobacco
product or tobacco related device.  This subdivision shall not apply to minors
lawfully involved in a compliance check.
      (4)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any minor to attempt to
disguise his or her true age by the use of a false form of identification,
whether the identification is that of another person or one on which the age of
the person has been modified or tampered with to represent an age older than
the actual age of the person.
   (B)   Whoever sells tobacco to a person under the age of 18 years is guilty
of a misdemeanor. It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this
subdivision if the defendant proves by a preponderance of the evidence that the
defendant reasonably and in good faith relied on proof of age as described in
M.S. § 340A.503, Subdivision 6, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   Whoever furnishes tobacco or tobacco related devices to a person under
the age of 18 years is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (D)   Whoever possesses, smokes, chews or otherwise ingests, purchases or
attempts to purchase tobacco or tobacco related devices and is under the age of
18 years is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. This subdivision does not apply to a
person under the age of 18 years who purchases or attempts to purchase tobacco
or tobacco related devices while under the direct supervision of a responsible
adult for training, education, research or enforcement purposes.  Any person
under the age of 16 years who sells, furnishes or gives away any tobacco or
tobacco related device is guilty of a petty misdemeanor.  Any license holder
who permits any employee under the age of 16 to sell, furnish or give away any
tobacco or tobacco related device is guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
   (E)   Notwithstanding division (C) above, an Indian may furnish tobacco to
an Indian under the age of 18 years if the tobacco is furnished as part of a
traditional Indian spiritual or cultural ceremony.  For purposes of this
subdivision, an Indian is a person who is a member of an Indian tribe, as
defined in M.S. § 257.351, Subdivision 9, as it may be amended from time to
time.
   (F)   Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the city police shall issue a
criminal citation to the alleged violator.
(Ord. 183, passed 9-2-97; Am. Ord. 247, passed 2-22-11)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 117.09  ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.
   (A)   If a licensee or employee of a licensee sells tobacco or tobacco
related devices to a person under the age of 18 years, or violates any other
provision of this chapter, the licensee shall be charged an administrative
penalty of $200.  An administrative penalty of $400 shall be imposed for a
second violation at the same location within 24 months after the initial
violation.  For a third violation at the same location within 24 months after
the initial violation, the licensee shall lose the licensee’s authorization to
sell tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related devices for a period of not
less than 30 days nor more than one year.  The loss of authorization shall be
accomplished by a combination, if necessary, of a suspension of the licensee’s
then existing authorization and an order prohibiting renewal of the licensee’s
license for the prescribed period.
   (B)   An individual who sells tobacco or tobacco related devices to a person
under the age of 18 years shall be charged an administrative penalty of $50.
   (C)   Any person who purchases or attempts to purchase tobacco, tobacco
products or tobacco related devices and is under the age of 18 years may be
charged an administrative penalty of up to $50.  The City Council may also send
notice of the violation to the violator’s parents or school, or order the
violator to attend tobacco-free education programs or other court diversion
programs, or to perform appropriate community service.  The provisions of this
subdivision shall not apply to a person under the age of 18 who purchases or
attempts to purchase tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related devices while
under the direct supervision of a responsible adult for training, research or
enforcement purposes.
(Ord. 183, passed 9-2-97; Am. Ord. 247, passed 2-22-11)
§ 117.10  ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Upon discovery of a suspected violation under §
117.09, the alleged violator shall be issued, either personally or by mail, a
citation that sets forth the alleged violation and the administrative penalty
for the violation, and informs the alleged violator of his or her right to be
heard on the accusation.
   (B)   If, within 20 days after receipt of a citation, a person accused of
violating this chapter so requests, a hearing shall be scheduled, the time and
place of which shall be published and provided to the accused violator.
   (C)   The City Council, or any other person as the Council may by resolution
designate, shall serve as the hearing officer.
   (D)   If the hearing officer determines that a violation of this chapter did
occur, that decision, along with the hearing officer’s reasons for finding a
violation and the penalty to be imposed under §
117.09, shall be recorded in writing, a copy of which shall be provided to the
accused violator.  Likewise, if the hearing officer finds that no violation
occurred or finds grounds for not imposing any penalty, the findings shall be
recorded and a copy provided to the acquitted accused violator.
   (E)   Appeals of any decision made by the hearing officer shall be filed in
the district court for the county in which the violator resides.
   (F)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from seeking
prosecution as a criminal offense for any alleged violation of this chapter. 
If the city elects to seek prosecution as a criminal offense, no administrative
penalty shall be imposed.
   (G)   Each violation, and every day in which a violation occurs or
continues, shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 183, passed 9-2-97)
APPENDIX A:  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE TO SELL TOBACCO, TOBACCO PRODUCTS, AND
TOBACCO RELATED DEVICES AT RETAIL
State of Minnesota                                             City of New
Prague
Counties of Scott and LeSueur
Application for License to Sell Tobacco Related Products at Retail
   The undersigned License Holder of the City of New Prague, in the Counties of
Scott and LeSueur, State of Minnesota, HEREBY MAKE.....APPLICATION FOR LICENSE
to be issued to PROVIDE FULL FIRST, MIDDLE AND LAST NAME
______________________________________________
TO SELL Tobacco, Tobacco Products, and Tobacco Related Devices at
____________________________________________ in the City of New Prague in said
counties and state for the term of one year, beginning with the 1ST day of
January, 20____, subject to the laws of the State of Minnesota and ordinances
and regulations of said City of New Prague pertaining thereto, and herewith
deposit $ __________ in payment of the fee therefor.
Date of Birth: _______
Business Telephone # __________                     Home Telephone #
_____________
1.   Have you been convicted within the past five years of a violation of any
provisions of the attached chapter or a violation of Federal, State, or local
law, ordinance provision, or other regulation relating to tobacco or tobacco
products, or related tobacco devices?
***** Please be aware that providing false information will disqualify your
application in its entirety.
_______ YES (Please explain below)   _______ NO
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
(Please attach additional pages if needed)
Date ___________ , 20____
_________________________
Signature of Applicant        
***** A signed Affidavit of Compliance concerning educational materials used to
instruct employees in the legal requirements pertaining to the sale of tobacco,
tobacco products, and tobacco related devices must accompany this application.
(Ord. 183, passed 9-2-97; Am. Ord. 247, passed 2-22-11)
APPENDIX B:  AFFIDAVIT OF COMPLIANCE CONCERNING EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS
CITY OF NEW PRAGUE
Affidavit of Compliance Concerning Educational Materials
______________ (Licensee), has conducted the proper instructional program for
all employees involved with the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco
related devices as described and required in Chapter 117 of the City of New
Prague Code of Ordinances (Instructional Program).
Please include a copy of the educational materials you use to educate your
employees in the proper sale of tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related
devices.  License will not be approved without this information.
___________________________
Licensee Signature
(Ord. 183, passed 9-2-97; Am. Ord. 247, passed 2-22-11)
CHAPTER 118:  PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
Section
   
118.01   Definitions
   
118.02   Exceptions to definitions
   
118.03   Licensing; exemptions
   
118.04   License ineligibility
   
118.05   License suspension and revocation
   
118.06   License transferability
   
118.07   Registration
   
118.08   Prohibited activities
   
118.09   Exclusion by placard
§ 118.01  DEFINITIONS.
   Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms
shall be given their commonly accepted definitions.  For the purpose of this
chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NON-COMMERCIAL DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCATE.  A person who goes door-to-door for
the primary purpose of disseminating religious, political, social, or other
ideological beliefs.  For the purpose of this chapter, the term DOOR-TO-DOOR
ADVOCATE shall fall under the term solicitor and include door-to-door
canvassing and pamphleteering intended for non-commercial purposes.
   PEDDLER.  A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-
business, street-to- street, or any other type of place-to-place, for the
purpose of offering for sale, displaying or exposing for sale, selling or
attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the goods, wares,
products, merchandise or other personal property that the person is carrying or
otherwise transporting.  The term PEDDLER shall mean the same as the term
hawker.
   PERSON.  Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation,
partnership or association.  As applied to groups, organizations, corporations,
partnerships and associations, the term shall include each member, officer,
partner, associate, agent or employee.
   PROFESSIONAL FUNDRAISER.  Any person, including a corporation or other
entity, who, for compensation, performs any solicitations or other services for
a religious, political, social or other charitable organization.
   REGULAR BUSINESS DAY.  Any day during which the city hall is normally open
for the purpose of conducting public business.  Holidays defined by state law
shall not be counted as regular business days.
   SOLICITOR.  A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-
to-business, street- to-street, or any other type of place-to-place, for the
purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares, products,
merchandise, other personal property or services of which he or she may be
carrying or transporting samples, or that may be described in a catalog or by
other means, and for  which delivery or performance shall occur at a later
time.  The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a person from the
scope of this provision if the actual purpose of the person’s activity is to
obtain or attempt to obtain orders as discussed above.  The term shall mean the
same as the term “canvasser.”
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT.  A person who temporarily sets up business out of a
vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent, other portable shelter, empty store front,
parking lot, or vacant lot for the purpose of exposing or displaying for sale,
selling or attempting to sell, and delivering, goods, wares, products,
merchandise or other personal property.  It shall also mean a person who
provides services from the above locations except that services shall not
include massage services, tattoo parlors and other similar activities or
activities that are prohibited elsewhere in the corresponding zoning district. 
A transient merchant must not remain or intend to remain in any one location
for more than 14 consecutive days, or at any location within the city for a
period exceeding 60 total days during a calendar year.
(Am. Ord. 244, passed 8-2-10)
§ 118.02  EXCEPTIONS TO DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of the requirements of this chapter, the terms
PEDDLER, SOLICITOR, and TRANSIENT MERCHANT shall not apply to any person
selling or attempting to sell at wholesale any goods, wares, products,
merchandise or other personal property to a retailer of the items being sold by
the wholesaler.  The terms also shall not apply to any person who makes initial
contacts with other people for the purpose of establishing or trying to
establish a regular customer delivery route for the delivery of perishable food
and dairy products such as baked goods and milk, nor shall they apply to any
person making deliveries of perishable food and dairy products to the customers
on his or her established regular delivery route.
   (B)   In addition, persons conducting the type of sales commonly known as
garage sales, rummage sales, or estate sales, as well as those persons
participating in an organized multi-person bazaar or flea market, shall be
exempt from the definitions of PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, and TRANSIENT MERCHANTS,
as shall be anyone conducting an auction as a properly licensed auctioneer, or
any officer of the court conducting a court-ordered sale.  Exemption from the
definitions for the scope of this chapter shall not excuse any person from
complying with any other applicable statutory provision or local ordinance.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to prohibit or restrict
non-commercial door-to-door advocacy. Persons engaging in door-to-door advocacy
shall not be required to register as solicitors under §
118.07.
(Am. Ord. 244, passed 8-2-10)
§ 118.03  LICENSING; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   County license required.  No person shall conduct business as a
peddler, solicitor or transient merchant within the city limits without first
having obtained the appropriate license from the county as required by M.S.
Chapter 329 as it may be amended from time to time, if the county issues a
license for the activity.
   (B)   City license required.  Except as otherwise provided for by this
chapter, no person shall conduct business as either a peddler or a transient
merchant without first having obtained a license from the city.  Solicitors
need not be licensed, but are still required to register pursuant to §
118.07.
   (C)   Application.  Application for a city license to conduct business as a
peddler or transient merchant shall be made at least 14 regular business days
before the applicant desires to begin conducting business.  Application for a
license shall be made on a form approved by the City Council and available from
the office of the City Clerk.  All applications shall be signed by the
applicant.  All applications shall include the following information:
      (1)   Applicant’s full legal name.
      (2)   All other names under which the applicant conducts business or to
which applicant officially answers.
      (3)   A physical description of the applicant (hair color, eye color,
height, weight, distinguishing marks and features, and the like).
      (4)   Full address of applicant’s permanent residence.
      (5)   Telephone number of applicant’s permanent residence.
      (6)   Full legal name of any and all business operations owned, managed
or operated by applicant, or for which the applicant is an employee or agent.
      (7)   Full address of applicant’s regular place of business (if any).
      (8)   Any and all business related telephone numbers of the applicant.
      (9)   The type of business for which the applicant is applying for a
license.
      (10)   Whether the applicant is applying for an annual or daily license.
      (11)   The dates during which the applicant intends to conduct business,
and if the applicant is applying for a daily license, the number of days he or
she will be conducting business in the city (maximum 14 consecutive days).
      (12)   Any and all addresses and telephone numbers where the applicant
can be reached while conducting business within the city, including the
location where a transient merchant intends to set up business.
      (13)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
within the last five years of any felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor for
violation of any state or federal statute or any local ordinance, other than
traffic offenses.
      (14)   A list of the three most recent locations where the applicant has
conducted business as a peddler or transient merchant.
      (15)   Proof of any requested county license.
      (16)   Written permission of the property owner or the property owner’s
agent for any property to be used by a transient merchant.
      (17)   A general description of the items to be sold or services to be
provided.
      (18)   All additional information deemed necessary by the City Council.
      (19)   The applicant’s driver’s license number or other acceptable form
of identification.
      (20)   The license plate number, registration information and vehicle
identification number for any vehicle to be used in conjunction with the
licensed business and a description of the vehicle.
   (D)   Fee.  All applications for a license under this chapter shall be
accompanied by the fee as established on the city’s Official Fee Schedule, as
it may be amended from time to time.
   (E)   Procedure.  Upon receipt of the completed application and payment of
the license fee, the City Clerk, within two regular business days, must
determine if the application is complete.  An application is determined to be
complete only if all required information is provided.  If the City Clerk
determines that the application is incomplete, the City Clerk must inform the
applicant of the required necessary information that is missing.  If the
application is complete, the City Clerk must order any investigation, including
background checks, necessary to verify the information provided with the
application.  Within ten regular business days of receiving a complete
application the City Clerk must issue the license unless there exist grounds
for denying the license under §
118.04, in which case the Clerk must deny the license. If the City Clerk denies
the license, the applicant must be notified in writing of the decision, the
reason for denial, and of the applicant’s right to appeal the denial by
requesting, within 20 days of receiving notice of rejection, a public hearing
before the City Council.  The City Council shall hear the appeal within 20 days
of the date of the request.  The decision of the City Council following the
public hearing can be appealed by petitioning the Minnesota Court of Appeals
for a Writ of Certiorari.
   (F)   Duration.  An annual license granted under this chapter shall be valid
for one calendar year from the date of issue.  All other licenses granted under
this chapter shall be valid only during the time period indicated on the
license.  Annual licenses will not be granted to transient merchants.
   (G)   License exemptions.
      (1)   No license shall be required for any person to sell or attempt to
sell, or to take or attempt to take orders for, any product grown, produced,
cultivated, or raised on any farm including, but not limited to fruits,
vegetables, plants, flowers and Christmas trees.
      (2)   No license shall be required of any person going from house-to-
house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or other type of
place-to-place when the activity is for the purpose of exercising that person’s
State or Federal Constitutional rights such as the freedom of speech, press,
religion and the like, except that this exemption may be lost if the person’s
exercise of Constitutional rights is merely incidental to a commercial
activity.
      (3)   Professional fundraisers working on behalf of an otherwise exempt
person or group shall not be exempt from the licensing requirements of this
chapter.
(Am. Ord. 244, passed 8-2-10)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 118.04  LICENSE INELIGIBILITY.
   The following shall be grounds for denying a license under this chapter:
   (A)   The failure of the applicant to obtain and show proof of having
obtained any required county license.
   (B)   The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the
information requested by the city as a part of the application, or the failure
to sign the application, or the failure to pay the required fee at the time of
application.
   (C)   The conviction of the applicant within the past five years from the
date of application for any violation of any federal or state statute or
regulation, or of any local ordinance, which adversely reflects on the person’s
ability to conduct the business for which the license is being sought in an
honest and legal manner.  Those violations shall include but not be limited to
burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, and
any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another person.
   (D)   The revocation within the past five years of any license issued to the
applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or
transient merchant.
   (E)   The applicant is found to have a bad business reputation.  Evidence of
a bad business reputation shall include, but not be limited to, the existence
of more than three complaints against the applicant with the Better Business
Bureau, the Attorney General’s Office, or other similar business or consumer
rights office or agency, within the preceding 12 months, or three complaints
filed against the applicant within the preceding five years.
(Am. Ord. 244, passed 8-2-10)
§ 118.05  LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Generally.  Any license issued under this section may be suspended or
revoked at the discretion of the City Council for violation of any of the
following:
      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statements on the application
form.
      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made during the course
of the licensed activity.
      (3)   Conviction of any offense for which granting of a license could
have been denied under §
118.04.
      (4)   Violation of any provision of this chapter.
   (B)   Multiple persons under one license.  The suspension or revocation of
any license issued for the purpose of authorizing multiple persons to conduct
business as peddlers or transient merchants on behalf of the licensee shall
serve as a suspension or revocation of each authorized person’s authority to
conduct business as a peddler or transient merchant on behalf of the licensee
whose license is suspended or revoked.
   (C)   Notice.  Prior to revoking or suspending any license issued under this
chapter, the city shall provide the license holder with written notice of the
alleged violations and inform the licensee of his or her right to a hearing on
the alleged violation.  Notice shall be delivered in person or by mail to the
permanent residential address listed on the license application, or if no
residential address is listed, to the business address provided on the license
application.
   (D)   Public hearing.  Upon receiving the notice provided in division (C) of
this section, the licensee shall have the right to request a public hearing. 
If no request for a hearing is received by the City Clerk within ten regular
business days following the service of the notice, the city may proceed with
the suspension or revocation.  For the purpose of mailed notices, service shall
be considered complete as of the date the notice is placed in the mail.  If a
public hearing is requested within the stated timeframe, a hearing shall be
scheduled within 20 days from the date of the request.  Within three regular
business days of the hearing, the City Council shall notify the licensee of its
decision.
   (E)   Emergency.  If, in the discretion of the City Council, imminent harm
to the health or safety of the public may occur because of the actions of a
peddler or transient merchant licensed under this chapter, the City Council may
immediately suspend the person’s license and provide notice of the right to
hold a subsequent public hearing as prescribed in division (D) of this section.
   (F)   Appeals.  Any person whose license is suspended or revoked under this
section shall have the right to appeal that decision in court.
(Am. Ord. 244, passed 8-2-10)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 118.06  LICENSE TRANSFERABILITY.
   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred to any person
other than the person to whom the license was issued.
(Am. Ord. 244, passed 8-2-10)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 118.07  REGISTRATION.
   All solicitors, and any person exempt from the licensing requirements of
this chapter under §
118.03, shall be required to register with the city.  Persons engaging in door-
to-door advocacy shall not be required to register. The term NON-COMMERCIAL
DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCACY includes door-to-door canvassing and pamphleteering as
vehicles for the dissemination of religious, political and other ideas. 
Registration shall be made on the same form required for a license application,
but no fee shall be required.  Immediately upon completion of the registration
form, the City Clerk shall issue to the registrant a Certificate of
Registration as proof of the registration.  Certificates of Registration shall
be non-transferable.
(Am. Ord. 244, passed 8-2-10)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 118.08  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall conduct business in any of
the following manners:
   (A)   Calling attention to his or her business or items to be sold by means
of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out, or by any other
noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an enclosed structure.
   (B)   Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian traffic on
any street, alley, sidewalk or other public right-of-way.
   (C)   Conducting business in a way as to create a threat to the health,
safety and welfare of any individual or the general public.
   (D)   Conducting business before 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. 
   (E)   Failing to provide proof of license or registration, and
identification, when requested; or using the license or registration of another
person.
   (F)   Making any false or misleading statements about the product or service
being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement.  No peddler, solicitor
or transient merchant shall claim to have the endorsement of the city solely
based on the city having issued a license or certificate of registration to
that person.
   (G)   Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave, or to
otherwise conduct business in a manner a reasonable person would find obscene,
threatening, intimidating or abusive.
   (H)   Violation of any section of Chapter 92 of the city code as related to
public health, welfare and safety matters or public nuisances.
   (I)   Lack of compliance with the city’s Zoning Ordinance as it relates to
the location of transient merchant locations.  The transient merchant site
shall not occupy parking spaces that are the minimum required for the principal
use on the lot or site if the transient merchant is utilizing a portion of a
parking lot.
(Am. Ord. 244, passed 8-2-10)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 118.09  EXCLUSION BY PLACARD.
   No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant, unless invited to do so by the
property owner or tenant, shall enter the property of another for the purpose
of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant when the
property is marked with a sign or placard at least four inches long and four
inches wide with print of at least 48 point in size stating “No Peddlers,
Solicitors or Transient Merchants,” or “Peddlers, Solicitors, and Transient
Merchants Prohibited,” or other comparable statement.  No person other than the
property owner or tenant shall remove, deface or otherwise tamper with any sign
or placard under this section.
(Am. Ord. 244, passed 8-2-10)  Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 119:  ADULT USE
Section
General Provisions
   
119.01   Findings and purpose
   
119.02   Definitions
Sexually Oriented Uses
   
119.20   Purpose
   
119.21   General provisions
   
119.22   Sexually oriented uses, principal
   
119.23   Sexually oriented uses, accessory
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 119.01  FINDINGS AND PURPOSE. 
   (A)   Studies conducted by the Minnesota Attorney General, the American
Planning Association, and cities such as St. Paul, Minnesota; Indianapolis,
Indiana; Hopkins, Minnesota; Ramsey, Minnesota; Minnetonka, Minnesota;
Rochester, Minnesota; Phoenix, Arizona; Los Angeles, California; and Seattle,
Washington have studied the impacts that adult establishments have on those
communities.  These studies have concluded that adult establishments have
adverse impacts on the surrounding neighborhoods.  These impacts include
increased crime rates, lower property values, increased transiency,
neighborhood blight, and potential health risks. 
   (B)   Based on these studies and findings, the City Council concludes:
      (1)   Adult establishments have adverse secondary impacts of the types
set forth above.
      (2)   The adverse impacts caused by adult establishments tend to diminish
if adult establishments are governed by geographic, licensing, and health
requirements.
      (3)   It is not the intent of the City Council to prohibit adult
establishments from having a reasonable opportunity to locate in the city.
      (4)   M.S. § 394.21, as it may be amended from time to time, allows the
city to adopt regulations to promote the public health, safety, morals and
general welfare.
      (5)   The public health, safety, morals and general welfare will be
promoted by the city adopting regulations governing adult establishments.
(Ord. 191)
§ 119.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED USES.  Uses which include a sexually oriented arcade;
sexually oriented bookstore, sexually oriented video store; sexually oriented
store; sexually oriented cabaret; sexually oriented conversation/rap parlor;
sexually oriented massage parlor; sexually oriented motel; sexually oriented
motion picture theater; sexually oriented steam room, bath house or sauna;
sexually oriented theater, escort agency; nude model studio; sexual encounter
center and other premises, enterprises, establishments, businesses, or places
open to some or all members of the public, at or in which there is an emphasis
on the presentation, display, depiction, or description of SPECIFIED SEXUAL
ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS which are capable of being seen by
members of the public.  Activities classified as “obscene” as defined by M.S. §
617.241, as it may be amended from time to time, are not included.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED USES, ACCESSORY.  The offering of retail goods for sale
which are classified as sexually oriented uses on a limited scale and which are
incidental to the primary activity and goods and/or services offered by the
establishment.  Examples of such items include the sale of sexually oriented
books or magazines, or the sale and/or rental of sexually oriented motion
pictures, the sale of sexually oriented novelties.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED USES, PRINCIPAL.  The offering of goods and/or services
which are classified as sexually oriented uses as a primary or sole activity of
a business or establishment and include, but are not limited to the following:
      (1)   ESCORT.  A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act
as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
      (2)   ESCORT AGENCY.  A person or business association who furnishes,
offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary
business purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
      (3)   ESTABLISHMENT.  Means and includes any of the following:
         (a)   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as
a new business;
         (b)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a
sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
         (c)   The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other
existing sexually oriented business; or
         (d)   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
      (4)   NUDE MODEL STUDIO.  Any place where a person who appears in a state
of nudity or displays SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREA is provided to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by
other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
      (5)   NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY.
         (a)   The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals,
female genitals, or female breasts; or
         (b)   The state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human
buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or areola of the female breast.
      (6)   SEMI-NUDE.  A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than
the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well as
portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
      (7)   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER.  A business or commercial enterprise that,
as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
         (a)   Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the opposite sex; or
         (b)   Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude.
      (8)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED ARCADE.  Any place to which the public is
permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically,
electronically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to
five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
      (9)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BOOKSTORE, SEXUALLY ORIENTED VIDEO STORE, OR
SEXUALLY ORIENTED STORE.  A commercial establishment which as a principal
business purpose offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any
one of more of the following:
         (a)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions,
compact discs, computer software, digital recordings, slides, or other visual
representations which depict or describe SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS; or
         (b)   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia, which are designed for,
use in connection with SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
      (10)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED CABARET.  A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or
similar commercial establishment which regularly features:
         (a)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or
         (b)   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS or by SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES; or
         (c)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, compact discs,
computer software, digital recordings or other photographic reproductions which
are characterized by the depiction or description of SPECIFIED SEXUAL
ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
      (11)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED CONVERSATION/REP PARLOR.  A conversation/rap
parlor which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides the service of
engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, or discussion between an
employee of the establishment and a customer, if such service is distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED
ANATOMICAL AREAS.
      (12)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED MASSAGE PARLOR.  A massage parlor which excludes
minors by reason of age, or which provides for any form of consideration, the
rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping, or rolling of the body, if the service
provided by the massage parlor is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
      (13)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED MOTEL.  A hotel, motel or similar commercial
establishment which:
         (a)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of
consideration; provides patrols with closed-circuit television transmissions,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS, and has a sign
visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this
adult type of photographic reproductions; or
         (b)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is
less than ten hours; or
         (c)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the
room for a period of time that is less than ten hours.
      (14)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A commercial
establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures,
video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly
shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of SPECIFIED
SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
      (15)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED SAUNA.  A sauna which excludes minors by reason
of age, or which provides for any form of consideration, a steam bath or heat
bathing room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxing, or reducing, utilizing
steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing, or reducing agent, if the service
provided by the sauna is characterized by an emphasis on SPECIFIED SEXUAL
ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
      (16)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED THEATER.  A theater, concert hall, auditorium,
or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear
in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS or SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREA.  Any of the following:
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, and female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola;
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if opaquely
covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.  Includes any of the following:
      (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;
      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
      (3)   Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
      (4)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in (1) through (3) above.
(Ord. 191)
SEXUALLY ORIENTED USES
§ 119.20  PURPOSE. 
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish provisions for the opportunity
as well as controls of sexually oriented uses within the City of New Prague.
(Ord. 191)
§ 119.21  GENERAL PROVISIONS. 
   Sexually oriented uses as defined in this ordinance shall be subject to the
following general provisions:
   (A)   Activities classified as obscene as defined by M.S. § 617.241, as it
may be amended from time to time, are not permitted and are prohibited.
   (B)   Sexually oriented uses, either principal or accessory, shall be
prohibited from locating in any building which is also used for residential
purposes.
   (C)   Sexually oriented uses, either principal or accessory, shall be
prohibited from locating in any building which is also licensed to sell
intoxicating liquor, non-intoxicating malt liquor or wine.
   (D)   A sexually oriented use which does not qualify as a sexually oriented
use-accessory, shall be classified as a sexually oriented use-principal.
   (E)   In addition to any permits required under this chapter, an annual
license and associated fee shall be established for sexually oriented uses,
both principal and accessory, by the City Council.
(Ord. 191)
§ 119.22  SEXUALLY ORIENTED USES, PRINCIPAL.
   Sexually oriented uses principal are permitted with a conditional use permit
in the I-1 (Industrial) District subject to the following conditions:
   (A)   Sexually oriented uses-principal shall be located at least 1,000
radial feet, as measured in a straight line from the closest point of the
property line of the building upon which the sexually oriented use-principal is
located to the property line of:
      (1)   Property zoned RL-70, RL-84, RL-90, RM, and RH.
      (2)   Another sexually oriented use-principal.
      (3)   Property used for residential purposes.
      (4)   Church or cemetery.
      (5)   Schools.
      (6)   Day cares.
      (7)   Public library.
      (8)   Public parks/trails.
      (9)   State and Federal Wildlife refuge
      (10)   On/off sale liquor establishments.
      (11)   Any sensitive use as identified by the City Planner.
   (B)   Sexually oriented use-principal activities, as defined by this
chapter, shall be classified as one use.  No two sexually oriented uses-
principal shall be located in the same building or upon the same property and
each use shall be subject to division (A) above.
   (C)   Sexually oriented uses-principal shall, in addition to other sign
requirements established by city code or ordinance, also adhere to the
following signing regulations:
      (1)   Sign messages shall be generic in nature, not use any sexually
oriented materials or entertainment and shall only identify the type of
business which is being conducted.
      (2)   Sign shall not contain material classified as advertising.
      (3)   Signs shall comply with requirements of size and number of the
district in which they are located.
   (D)   Both the owner and manager of a sexually oriented uses-principal shall
be responsible for the conduct of their employees and for compliance with this
section.
   (E)   No owner or manager of a sexually oriented uses-principal shall employ
a person under the age of 18.
   (F)   No owner, manager, or employee of a sexually oriented uses-principal
shall have been convicted of violating this section two of more times within 24
months.
   (G)   No owner, manager, or employee of a sexually oriented uses-principal
shall have been convicted of a sex crime, as identified in M.S. §§ 609.293
through 609.352, 609.746 through 609.749, 609.79, 518B.01, as they may be
amended from time to time, or related statute dealing with sexual assault,
sexual misconduct, harassment, obscenity, or domestic abuse.
   (H)   The business owner, manager, or employee of a sexually oriented uses-
principal shall ensure that no person under the age of 18 enters the business.
   (I)   No owner, manager, or employee of a sexually oriented uses-principal
shall allow any person under the age of 18 to have access to sexually oriented
materials, whether by sight, purchase, touch, or any other means.
   (J)   No owner, manager, or employee of a sexually oriented uses-principal
may sell or display for sale any sexually oriented material except in original
unopened packages.
   (K)   No owner, manager, or employee of a sexually oriented uses-principal
shall allow sexually oriented materials or entertainment to be visible or
perceivable in any manner, including aurally, at any time from outside of the
business.
   (L)   No sexually oriented uses-principal shall be opened except between 7:
00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday.
   (M)   No sexually oriented uses-principal shall have any booths, stalls or
partitions which separate any area from a general public room.  The
restrictions of this paragraph do not apply to restrooms, storage rooms, or
private offices of the owner, manager or employees of the business, if such
storage rooms are used solely for the running of the business and no person
other than the owner, manager and employees are allowed in the storage rooms or
offices.
   (N)   Each sexually oriented uses-principal shall display a sign on its main
entrance door, which reads: “This business sells sexually oriented materials or
entertainment.  Persons under the age of 18 are prohibited from entering.”  The
sign letters shall be a minimum of two inches high.
   (O)   Sexually oriented cabaret shall adhere to the following standards and
regulations:
      (1)   An owner, operator, or manager of a sexually oriented cabaret may
not allow any dancer or other live entertainer to display specified anatomical
areas or to display or perform specified sexual activities on the premises of
the sexually oriented cabaret;
      (2)   A dancer, live entertainer, performer, patron, or any other person
may not display specified anatomical areas in a sexually oriented cabaret;
      (3)   The owner, operator, or manager of a sexually oriented cabaret must
provide the following information to the city concerning any person who dances
or performs live entertainment at the sexually oriented cabaret: the person’s
name, home address, home telephone number, date of birth, and any aliases;
      (4)   A dancer, live entertainer, performer may not be under 18 years
old;
      (5)   Dancing or live entertainment must occur on a platform intended for
that purpose and that is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor;
      (6)   A dancer or performer may not perform a dance or live entertainment
closer than ten feet from any patron;
      (7)   A dancer or performer may not fondle or caress any patron and no
patron may fondle or caress any dancer or performer;
      (8)   A patron may not pay or give gratuity to any dancer or performer;
and
      (9)   A dancer or performer may not solicit or accept any pay or gratuity
from any patron.
(Ord. 191)
§ 119.23  SEXUALLY ORIENTED USES, ACCESSORY.
   Sexually oriented uses accessory are allowed as a permitted uses in the B-1,
B-2, B-3 (Business) and I-1 (Industrial) District subject to the following
conditions:
   (A)   Sexually oriented uses-accessory shall:
      (1)   Comprise no more than 5% of the floor area of the establishment in
which it is located; provided that the maximum floor area used for sexually
oriented uses-accessory may not exceed 1,000 square feet.
      (2)   Comprise no more than 10% of the gross receipts of the entire
business operation.
      (3)   Not involve or include any activity except the sale or rental of
merchandise.
   (B)   Sexually oriented uses-accessory shall be restricted from and prohibit
access to minors by the physical separation of such items from areas of general
public access:
      (1)   Movie rentals.  Display areas shall be restricted from general view
and shall be located within a separate room, the access of which is in clear
view and under the control of the persons responsible for the operation or
shall be in catalogs under the direct control and distribution of the operator.
      (2)   Magazines.  Publications classified or qualifying as sexually
oriented shall not be physically accessible to minors and shall be covered with
a wrapper or other means to prevent display or any material other than the
publication title.
      (3)   Other use.  Sexually oriented uses-accessory not specifically cited
shall comply with the intent of this chapter subject to the approval of the
City Planner.
   (C)   Sexually oriented uses-accessory shall be prohibited from both
internal and external advertising and signing of sexually oriented materials
and products.
   (D)   Sexually oriented uses-accessory activities, including sale or display
of instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are used or designed for use in
connection with specified sexual activities, shall be prohibited at any public
show, movie, caravan, circus, carnival, theatrical or other performance or
exhibition presented to the general public where minors are admitted.
(Ord. 191)
CHAPTER 120:  REGISTRATION PROCESS FOR RENTAL HOUSING
Section
   
120.01   Purpose
   
120.02   Definitions
   
120.03   Enforcement
   
120.04   Registration of rental property required
   
120.05   Registration application
   
120.06   Transfers and changes
   
120.07   Registration fee
 
   
120.99   Penalty
§ 120.01  PURPOSE.
   The city intends to use the information collected on the registration forms
to analyze the location and distribution of rental housing within the city, to
analyze the current status as well as the trends in the conversion of owner-
occupied housing to and from non-owner occupied, to quantify the amount of
rental housing available in the city, and to track the needs and availability
of rental housing as the population increases.
(Ord. 231, passed 3-17-08)
§ 120.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY.  The City of New Prague, Minnesota.
   DWELLING.  A building wholly or partly used or intended to be used for
living, sleeping, cooking, and eating purposes by human occupants, but not
including hotels and motels.
   DWELLING UNIT or RENTAL UNIT.  A room or a group of rooms located within a
dwelling or apartment building which are used or intended to be used for
living, sleeping, cooking, and eating purposes.
   LET.  To give the use of a dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit by an
owner or manager to an occupant in return for rent.
   MANAGER.  A person who has charge, care, or control of a building or part
thereof in which dwelling unit(s) or rooming unit(s) are let on behalf of the
owner.
   OCCUPANT.  An individual living in or having possession of a building or
part thereof for 14 consecutive days or more, whether or not the individual is
occasionally absent from the premises.
   OWNER.  A person or entity which alone or jointly with others owns or has an
ownership interest in a dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit within the
city. OWNER shall include any agent or manager designated by the owner to be
responsible for the rental property, but the owner shall remain responsible for
full compliance with this chapter.
   PREMISES.  Includes a dwelling or dwellings, surrounding land related
thereto, and other structures located on the land.
   RENT.  A stated return or payment for the temporary possession of a
dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit. The return or payment may be money,
service, property, or other valuable consideration.
   RENTAL PROPERTY.  Any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or multiples
thereof on one property and the related premises which are subject to this
chapter.
   ROOMING UNIT.  A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used
or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking purposes,
along with private or shared sanitation facilities.
   UNIT.  Any dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit regulated by this
chapter.
(Ord. 231, passed 3-17-08)
§ 120.03  ENFORCEMENT.
   The Planning Department of the city shall enforce the requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. 231, passed 3-17-08)
§ 120.04  REGISTRATION OF RENTAL PROPERTY REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful to operate rental property in the city without first
registering the property with the city.
(Ord. 231, passed 3-17-08)  Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.05  REGISTRATION APPLICATION.
   (A)   The owner or manager of any rental property intended to be let or
currently being let shall register the rental property with the city within 30
days of the effective date of this chapter. For 2008 and 2009, all rental
property registrations shall expire December 31, 2009. Thereafter, the
registration shall be effective for a two year period as of January 1 of the
even year and shall expire December 31 of the following year.
   (B)   The registration application shall be available at City Hall and shall
be filed with the City Administrator.
   (C)   A registration application must be filed with the City Administrator
at least 30 days prior to any conversion of a dwelling to use as rental
property.
   (D)   Each registration application shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Rental property building type;
      (2)   Name of rental property complex, if applicable;
      (3)   Address of the rental property;
      (4)   Property identification number of the rental property;
      (5)   Number of rental property units described by the number of bedrooms
and other units;
      (6)   Name, address, and a description of the legal entity owning the
rental property;
      (7)   Name, address, and telephone number of a contact person and manager
of the rental property; and
      (8)   Owner’s signature acknowledging receipt of the requirements
described in the City Code of Ordinances and attesting that the rental property
will be operated and maintained according to the applicable requirements and
subject to the applicable penalties for violations.
   (E)   If the proposed use of the dwelling does not comply with the city’s
zoning code, then the registration application will not be accepted.
(Ord. 231, passed 3-17-08)
§ 120.06  TRANSFERS AND CHANGES.
   Within 30 days of a transfer of ownership, change in manager, change in the
number of rental units, or change in the dwelling occupancy from owner-occupant
to non-owner-occupant, the owner or manager shall complete and submit a
registration application for any rental property affected by the transfer or
change.
(Ord. 231, passed 3-17-08)
§ 120.07  REGISTRATION FEE.
   The registration fee is in the amount set by the Council by resolution from
time to time. The Council may also set by resolution from time to time an
additional fee for application registrations or renewals received in violation
of this chapter.
(Ord. 231, passed 3-17-08)
§ 120.99  PENALTY.
   Any violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor and is also subject to all
available civil penalties and other remedies. Each day a violation exists
constitutes a separate violation.
(Ord. 231, passed 3-17-08)
TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
      
131.   SOCIAL HOSTS
CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Depositing refuse into creek prohibited
   
130.02   Curfew for minors
   
130.03   Discharging firearms
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01  DEPOSITING REFUSE INTO CREEK PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to deposit refuse or any
foreign matter into the creek which flows in a northerly direction through the
corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. 115, passed 7-6-59)  Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   Refuse, see Chapter 53
§ 130.02  CURFEW FOR MINORS.
   (A)   This curfew for minors within the city is being implemented for four
primary reasons:
      (1)   To protect the public from illegal acts of minors committed after
the curfew hour;
      (2)   To protect minors from improper influences that prevail after the
curfew hour;
      (3)   To protect minors from criminal activity that occurs after the
curfew hour; and
      (4)   To help parents and legal guardians control their minor children.
   (B)   Pursuant to M.S. § 260.111, as it may be amended from time to time, a
parent, guardian, or custodian of a child who is subject to the jurisdiction of
the juvenile court is also subject to the jurisdiction of the juvenile court in
any manner in which that parent, guardian, or custodian has a right to notice
under M.S. §§ 260.135 and 260.141 or the right to participate under M.S. §
260.155, as they may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      EMERGENCY ERRAND.  A task that if not completed promptly threatens the
health, safety or comfort of the minor or a member of the minor’s household. 
This includes, but is not limited to seeking urgent medical treatment, seeking
urgent assistance from law enforcement or fire department personnel, and
seeking shelter from the elements or urgent assistance from a utility company
due to a natural or man-made calamity.
      PLACES OF ENTERTAINMENT, AMUSEMENT OR REFRESHMENT.  These places include,
but are not limited to movie theaters, pinball arcades, shopping malls,
amusement parks, restaurants and bowling alleys.
      PRIMARY CARE OR CUSTODY.  The person who is responsible for providing
food, clothing, shelter and other basic necessities to the minor.  The person
providing primary care or custody to the minor cannot be another minor.
      SCHOOL ACTIVITY.  An event which has been placed on a school calendar by
public or parochial school authorities as a school sanctioned event.
      SUPERVISED VOLUNTARY ASSOCIATION.  Includes scouts, 4-H, community
leagues, fraternal and social clubs or other community events.  Examples of
community events include, but shall not be limited to the following: dances,
community celebrations and carnivals.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 16 years to be on
or present in any public street, avenue, alley, park or other public grounds or
building, place of amusement, entertainment or refreshment, vacant lot or any
other unsupervised place within the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. Sunday
through Thursday, other than evenings preceding legal holidays, and 6:00 a.m.
of the following day, and between the hours of 11:00 p.m. Friday, Saturday and
the day preceding a legal holiday and 6:00 a.m. of the following day unless:
      (1)   The minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or other
adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor or one exercising
temporary supervision over the minor;
      (2)   The minor is returning home by direct route from and within 30
minutes after the conclusion of a school activity, or an activity of a
religious or supervised voluntary association;
      (3)   The minor is in a place or returning home from the place connected
with and required by some legitimate business, trade, profession or occupation
in which the minor is permitted by law to be engaged;
      (4)   The minor is in a motor vehicle with parental consent for normal
travel with intercity travel to, through or from any city within Scott and
LeSueur County being excepted in all cases from the curfew; or
      (5)   The minor is on an emergency errand.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years and over
the age of 16 years to be on any public street, avenue, alley, park or other
public grounds or building, place of amusement, entertainment or refreshment,
vacant lot or any other unsupervised place within the city between the hours of
11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday, other than evenings preceding legal
holidays, and 6:00 a.m. of the following day and between the hours of 12:30
a.m. Friday, Saturday and the day preceding a legal holiday, and 6:00 a.m. of
the following day unless:
      (1)   The minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or other
adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor or one exercising
temporary supervision over the minor;
      (2)   The minor is returning home by direct route from and within 30
minutes after the conclusion of a school activity, or an activity of a
religious or supervised voluntary association;
      (3)   The minor is in a place or returning home from a place connected
with and required by some legitimate business, trade, profession or occupation
in which the minor is permitted by law to be engaged;
      (4)   The minor is in a motor vehicle with parental consent for normal
travel with intercity travel to, through or from any city within Scott and
LeSueur County being excepted in all cases from the curfew; or
      (5)   The minor is on an emergency errand.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having
the legal custody and control of a minor under the age of 18 years to knowingly
or negligently permit the minor to violate the provisions of divisions (A)
through (D) above.
   (G)   Divisions (A) through (D) above are not to be construed to give a
minor the right to stay out until the curfew hours designated herein if
otherwise directed by a parent, guardian or other adult person having the
primary care and custody of the minor; nor should it be construed to diminish
or impair the control of the adult person having primary care or custody of the
minor.
   (H)   It shall be unlawful for any person operating or in charge of
amusement, entertainment or refreshment, or any other place of business to
permit any minor under the age of 18 years to loiter, loaf or idle in the place
during the hours prohibited by divisions (A) through (D).
   (I)   Whenever the owner or person in charge or in control of any place of
amusement, entertainment, refreshment, or other place of business shall find
persons under the age of 18 years loitering, loafing or idling in the place of
business, he or she shall immediately order the person to leave, and if the
person refuses to leave the place of business, the operator shall immediately
notify the police department and inform them of the violation.
   (J)   This section shall not be construed as permitting the presence at any
time of any person under the age of 18 years in any place where his or her
presence is now prohibited by an existing law or ordinance.
(Ord. 180, passed - - )  Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03  DISCHARGING FIREARMS.
   (A)   No person shall discharge a firearm within the city.
   (B)   This section shall not prohibit the firing of a military salute or the
firing of weapons by persons of the nation’s armed forces acting under military
authority, and shall not apply to law enforcement officials in the proper
enforcement of the law, or to any person in the proper exercise of the right of
self defense, or to any person otherwise lawfully permitted by proper federal,
state or local authorities to discharge a firearm in a manner contrary to the
provisions of this section.
   (C)   If any of the above provisions are found to be in conflict with M.S. §
624.717, as it may be amended from time to time, the provisions of that statute
shall prevail.
§ 130.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   A minor found to be in violation of §
130.02 shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor, and shall be sentenced to the
payment of a fine of $25.
   (B)   A minor found to be in violation of §
130.02 on two separate occasions within the period of one year shall be guilty
of a petty misdemeanor, and shall be sentenced to the payment of a fine of $50
or to ten hours of community service or any combination thereof.
   (C)   A minor found to be in violation of §
130.02 on more than two separate occasions within the period of one year shall
be guilty of a petty misdemeanor, and shall be sentenced to the payment of a
fine of $100 or to 20 hours of community service or any combination thereof.
   (D)   Any parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care
and custody of a minor or one exercising temporary supervision of a minor who
has knowingly or negligently permitted the minor to violate §
130.02 on at least one prior occasion shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 180, passed - - )
CHAPTER 131:  SOCIAL HOSTS
Section
   
131.01   Purpose
   
131.02   Findings
   
131.03   Definitions
   
131.04   Prohibited acts
   
131.05   Exceptions
   
131.06   Enforcement
   
131.07   Severability
 
   
131.99   Penalty
§ 131.01  PURPOSE.
   The City Council desires to protect the health, safety and welfare of all
persons living in and visiting the city. The use of alcohol by persons under
the age of 21 is prohibited by State Statute. The City Council intends to
discourage underage possession and consumption of alcohol, even if done within
the confines of a private residence, and intends to hold persons criminally
responsible who host events or gatherings where persons under the age of 21
possess or consume alcohol regardless of whether the person hosting the event
or gathering supplied the alcohol or was present.
(Ord. 238, passed 7-20-09)
§ 131.02  FINDINGS.
   The City Council finds that:
   (A)   Alcohol is an addictive drug which, if used irresponsibly, could have
drastic effects on those who use it as well as those who are affected by the
actions of an irresponsible user.
   (B)   Consumption of alcohol by persons under the age of 21 is harmful to
those persons and constitutes a potential threat to public safety from injuries
related to alcohol consumption, such as alcohol overdose or alcohol-related
traffic collisions.
   (C)   As a result, events and gatherings held on private or public property
where alcohol is possessed or consumed by persons under the age of 21 should be
prevented as much as possible.
   (D)   Events or gatherings involving underage possession and consumption
often occur outside the presence of parents or other responsible adults.
However, there are times when a parent or other adult is present and condones
the activity, and, in some circumstances, provides the alcohol.
   (E)   Even though giving or furnishing alcohol to an underage person is a
crime, it is difficult to prove, and an ordinance is necessary to help further
combat underage consumption.
   (F)   A deterrent effect will be created by holding a person criminally
responsible for hosting an event or gathering where underage possession or
consumption occurs.
(Ord. 238, passed 7-20-09)
§ 131.03  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL.  Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine,
whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits including dilutions
and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE.  Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid
or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains 0.5% or
more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone
or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances.
   EVENT OR GATHERING.  Any group of three or more persons who have assembled
or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.
   HOST.  To aid, conduct, sponsor, allow, entertain, organize, supervise,
control, or permit a gathering or event.
   PARENT.  Any person having the following relationship to a juvenile:
      (1)   A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent;
      (2)   A legal guardian; or
      (3)   A person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the
court.
   PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, corporation, or any
association of one or more individuals.  PERSON does not include a city,
county, or state agency.
   RESIDENCE OR PREMISES.  Any location, including a home, yard, farm, field,
land, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a
hall or meeting room, park, or any other place of assembly, public or private,
whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a
dwelling or specifically for a party or other social function, and whether
owned, leased, rented, or used with or without permission or compensation.
   UNDERAGE PERSON.  An individual under 21 years of age.
(Ord. 238, passed 7-20-09)
§ 131.04  PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to host an event or gathering at
any residence or premises where alcoholic beverages are present and underage
persons may also be present if:
      (1)   The person hosting the event or gathering knows or reasonably
should know that the underage person:
         (a)   May or does consume alcohol or an alcoholic beverage; or
         (b)   Possesses alcohol or an alcoholic beverage with the intent to
consume it; and
      (2)   The person fails to take reasonable steps to prevent the possession
or consumption of alcoholic beverages by an underage person(s).
   (B)   A person who hosts an event or gathering does not have to be present
at the event or gathering to be criminally responsible.
   (C)   A person is criminally responsible for violating division (A) above if
the person intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels, or conspires with or
otherwise procures another to commit the prohibited act.
(Ord. 238, passed 7-20-09)  Penalty see §
131.99
§ 131.05  EXCEPTIONS,
   (A)   This chapter does not apply to conduct solely between an underage
person and his or her parent while present in the parent's household.
   (B)   This chapter does not apply to a legally protected religious
observance.
   (C)   This chapter does not apply to retail intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt
liquor licensees, municipal liquor stores, or bottle club permit holders who
are regulated by M.S. § 340A.503 subdivision 1(a)(1), but it does apply to a
person who hosts a gathering or event at such liquor establishment.
   (D)   This chapter does not apply to situations where underage persons are
lawfully in possession of alcohol or alcoholic beverages during the course and
scope of employment.
(Ord. 238, passed 7-20-09)
§ 131.06  ENFORCEMENT.
   This chapter may be enforced by any police officer or county sheriff’s
deputy.
(Ord. 238, passed 7-20-09)
§ 131.07  SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, word, or other portion
of this chapter is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional or invalid, in
whole, or in part, by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall
be deemed severable, and such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter, which remaining
portions shall continue in full force and effect.
(Ord. 238, passed 7-20-09)
§ 131.99  PENALTY.
   Violation of §
131.04 is a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 238, passed 7-20-09)
TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   SUBDIVISION REGULATION ORDINANCE
      
152.   FLOOD HAZARD REGULATIONS
      
153.   ZONING ORDINANCE
CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   Numbering of dwellings and structures
Adoption of State Building Code
   
150.15   Building Code adopted by reference
   
150.16   Application, administration and enforcement
   
150.17   Permits and fees
   
150.18   Violations and penalties
   
150.19   Building Code optional chapters
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01  NUMBERING OF DWELLINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   The purpose of this section is for the proper identification of all
houses and structures now existing or hereafter to be erected within the city. 
The official number, which shall be obtained by the owner from the City
Administrator’s Office, shall be placed and maintained on each house or
structure by its owner at or near the front or rear entrances of the house or
structure in a manner that the number may be easily and clearly seen and read
during the hours of darkness as well as daylight from the public street.
   (B)   The approved house number to be placed and maintained on the house or
structure shall comply with the following specifications:
      (1)   House numbers should be located on the front of the house.
      (2)   House numbers should be four inches in height.
      (3)   House numbers should be visible from the road.
      (4)   House number colors should contrast with the color of the house so
that they are easily readable.
   (C)   This section applies to all structures within the city.
(Ord. 182, passed 1-2-96)
ADOPTION OF STATE BUILDING CODE
§ 150.15  BUILDING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The Minnesota State Building Code, as adopted by the Commissioner of
Administration pursuant to M.S. Chapter 16B.59 to 16B.75, as they may be
amended from time to time, including all of the amendments, rules and
regulations established, adopted and published from time to time by the
Minnesota Commissioner of Administration, through the Building Codes and
Standards Division is hereby adopted by reference with the exception of the
optional chapters, unless specifically adopted in this ordinance.  The
Minnesota State Building Code is hereby incorporated in this subchapter as if
fully set out herein.
(Ord. 153A, passed 5-5-03)
§ 150.16  APPLICATION, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The application, administration, and enforcement of the code shall be
in accordance with Minnesota State Building Code.  The code shall be enforced
within the extraterritorial limits permitted by M.S. 16B.62, Subdivision 1, as
it may be amended from time to time, when so established by this subchapter.
   (B)   The code enforcement agency of this municipality is called the City of
New Prague Planning Department.
   (C)   This code shall be enforced by the Minnesota Certified Building
Official designated by this municipality to administer the code (M.S. 16B.65,
Subdivision 1, as it may be amended from time to time).
(Ord. 153A, passed 5-5-03)
§ 150.17  PERMITS AND FEES.
   (A)   The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as
authorized in M.S. 16B.62, Subdivision 1, as it may be amended from time to
time.
   (B)   Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by this code in
accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the municipality as attached.  In
addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits issued for work
governed by this code in accordance with M.S. 16B.70, as it may be amended from
time to time.
(Ord. 153A, passed 5-5-03)
§ 150.18  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   A violation of the code is a misdemeanor (M.S. 16B.69, as it may be amended
from time to time).
(Ord. 153A, passed 5-5-03)
§ 150.19  BUILDING CODE OPTIONAL CHAPTERS.
   The Minnesota State Building Code, established pursuant to M.S. 16B.59 to
16B.75, as they may be amended from time to time, allows the municipality to
adopt by reference and enforce certain optional chapters of the most current
edition of the Minnesota State Building Code.
(Ord. 153A, passed 5-5-03)
CHAPTER 151:  SUBDIVISION REGULATION ORDINANCE
Section
   
151.01   Adoption of Subdivision Regulation Ordinance by reference
§ 151.01   ADOPTION OF SUBDIVISION REGULATION ORDINANCE BY REFERENCE.
   The Subdivision Regulation Ordinance, enacted by the city as Ordinance 242,
passed 3-25-10, is hereby adopted by reference and made part of this code the
same as if set forth in full herein.  Copies are on file in the office of the
City Clerk for public inspection during regular office hours.
(Ord. 242, passed 3-25-10; Am. Ord. 250, passed 7-18-11)
CHAPTER 152:  FLOOD HAZARD REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
152.01   Statutory authorization
   
152.02   Findings of fact
   
152.03   Statement of purpose
   
152.04   Definitions
   
152.05   Applicability
   
152.06   Establishment of the official zoning map
   
152.07   Interpretation
   
152.08   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
152.09   Warning and disclaimer of liability
Flood Hazard Reduction
   
152.20   Regulatory flood protection elevation
   
152.21   Districts
   
152.22   Compliance
   
152.23   Floodway District
   
152.24   Flood Fringe District
   
152.25   General Flood Plain District
   
152.26   Subdivisions
   
152.27   Utilities, railroads, roads and bridges
   
152.28   Manufactured homes; travel trailers and travel vehicles
   
152.29   Nonconforming uses
Administration and Enforcement
   
152.40   Zoning Administrator
   
152.41   Permits, certification requirement and record keeping
   
152.42   Appeals and variances; duties of the Board of Adjustment
   
152.43   Conditional uses; standards and evaluation procedures
   
152.44   Amendments
   
152.45   Violations
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The legislature of the state, in M.S. Chapter 103E and 462, as they may be
amended from time to time, has delegated the responsibility to local government
units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.  Therefore, the
city does enact the flood hazard regulations set out herein.
(Ord. 148, passed 2-6-95)
§ 152.02  FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation,
which results in potential loss of life, loss of property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   This chapter is based upon a reasonable method of analyzing flood
hazards which is consistent with the standards established by the State
Department of Natural Resources.
(Ord. 148, passed 2-6-95)
§ 152.03  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare, and to minimize those losses described in §
152.02 by provisions contained herein.
(Ord. 148, passed 2-6-95)
§ 152.04  DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions of the City Zoning Ordinance are hereby adopted by reference
and incorporated into this chapter as if fully set out herein.
§ 152.05  APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city
shown on the official zoning map and/or the attachments thereto as being
located within the boundaries of the Floodway or Flood Fringe Districts or
General Flood Plain District.
(Ord. 148, passed 2-6-95)
§ 152.06  ESTABLISHMENT OF THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   The official zoning map, together with all materials attached thereto, is
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.  The
attached materials shall include the “Flood Insurance Study, Le Sueur County,
Minnesota, and Incorporated Areas,” prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and dated July 21, 1999, and the flood insurance rate map
panels numbered 27079C0087D, 27079C0088D, 27079C0089D, and 27079C0093 therein,
dated July 21, 1999, and flood insurance rate map panel 27079C0091D, dated July
21, 1999 and revised March 11, 2004 to reflect a LOMR.  The flood insurance
rate map together with the official zoning map shall be on file in the office
of the City Clerk and the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 148, passed 2-6-95; Am. Ord. passed 8-2-99; Am. Ord. passed 3-6-00; Am.
Ord. passed 4-5-04)
§ 152.07  INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter shall be liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and shall
not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state
statutes.
   (B)   The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be determined by scaling
distances on the official zoning map.  Where interpretation is needed as to the
exact location of the boundaries of the district as shown on the official
zoning map, as for example where there appears to be a conflict between a
mapped boundary and actual field conditions and there is a formal appeal of the
decision of the Zoning Administrator, the Board of Adjustment shall make the
necessary interpretation.  All decisions will be based on elevations on the
regional 100-year flood profile and other available technical data.  Persons
contesting the location of the district boundaries shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to present their case to the Board and to submit technical
evidence.
(Ord. 148, passed 2-6-95)
§ 152.08  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.  However, where this
chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall
prevail.  All other ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby
repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
(Ord. 148, passed 2-6-95)
§ 152.09  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   This chapter does not imply that areas outside the flood plain districts or
land uses permitted within the flood plain districts will be free from flooding
or flood damages.  This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
(Ord. 148, passed 2-6-95)
FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 152.20  REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION.
   The regulatory flood protection elevation shall be an elevation no lower
than one foot above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in
flood elevation caused by encroachments on the flood plain that resulted from
designation of a floodway.
(Ord. 148, passed 2-6-95)
§ 152.21  DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Floodway District.  The Floodway District shall include those areas
designated as floodway on the flood insurance rate map panels adopted in §
152.06.
   (B)   Flood Fringe District.  The Flood Fringe District shall include those
areas designated as Zone AE on the Flood Insurance Rate Map panels adopted in §
152.06 that are located outside of the floodway.
   (C)   General Floodplain District.  The General Floodplain District shall
include those areas within the corporate limits of the city as being within
Zone A on the flood insurance rate map adopted in §
152.06.
(Ord. 148, passed 2-6-95; Am. Ord. passed 3-6-00)
§ 152.22  COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   No new structure or land shall hereafter be used, and no structure
shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full
compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations
which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter.  Within the
Floodway and Flood Fringe Districts, all uses not listed as permitted uses or
conditional uses in §§
152.23 through 152.25 shall be prohibited.  In addition, a caution is provided
here that new manufactured homes, replacement manufactured homes and certain
travel trailers and travel vehicles are subject to the general provisions of
this chapter, and specifically §
152.28.
   (B)   Modifications, additions, structural alteration or repair after damage
to existing nonconforming structures and nonconforming uses of structures or
land are regulated by the general provisions of this chapter, and specifically
§
152.29.
   (C)   As-built elevations for elevated or flood proofed structures must be
certified by ground surveys, and flood proofing techniques must be designed and
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, as specified in
the general provisions of this chapter and specifically as stated in §
152.41.
(Ord. 148, passed 2-6-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.23  FLOODWAY DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting;
      (2)   Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas, and airport
landing strips;
      (3)   Private and public golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges,
archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks,
wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves,
target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, and single or
multiple purpose recreational trails; and/or
      (4)   Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas.
   (B)   Standards for floodway permitted uses.
      (1)   The use shall have a low flood damage potential.
      (2)   The use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning district if
one exists.
      (3)   The use shall not obstruct flood flows or increase flood
elevations, and shall not involve structures, fill, obstructions, excavations
or storage of materials or equipment.
   (C)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   Structures accessory to the uses listed in division (A) above and
the uses listed in subsections (2) through (8) below;
      (2)   Extraction and storage of sand, gravel, and other materials;
      (3)   Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves and water control
structures;
      (4)   Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines and
pipelines;
      (5)   Storage yards for equipment, machinery, or materials;
      (6)   Placement of fill;
      (7)   Travel trailers and travel vehicles either on individual lots of
record or in existing or new subdivisions or commercial or condominium type
campgrounds, subject to the exemptions and provisions of §
152.28; and/or
      (8)   Structural works for flood control such as levees, dikes and
floodwalls constructed to any height where the intent is to protect individual
structures, and levees or dikes where the intent is to protect agricultural
crops for a frequency flood event equal to or less than the one-year frequency
flood event.
   (D)   Standards for floodway conditional uses.
      (1)   No structure, temporary or permanent, or fill, including fill roads
and levees, deposit, obstruction, storage of materials or equipment, or other
uses may be allowed as a conditional use that will cause any increase in the
stage of the 100-year or regional flood, or cause an increase in flood damages
in the reach or reaches affected.
      (2)   All floodway conditional uses shall be subject to the procedures
and standards contained in §
152.43.
      (3)   The conditional use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning
district if one exists.
      (4)   The standards for fill are as follows:
         (a)   Fill, dredge spoil and all other similar materials deposited or
stored in the flood plain shall be protected from erosion by vegetative cover,
mulching, riprap or other acceptable method.
         (b)   Dredge spoil sites and sand and gravel operations shall not be
allowed in the floodway unless a long-term site development plan is submitted
which includes an erosion/sedimentation prevention element to the plan.
         (c)   As an alternative, and consistent with subsection (b) above,
dredge spoil disposal and sand and gravel operations may allow temporary, on-
site storage of fill or other materials which would have caused an increase to
the stage of the 100-year or regional flood, but only after the governing body
has received an appropriate plan which assures the removal of the materials
from the floodway based upon the flood warning time available.  The conditional
use permit must be title registered with the property in the office of the
County Recorder.
      (5)   The standards for accessory structures are as follows:
         (a)   Accessory structures shall not be designed for human habitation.
         (b)   Accessory structures, if permitted, shall be constructed
according to the following provisions and placed on the building site so as to
offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of flood waters:
            1.   Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the
longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow; and
            2.    So far as practicable, structures shall be placed
approximately on the same flood flow lines as those of adjoining structures.
         (c)   Accessory structures shall be elevated on fill or structurally
dry flood proofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 flood proofing
classifications in the State Building Code.  As an alternative, an accessory
structure may be flood proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 flood proofing
classification in the State Building Code, provided the accessory structure
constitutes a minimal investment, does not exceed 500 square feet in size, and
for a detached garage, the detached garage must be used solely for parking of
vehicles and limited storage.  All flood proofed accessory structures must meet
the following additional standards, as appropriate:
            1.   The structure must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure, and shall be designed
to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls; and
            2.   Any mechanical and utility equipment in a structure must be
elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or properly
flood proofed.
      (6)   The standards for storage of materials and equipment are as
follows:
         (a)   The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of
flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal or
plant life is prohibited.
         (b)   Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if
readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning
and in accordance with a plan approved by the governing body.
      (7)   Structural works for flood control that will change the course,
current or cross section of protected wetlands or public waters shall be
subject to the provisions of M.S. Chapter 1036, as it may be amended from time
to time. Community-wide structural works for flood control intended to remove
areas from the regulatory flood plain shall not be allowed in the floodway.
      (8)   A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the floodway shall not
cause an increase to the 100-year or regional flood and technique analysis must
assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides of a stream.
(Ord. 148, passed 2-6-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.24  FLOOD FRINGE DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses.  Permitted uses shall be those uses of land or
structures listed as permitted uses in the underlying zoning use district(s). 
If no preexisting, underlying zoning use districts exist, then any residential
or nonresidential structure or use of a structure or land shall be a permitted
use in the Flood Fringe District, provided the use does not constitute a public
nuisance.  All permitted uses shall comply with the standards for Flood Fringe
permitted uses listed in division (B) below and the standards for all Flood
Fringe uses listed in division (E) below.
   (B)   Standards for Flood Fringe permitted uses.
      (1)   All structures, including accessory structures, must be elevated on
fill so that the lowest floor including the basement floor is at or above the
regulatory flood protection elevation.  The finished fill elevation for
structures shall be no lower than one foot below the regulatory flood
protection elevation and the fill shall extend at the elevation at least 15
feet beyond the outside limits of the structure erected thereon.
      (2)   As an alternative to elevation on fill, accessory structures that
constitute a minimal investment and that do not exceed 500 square feet for the
outside dimension at ground level may be internally flood proofed in accordance
with §
152.23(D)(5).
      (3)   The cumulative placement of fill, where at any one time in excess
of 1,000 cubic yards of fill is located on the parcel, shall be allowed only as
a conditional use, unless the fill is specifically intended to elevate a
structure in accordance with division (B)(1) above.
      (4)   The storage of any materials or equipment shall be elevated on fill
to the regulatory flood protection elevation.
      (5)   The provisions of division (E) below shall apply.
   (C)   Conditional uses.  Any structure that is not elevated on fill or flood
proofed in accordance with subsections (1) through (4) above, or any use of
land that does not comply with the standards in subsections (3) and (4) above
shall only be allowable as a conditional use.  An application for a conditional
use shall be subject to the standards and criteria and evaluation procedures
specified in divisions (D) and (E) below, and §
152.43.
   (D)   Standards for Flood Fringe conditional uses.
      (1)   Alternative elevation methods other than the use of fill may be
utilized to elevate a structure’s lowest floor above the regulatory flood
protection elevation.  These alternative methods may include the use of stilts,
pilings, parallel walls and the like, or above-grade, enclosed areas such as
crawl spaces or tuck-under garages.  The base or floor of an enclosed area
shall be considered above-grade and not a structure’s basement or lowest floor
if:
         (a)   The enclosed area is above-grade on at least one side of the
structure;
         (b)   It is designed to internally flood and is constructed with flood
resistant materials; and
         (c)   It is used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage.  The above noted alternative elevation methods are subject to the
following additional standards:
            1.   The structure’s design and as-built condition must be
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as being in
compliance with the general design standards of the State Building Code, and
specifically, that all electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities must be at or above the
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation or be designed to prevent flood water
from entering or accumulating within these components during times of flooding.
            2.   Above-grade, fully enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or
tuck-under garages must be designed to internally flood, and the design plans
must stipulate:
               a.   The minimum area of openings in the walls where internal
flooding is to be used as a flood proofing technique.  When openings are placed
in a structure’s walls to provide for entry of flood waters to equalize
pressures, the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above-
grade.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or
devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood waters;
and
               b.   That the enclosed area will be designed of flood resistant
materials in accordance with the FP-3 or FP-4 classifications in the State
Building Code, and shall be used solely for building access, parking of
vehicles or storage.
      (2)   Basements, as defined in the City Zoning Ordinance, shall be
subject to the following:
         (a)   Residential basement construction shall not be allowed below the
regulatory flood protection elevation.
         (b)   Nonresidential basements may be allowed below the regulatory
flood protection elevation provided the basement is structurally dry flood
proofed in accordance with subsection (3) below.
      (3)   All areas of nonresidential structures including basements to be
placed below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be flood proofed
in accordance with the structurally dry flood proofing classifications in the
State Building Code.  Structurally dry flood proofing must meet the FF-1 or FP-
2 flood proofing classification in the State Building Code, and this shall
require making the structure watertight with the walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water, and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of
buoyancy.  Structures flood proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 classification shall
not be permitted.
      (4)   When at any one time more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill or other
similar material is located on a parcel for activities such as on-site storage,
landscaping, sand and gravel operations, landfills, roads, dredge spoil
disposal or construction of flood control works, an erosion/sedimentation
control plan must be submitted unless the community is enforcing a state
approved shoreland management ordinance.  The plan must clearly specify methods
to be used to stabilize the fill on site for a flood event.  The plan must be
prepared and certified by a registered professional engineer or other qualified
individual acceptable to the governing body.  The plan may incorporate
alternative procedures for removal of the material from the flood plain when
adequate flood warning time exists.
      (5)   The standards for storage of materials and equipment are as
follows:
         (a)   The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of
flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal or
plant life is prohibited.
         (b)   The storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if
readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning
and in accordance with a plan approved by the governing body.
      (6)   The provisions of division (E) below shall also apply.
   (E)   Standards for all Flood Fringe uses.
      (1)   All new principal structures must have vehicular access at or above
an elevation not more than two feet below the regulatory flood protection
elevation.  If a variance to this requirement is granted, the Board of
Adjustment must specify limitations on the period of use or occupancy of the
structure for times of flooding and only after determining that adequate flood
warning and local flood emergency response procedures exist.
      (2)   For commercial uses, accessory land uses such as yards, railroad
tracks, and parking lots may be at elevations lower than the regulatory flood
protection elevation.  However, a permit for these facilities to be used by the
employees or the general public shall not be granted in the absence of a flood
warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area would be
inundated to a depth greater than two feet or be subject to flood velocities
greater than four feet per second upon occurrence of the regional flood.
      (3)   For manufacturing and industrial uses, measures shall be taken to
minimize interference with normal plant operations, especially along streams
having protracted flood durations.  Certain accessory land uses such as yards
and parking lots may be at lower elevations subject to requirements set out in
subsection (2) above.  In considering permit applications, due consideration
shall be given to the needs of an industry whose business requires that it be
located in flood plain areas.
      (4)   Fill shall be properly compacted and the slopes shall be properly
protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable method. 
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for
removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures
properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA’s
requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection
standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments.  These standards
should be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change
of special flood hazard area designation will be requested.
      (5)   Flood plain developments shall not adversely affect the hydraulic
capacity of the channel and adjoining flood plain of any tributary watercourse
or drainage system where a floodway or other encroachment limit has not been
specified on the official zoning map.
      (6)   Standards for travel trailers and travel vehicles are contained in
§
152.23.
      (7)   All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral
movement.  Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.  This requirement is in
addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind
forces.
(Ord. 148, passed 2-6-95)
§ 152.25  GENERAL FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permissible uses.
      (1)   The uses listed in §
152.23(A) shall be permitted uses.
      (2)   All other uses shall be subject to the Floodway/Flood Fringe
evaluation criteria pursuant to division (B) below.  Section 152.23 shall apply
if the proposed use is in the Floodway District and §
152.24 shall apply if the proposed use is in the Flood Fringe District.
   (B)   Procedures for Floodway and Flood Fringe Determinations within the
General Flood Plain District.
      (1)   Upon receipt of an application for a conditional use permit for a
use within the General Flood Plain District, the applicant shall be required to
furnish any of the following information as is deemed necessary by the Zoning
Administrator for the determination of the regulatory flood protection
elevation and whether the proposed use is within the Floodway or Flood Fringe
District.
         (a)   A typical valley cross-section showing the channel of the
stream, elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the channel, cross-
sectional areas to be occupied by the proposed development and high water
information.
         (b)   A plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the
ground; pertinent structure, fill, or storage elevations; size, location, and
spatial arrangement of all proposed and existing structures on the site;
location and elevations of streets; photographs showing existing land uses and
vegetation upstream and downstream; and soil type.
         (c)   A profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow
line of the stream for at least 500 feet in either direction from the proposed
development.
      (2)   The applicant shall be responsible to submit one copy of the above
information to a designated engineer or other expert person or agency for
technical assistance in determining whether the proposed use is in the Floodway
or Flood Fringe District, and to determine the regulatory flood protection
elevation.  Procedures consistent with Minn. Rules, Parts 6120.5000 through
6120.6200, as they may be amended from time to time, shall be followed in this
expert evaluation.  The designated engineer or expert is strongly encouraged to
discuss the proposed technical evaluation methodology with the respective
Department of Natural Resources Area Hydrologist prior to commencing the
analysis.  The designated engineer or expert shall:
         (a)   Estimate the peak discharge of the regional flood;
         (b)   Calculate the water surface profile of the regional flood based
upon a hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and overbank areas;
         (c)   Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the regional
flood without increasing flood stages more than  foot.  A lesser stage increase
than  inch shall be required if, as a result of the additional stage increase,
increased flood damages would result.  An equal degree of encroachment on both
sides of the stream within the reach shall be assumed in computing floodway
boundaries.
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator shall present the technical evaluation and
findings of the designated engineer or expert of the governing body.  The
governing body must formally accept the technical evaluation and the
recommended Floodway and/or Flood Fringe District boundary or deny the permit
application.  The governing body, prior to official action, may submit the
application and all supporting data and analyses to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, the Department of Natural Resources or the Planning
Commission for review and comment.  Once the Floodway and Flood Fringe
boundaries have been determined, the governing body shall refer the matter back
to the Zoning Administrator, who shall process the permit application
consistent with the applicable provisions of §§
152.23 and 152.24.
(Ord. 148, passed 2-6-95; Am. Ord. passed 8-2-99)
§ 152.26  SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)    No land shall be subdivided which is unsuitable for the reason of
flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment facilities. 
All lots within the flood plain districts shall contain a building site at or
above the regulatory flood protection elevation.  All subdivisions shall have
water and sewage treatment facilities that comply with the provisions of this
chapter and have road access both to the subdivision and to the individual
building sites no lower than two feet below the regulatory flood protection
elevation.  For all subdivisions in the flood plain, and the Floodway and Flood
Fringe boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation and the required
elevation of all access roads shall be clearly labeled on all required
subdivision drawings and platting documents.
   (B)   The Federal Emergency Management Agency has established criteria for
removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures
properly elevated on fill above the 200-year flood elevation.  FEMA’s
requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection
standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments.  These standards
should be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change
of special flood hazard area designation will be requested.
   (C)   In the General Floodplain District, applicants shall provide the
information required in §
152.25(B) to determine the 100-year flood elevation, the Floodway and Flood
Fringe District boundaries and the regulatory flood protection elevation for
the subdivision site.
(Ord. 148, passed 2-6-95; Am. Ord. passed 8-2-99)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.27  UTILITIES, RAILROADS, ROADS AND BRIDGES.
   (A)   All public utilities and facilities such as gas, electrical, sewer,
and water supply systems to be located in the flood plain shall be flood
proofed in accordance with the State Building Code or elevated to above the
regulatory flood protection elevation.
   (B)   Railroad tracks, roads and bridges to be located within the flood
plain shall comply with §§
152.23 and 152.24.  Elevation to the regulatory flood protection elevation
shall be provided where failure or interruption of these transportation
facilities would result in danger to the public health or safety, or where the
facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the area.  Minor or
auxiliary roads or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where
failure or interruption of transportation services would not endanger the
public health or safety.
   (C)   Where public utilities are not provided:
      (1)   On-site water supply systems must be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and
      (2)   New or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems
and discharges from the systems into flood waters, and they shall not be
subject to impairment or contamination during times of flooding.  Any sewage
treatment system designed in accordance with the state’s current statewide
standards for on-site sewage treatment systems shall be determined to be in
compliance with this section.
(Ord. 148, passed 2-6-95)
§ 152.28  MANUFACTURED HOMES; TRAVEL TRAILERS AND TRAVEL VEHICLES.
   (A)   New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing mobile
manufactured home parks shall be subject to the provisions placed on
subdivisions by §
152.26.
   (B)   The placement of new or replacement manufactured homes in existing
manufactured home parks or on individual lots of record that are located in
flood plain districts will be treated as a new structure and may be placed only
if elevated in compliance with §
152.23.  If vehicular road access for preexisting manufactured home parks is
not provided in accordance with §
152.23(A), then replacement manufactured homes will not be allowed until the
property owner(s) develops a flood warning emergency plan acceptable to the
governing body.
   (C)   All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral
movement.  Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.  This requirement is in
addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind
forces.
   (D)   Travel trailers and travel vehicles that do not meet the exemption
criteria specified in division (E) below shall be subject to the provisions of
this chapter and as specifically spelled out in divisions (G) and (H) below.
   (E)   Travel trailers and travel vehicles are exempt from the provisions of
this chapter if they are placed in any of the areas listed in division (F)
below, and further if they meet the following criteria:
      (1)   The travel trailer or travel vehicle has current licenses required
for highway use.
      (2)   The travel trailer or travel vehicle is highway ready, meaning on
wheels or the internal jacking systems are attached to the site only by quick
disconnect type utilities commonly used in campgrounds and trailer parks, and
the trailer or vehicle has no permanent structural type additions attached to
it.
      (3)   The travel trailer or travel vehicle and associated use must be
permissible in any preexisting, underlying zoning use district.
   (F)   Areas exempted for placement of travel/recreational vehicles are as
follows:
      (1)   Individual lots or parcels of record;
      (2)   Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds; and
      (3)   Existing condominium type associations.
   (G)   Travel trailers and travel vehicles exempted in division (E) above
lose this exemption when development occurs on the parcel exceeding $500
dollars for a structural addition to the travel trailer/travel vehicle or an
accessory structure such as a garage or storage building.  The travel trailer
or travel vehicle and all additions and accessory structures will then be
treated as a new structure and shall be subject to the elevation/flood proofing
requirements and the use of land restrictions specified in §§
152.23 and 152.24.
   (H)   New commercial travel trailer or travel vehicle parks or campgrounds,
and new residential type divisions and condominium associations and the
expansion of any existing similar use exceeding five  units or dwelling sites
shall be subject to the following:
      (1)   Any new or replacement travel trailer or travel vehicle will be
allowed in the Floodway or Flood Fringe Districts, provided the trailer or
vehicle and its contents are placed on fill above the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation and proper elevated road access to the site exists in
accordance with § 152(E)(1).  Any fill placed in a floodway for the purpose of
elevating a travel trailer shall be subject to the requirements of §
152.23.
      (2)   All new or replacement travel trailers or travel vehicles not
meeting the criteria of subsection (1) above may, as an alternative, be allowed
as a conditional use if in accordance with the following provisions and the
provisions of §
152.43.  The applicant must submit an emergency plan for the safe evacuation of
all vehicles and people during the 100-year flood.  The plan shall be prepared
by a registered engineer or other qualified individual, and shall demonstrate
that adequate time and personnel exist to carry out the evacuation.  All
attendant sewage and water facilities for new or replacement travel trailers or
other recreational vehicles must be protected or constructed so as to not be
impaired or contaminated during times of flooding in accordance with §
152.27(C).
(Ord. 148, passed 2-6-95)
§ 152.29  NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful
before the passage or amendment of this chapter but which is not in conformity
with provisions of this chapter may be continued subject to the conditions of
this section.
   (B)   A nonconforming use shall not be expanded, changed, enlarged or
altered in a way which increases its nonconformity.
   (C)   Any alteration or addition to a nonconforming structure or
nonconforming use which would result in increasing the flood damage potential
of that structure or use shall be protected to the regulatory flood protection
elevation in accordance with any of the elevation on fill or flood proofing
techniques,  such as the FP-1 through FP-4 flood proofing classifications,
allowable in the State Building Code, except as further restricted in division
(D) below.
   (D)   The cost of any structural alterations or additions to any
nonconforming structure over the life of the structure shall not exceed 50% of
the market value of the structure unless the conditions of this section are
satisfied.  The cost of all structural alterations and additions constructed
since the adoption of the community’s initial flood plain controls must be
calculated into today’s current cost, which will include all costs such as
construction materials and a reasonable cost placed on all manpower labor.  If
the current cost of all previous and proposed alterations and additions exceeds
50% of the current market value of the structure, then the structure must meet
the standards of §§
152.23 or 152.24 for new structures depending upon whether the structure is in
the Floodway or Flood Fringe District, respectively.
   (E)   If any nonconforming use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months,
any future use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter.  The
assessor shall notify the Zoning Administrator in writing of instances of
nonconforming uses which have been discontinued for a period of 12 months.
   (F)   If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means,
including floods, to an extent of 50% or more of its market value at the time
of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.  The applicable provisions for establishing new
uses or new structures in §§
152.23 or 152.24 will apply depending upon whether the use or structure is in
the Floodway or Flood Fringe District, respectively.
(Ord. 148, passed 2-6-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 152.40  ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   A Zoning Administrator or other official designated by the governing body
shall administer and enforce this chapter.  If the Zoning Administrator finds a
violation of the provisions of this chapter, he or she shall notify the person
responsible for the violation in accordance with the procedures stated in §
152.45.
(Ord. 148, passed 2-6-95)
§ 152.41  PERMITS, CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENT AND RECORD KEEPING.
   (A)   A permit issued by the Zoning Administrator in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter shall be secured prior to the erection, addition, or
alternation of any building, structure, or portion thereof, shall be prior to
the change or extension of a nonconforming use, and prior to the placement of
fill, evacuation of materials, or the storage of materials or equipment within
the flood plain.
   (B)   Application for a permit shall be made to the Zoning Administrator on
forms furnished by the Zoning Administrator, and shall include the following
where applicable: plans drawn to scale, showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and evaluations of the lot; existing or proposed structures, fill,
or storage of materials; and the location of the foregoing in relation to the
stream channel.
   (C)   Prior to granting a permit or processing an application for a
conditional use permit or variance, the Zoning Administrator shall determine
that the applicant has obtained all necessary state and federal permits.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or permit the use or occupancy of
any building or premises or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed,
converted, altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a Certificate of
Zoning Compliance shall have been issued by the Zoning Administrator stating
that the use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this
chapter.
   (E)   Permits, conditional use permits, or certificates of zoning compliance
issued on the basis of approved plans and applications authorize only the use,
arrangement, and construction set forth in the approved plans and applications,
and no other use, arrangement or construction.  Any use, arrangement or
construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of
this chapter.
   (F)   The applicant shall be required to submit certification by a
registered professional engineer, registered architect, or registered land
surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.  Flood proofing measures shall
be certified by a registered professional engineer or registered architect.
   (G)   The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of the elevation of
the lowest floor, including the basement, of all new structures and alterations
or additions to existing structures in the flood plain. The Zoning
Administrator shall also maintain a record of the elevation to which structures
are flood proofed.
(Ord. 148, passed 2-6-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.42  APPEALS AND VARIANCES; DUTIES OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules for the conduct of business
and may exercise all of the powers conferred on the Board by state law.
   (B)   The Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is
error in any order, requirements, decision, or determination made by an
administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
   (C)   The Board may hear requests for variances from the literal provisions
of this chapter in instances where their strict enforcement would cause undue
hardship because of circumstances unique to the individual property under
consideration, and to grant such variances only when it is demonstrated that
such actions will be in keeping with the spirit and intent of the section
chapter.  UNDUE HARDSHIP as used in connection with the granting of a
reasonable use if used under conditions allowed  by the official controls, the
plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to the property not
created by the landowner, and the variance, if granted, will not alter the
essential character of the locality.  Economic considerations alone shall not
constitute an undue hardship if reasonable use for the property exists under
the terms of this chapter .  UNDUE HARDSHIP also includes, but is not limited
to, inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems.  Variances
shall be granted for earth sheltered construction as defined in M.S. § 216C.06,
Subdivision 2, as it may be amended from time to time, when in harmony with the
chapter.  The Board may not permit as a variance any use that is not permitted
under the chapter for property in the zone where the affected person’s land is
located.  The Board may permit as a variance the temporary use of a one family
dwelling as a two family dwelling.  The Board may impose conditions in the
granting of variances to insure compliance and to protect adjacent properties.
   (D)   Upon filing with the Board of Adjustment of an appeal from a decision
of the Zoning Administrator or an application for a variance, the Board shall
fix a reasonable time for a hearing and give due notice to the parties in
interest as specified by law.  The Board shall submit by mail to the
Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the application for proposed
Variances sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will receive at
least ten days notice of the hearing.
   (E)   The Board shall arrive at a decision on an appeal or variance within
30 days.  In passing upon
an appeal, the Board may, so long as the action is in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the
order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator or
other public official.  It shall make its decision in writing, setting forth
the findings of fact and the reasons for its decisions.  In granting a variance
the Board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards such as those
specified in §
152.43(G), which are in conformity with the purposes of this chapter. 
Violations of the conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms
under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter.  A copy of all decisions granting variances shall be forwarded by mail
to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten days of the action.
   (F)   Appeal from any decision of the Board may be made, and as specified in
the community’s official controls and also state statutes.
   (G)   (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant for a
variance that:
         (a)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up
to amounts as high as $20 to $100 of insurance coverage; and
         (b)   Construction below the 100-year or regional flood level
increases risks to life and property.
      (2)   The notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance
actions.  A community shall maintain a record of all variance actions,
including justification for their issuance, and report the variances issued in
its annual or biennial report submitted to the administration of the National
Blood Insurance Program.
(Ord. 148, passed 2-6-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.43  CONDITIONAL USES; STANDARDS AND EVALUATION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The City Planning and Zoning Commission shall hear and make
recommendations to the City Council concerning applications for conditional
uses permissible under this chapter.  Applications shall be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator, who shall forward the application to the Planning and
Zoning Commission for consideration.
   (B)   Upon filing with the Planning and Zoning commission an application for
a conditional use Permit, the Zoning Administrator shall submit by mail to the
Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the application for the proposed
conditional use sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will receive
at least ten days notice of the hearing.
   (C)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall arrive at a decision on a
conditional use within 30 days, and forward their recommendation to the City
Council.  In granting a conditional use permit, the City Council shall
prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards, in addition to those specified
in division (G) below, which are in conformity with the purposes of this
chapter. Violations of these conditions and safeguards, when made part of the
terms under which the conditional use permit is granted, shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter.  A copy of all decisions granting conditional use
permits shall be forwarded by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources
within  ten days of the action.
   (D)   Procedures to be followed by the Planning and Zoning Commission in
passing on conditional use permit applications within all flood plain districts
are as follows:
      (1)   The applicant shall be required to furnish the following
information and additional information deemed necessary by the Planning and
Zoning Commission for determining the suitability of the particular site for
the proposed use:
         (a)   Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions and elevation of the lot, existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, flood proofing measures and the relationship of the above
to the location of the stream channel; and
         (b)   Specifications for building construction and materials, flood
proofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement, storage of
materials, water supply and sanitary facilities.
      (2)   One copy of the information described in subsection (1) above is to
be transmitted to a designated engineer or other expert person or agency for
technical assistance, where necessary, in elevating the proposed project in
relation to flood heights and velocities, the seriousness of flood damage to
the use, the adequacy of the plans for protection, and other technical matters.
      (3)   Based upon the technical evaluation of the designated engineer or
expert, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine the specific flood
hazard at the site and evaluate the suitability of the proposed use in relation
to the flood hazard.
      (4)   In passing upon conditional use applications, the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall consider all relevant factors specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:
         (a)   The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights
or velocities caused by encroachments;
         (b)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others, or they may block bridges, culverts or
other hydraulic structures;
         (c)   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems, and the
ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary
conditions;
         (d)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of the damage on the individual owner;
         (e)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community;
         (f)   The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location;
         (g)   The availability of alternative locations not subject to
flooding for the proposed use;
         (h)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development
anticipated in the foreseeable future;
         (i)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and flood plain management program for the area;
         (j)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         (k)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and
         (l)   Any other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this
chapter.
   (E)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall act in the manner described
above within 30 days from receiving the application, except that where
additional information is required pursuant to this chapter.  The Planning and
Zoning Commission shall render a written decision within 30 days from the
receipt of the additional information.
   (F)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purpose of this
chapter, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall attach any conditions to the
granting of conditional use permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the
purposes of this chapter.  The conditions may include, but are not limited to
the following:
      (1)   Modification of waste treatment and water supply facilities;
      (2)   Limitations on period of use, occupancy and operation;
      (3)   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed
restrictions;
      (4)   Requirements for construction of channel modifications,
compensatory storage, dikes, levees and other protective measures; and
      (5)   Flood proofing measures, in accordance with the State Building Code
and this chapter.  The applicant shall submit a plan or document certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect that the flood proofing measures
are consistent with the regulatory flood protection elevation and associated
flood factors for the particular area.
(Ord. 148, passed 2-6-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.44  AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   The flood plain designated on the official zoning map shall not be
removed from flood plain areas unless it can be shown that the designation is
in error or that the area has been filled to or above the elevation of the
regional flood and is contiguous to lands outside the flood plain.  Special
exceptions to this rule may be permitted by the Commissioner of Natural
Resources if he or she determines that, through other measures, lands are
adequately protected for the intended use.
   (B)   All amendments to this chapter, including amendments to the official
zoning map, must be submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of Natural
Resources prior to adoption.
   (C)   Changes in the official zoning map must meet the Federal Emergency
Management Agency’s technical conditions and criteria, and must receive prior
FEMA approval before adoption. The Commissioner of Natural Resources must be
given ten days written notice of all hearings to consider an amendment to this
chapter, and the notice shall include a draft of the ordinance or technical
study under consideration.
(Ord. 148, passed 2-6-95)
§ 152.99  VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with
any of its requirements, including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variances or conditional uses, shall
constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided for in §
10.99.
   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking any other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.  The actions
may include but are not limited to:
      (1)   In responding to a suspected violation, the Zoning Administrator
and local government may utilize the full array of enforcement actions
available to it, including but not limited to prosecution and fines,
injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders for corrective measures or a
request to the National Flood Insurance Program for denial of flood insurance
availability to the guilty party.  The community must act in good faith to
enforce these official controls and to correct violations to the extent
possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the National Flood
Insurance Program.
      (2)   When a violation is either discovered by or brought to the
attention of the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Administrator shall
immediately investigate the situation and document the nature and extent of the
violation of the official control.  As soon as is reasonably possible, this
information will be submitted to the appropriate Department of Natural
Resources and Federal Emergency Management Agency regional office along with
the community’s plan of action to correct the violation to the degree possible.
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator shall notify the suspected party of the
requirements of this chapter and all other official controls, and the nature
and extent of the suspected violation of these controls.  If the structure and/
or use is under construction or development, the construction or development
shall be immediately halted until a proper permit or approval is granted by the
community. If the construction or development is already completed, then the
Zoning Administrator may either:
         (a)   Issue an order identifying the corrective actions that must be
made within a specified time period to bring the use or structure into
compliance with the official controls; or
         (b)   Notify the responsible party to apply for an after-the-fact
permit/development approval within a specified period of time not to exceed 30
days.
      (4)   If the responsible party does not appropriately respond to the
Zoning Administrator within a specified period of time, each additional day
that lapses shall constitute an additional violation of this chapter and shall
be prosecuted accordingly.  The Zoning Administrator shall also, upon the lapse
of the specified response period, notify the landowner to restore the condition
which existed prior to the violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 148, passed 2-6-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 153:  ZONING ORDINANCE
Section
   
153.01   Adoption of Zoning Ordinance by reference
§ 153.01  ADOPTION OF THE ZONING ORDINANCE BY REFERENCE.
   The Zoning Ordinance, enacted by the city as Ordinance 245, passed 9-7-10,
is hereby adopted by reference and made part of this code the same as if set
forth in full herein.  Copies are on file in the office of the City Clerk for
public inspection during regular office hours.
(Ord. 245, passed 9-7-10; Am. Ord. 246, passed 12-20-10; Am. Ord. 248, passed
4-18-11; Am. Ord. 250, passed 7-18-11; Am. Ord. 251, passed 11-21-11; Am. Ord.
252, passed 1-3-12; Am. Ord. 269, passed 11-18-13; Am. Ord. 271, passed 3-17-
14; Am. Ord. 280, passed 3-2-15; Am. Ord. 288, passed 3-7-16; Am. Ord. 291,
passed 8-15-16; Am. Ord. 296, passed 2-21-17; Am. Ord. 299, passed 8-21-17; Am.
Ord. 301, passed 11-20-17; Am. Ord. 302, passed 3-19-18)


City of New Prague
Zoning Ordinance
Last Amended: March 19, 2018 (Effective March 29, 2018)
i
New Prague Zoning Ordinance
Table of Contents
Section Page
I TITLE ................................................................................................................................ 1
II INTENT AND PURPOSE ................................................................................................ 1
III RULES AND DEFINITIONS ........................................................................................... 1
301 Rules ..................................................................................................................... 1
302 Definitions ............................................................................................................ 2
IV GENERAL PROVISIONS .............................................................................................. 24
401 Application of this Ordinance ............................................................................ 24
402 Separability ......................................................................................................... 25
403 Nonconforming Uses and Structures .................................................................. 25
404 Nonconforming Lots .......................................................................................... 27
405 Existing Farm Operations ................................................................................... 27
V ADMINISTRATION ...................................................................................................... 27
501 Enforcing Officer ............................................................................................... 27
502 Appeals and the Board of Adjustment and Appeals ........................................... 28
503 Planning Commission......................................................................................... 28
504 Zoning Amendments .......................................................................................... 29
505 Conditional Use Permits ..................................................................................... 30
506 Interim Use Permits ............................................................................................ 33
507 Variances ............................................................................................................ 36
508 Enforcement ....................................................................................................... 37
VI ZONING DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT PROVISIONS ............................................... 39
601 Zoning Districts .................................................................................................. 39
602 Zoning Map ........................................................................................................ 39
603 RL-90 Single-Family Residential District .......................................................... 40
604 RL-84 Single-Family Residential District .......................................................... 41
605 RL-70 Single-Family Residential District .......................................................... 42
606 RM Two Three Four Family Residential District .............................................. 43
607 RH Multi-Family Residential District ................................................................ 44
608 B-1 Central Business District ............................................................................. 45
609 B-2 Community Commercial District ................................................................ 46
610 B-3 Highway Commercial District ..................................................................... 48
611 I-1 Light Industrial District ................................................................................ 49
ii
Section Page
VII PERFORMANCE STANDARDS .................................................................................... 51
701 Purpose ................................................................................................................. 51
702 Exterior Storage .................................................................................................... 51
703 Refuse ................................................................................................................... 52
704 Glare ..................................................................................................................... 53
705 Bulk Storage (Liquid) ........................................................................................... 53
706 (Intentionally Left Blank) ..................................................................................... 53
707 Screening .............................................................................................................. 53
708 Fencing ................................................................................................................. 54
709 Drainage Standards............................................................................................... 55
710 Permitted Encroachments ..................................................................................... 56
711 Accessory Buildings and Structures ..................................................................... 56
712 Dwelling Units Prohibited .................................................................................... 57
713 Relocating Structures ........................................................................................... 57
714 Home Occupations ............................................................................................... 58
715 Structures for Habitation ...................................................................................... 59
716 Manufactured Homes ........................................................................................... 59
717 Off-Street Parking and Loading ........................................................................... 60
718 Signs ..................................................................................................................... 65
719 Restaurants and Drinking Establishments ............................................................ 72
720 Drive-thru Businesses........................................................................................... 73
721 Car Washes ........................................................................................................... 73
722 Convenience Stores .............................................................................................. 73
723 Access Driveways ................................................................................................ 74
724 Land Alterations ................................................................................................... 76
725 Commercial Building Design/Site Relationship for the B-2 District ................... 77
726 Commercial Building Design for the B-1 District ............................................... 78
727 Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay ......................................................... 79
728 Bed and Breakfast Home ...................................................................................... 85
729 Bed and Breakfast Inns......................................................................................... 86
730 Commercial Towers and Antennas ...................................................................... 86
731 Outdoor Wood-Fired Boilers ................................................................................ 94
732 Second Kitchen in a Single Family Dwelling...94
733 Outdoor seating for restaurants and drinking establishments...96
734 Land and Water Preservation....97
735 Swimming Pools.130
736 Residential Erosion Control, Turf Establishment and Tree Requirements.131
737 Apartments Located Above the First Floor ........................................................ 134
738 Traffic Impact Studies ........................................................................................ 134
739 Brewpubs ............................................................................................................ 135
740 Small Breweries and Breweries ......................................................................... 135
741 Distilleries and Micro-Distilleries ...................................................................... 136
742 Clinics................................................................................................................. 136
743 Healthcare Facilities ........................................................................................... 136
VIII VIOLATIONS AND PENALITIES................................................................................ 136
IX EFFECTUATION ........................................................................................................... 137
iii
Zoning Ordinance
City of New Prague
located in the Counties of
Scott and LeSueur, Minnesota
118 Central Avenue North
New Prague, Minnesota 56071
Ordinance No. 187 ................... Adopted February 7, 2000
Amended January 21, 2003 .... Summary of Amendments Published February 6, 2003
Amended February 2, 2004 ...... Summary of Amendments Published February 19, 2004
Amended June 6, 2005 ............ Summary of Amendments Published June 16, 2005
Amended August 1, 2005...Amendments Published November 24, 2005
Amended September 6, 2005Amendments Published November 24, 2005
Amended November 7, 2005..Amendments Published November 24, 2005
Amended April 3, 2006Amendments Published April 13, 2006
Amended June 5, 2006..Amendments Published June 15, 2006
Amended January 2, 2007Summary of Amendments Published January 18, 2007
Amended September 4, 2007..Amendments Published September 13, 2007
Amended February 4, 2008Amendments Published February 14, 2008
Amended March 3, 2008.Amendments Published March 13, 2008
Amended July 7, 2008.Summary of Amendments Published July 17, 2008
Amended October 20, 2008................... Amendments Published October 30, 2008
Amended April 6, 2009.Amendments Published April 16, 2009
Amended September 7, 2010.Summary of Amendments Published September 16, 2010
Amended December 20, 2010.Summary of Amendments Published December 30, 2010
Amended April 18, 2011..Amendments Published April 28, 2011
Amended July 18, 2011..Amendments Published July 28, 2011
Amended November 21, 2011Amendments Published December 1, 2011
Amended January 3, 2012...Amendments Published January 12, 2012
Amended November 18, 2013Amendments Published November 21, 2013
Amended March 17, 2014...Amendments Published March 27, 2014
Amended March 2, 2015.Amendments Published March 12, 2015
Amended March 7, 2016Amendments Published March 17, 2016 (Effective June 30, 2016)
Amended February 21, 2017...Amendments Published March 2, 2017
Amended August 21, 2017....Amendments Published August 31, 2017
Amended November 20, 2017Amendments Published November 30, 2017
Amended March 19, 2018..Amendments Published March 29, 2018.
City Code Section 153
AN ORDINANCE FOR THE PURPOSE OF PROMOTING HEALTH, SAFETY,
ORDER, CONVENIENCE AND GENERAL WELFARE, BY REGULATING THE
USE OF LAND, THE LOCATION AND USE OF BUILDINGS AND THE
ARRANGEMENT OF BUILDINGS ON LOTS, AND THE DENSITY OF
POPULATION IN THE CITY OF NEW PRAGUE.
The City Council of New Prague, Minnesota, does ordain:
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 1
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
SECTION I: TITLE
101 This ordinance shall be known, cited and referred to as the New Prague Zoning Ordinance, except as
referred to herein, where it shall be known as this ordinance.
SECTION II: INTENT AND PURPOSE
201 This Ordinance is adopted for the purpose of:
1. Protecting the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
2. Dividing the area in the city into zones and districts regulating therein the location, construction,
reconstruction, alteration and use of structures and land.
3. Promoting orderly development of the residential, business, industrial, recreational and public
areas.
4. Conserving and developing the natural resources in the city.
5. Providing for the compatibility of different land uses and the most appropriate use of land
throughout the city.
6. Providing for the administration of this ordinance and defining the powers and duties of the
administrating officer as provided hereinafter.
7. Prescribing penalties for the violation of the provisions in this ordinance or any amendment thereto.
SECTION III: RULES AND DEFINITIONS
301 Rules
The language set forth in the text of this Ordinance shall be interpreted in accordance with the following
rules of construction:
1. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
2. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future the present.
3. The word "building" includes structure and dwelling.
4. The word "person" includes individual, corporation, co-partnership, and association.
5. The word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive.
6. All measured distances expressed in feet shall be to the nearest tenth of a foot.
7. In the event of conflicting provisions, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.
8. In the event that there is a word contained in this Ordinance which does not have a corresponding
definition contained in Section 302 of this Ordinance, then the definition as stated in the Blacks
Law Dictionary shall prevail as the definition.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 2
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
302 Definitions
The following words and terms, whenever they occur in this Ordinance, are defined as follows:
1. Accessory Use or Structure - A use or structure, or portion of a structure, subordinate to and
serving the principal use or structure on the same lot.
2. Agriculture - The term "agricultural" means the art or science of cultivating the soil and activities
incident thereto; the growing of soil crops in the customary manner on open tracts of land; the
accessory raising of livestock and poultry; farming. The term shall include incidental retail selling
by the producer of products raised on the premises, provided that space necessary for parking of
vehicles of customers shall be furnished off the public right of way.
3. Alley - Any dedicated public way affording a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting
property, and not intended for general traffic circulation.
4. Alterations - Any change, addition or modification in construction or type of occupancy, any
change in the structural members of a building, such as walls or partitions, columns, beams or
girders, the consummated act of which may be referred to herein as "altered" or "reconstructed.
5. Antenna - Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting or transmitting
electromagnetic waves, including but not limited to directional antennas, such as panels,
microwave dishes, and satellite dishes, and omni-directional antennas, such as whip antennas.
6. Applicant - Any person who wishes to obtain a building permit, zoning, or subdivision approval, or
a permit to allow land-disturbing activities. Applicant also means that persons agents, employees,
and others acting under this persons direction.
7. Assisted Living Facility  A residential facility with individualized services, which may include the
following services: the provision of supervision and minimal assistance with independent living
skills such as social and recreational opportunities, assistance with transportation, arranging for
meetings and appointments, arranging for medical and social services, providing reminders to
residents to take medications that are self-administered or providing storage for medications if
requested, provision of assistance in the preparation and administration of medications other than
injectables, the provision of therapeutic diets, taking vital signs, or providing assistance in dressing,
grooming, bathing or with walking devices, Such facilities may also provide other services such
as transportation, routine health and wellbeing services including but not limited to medical care
and counseling, 24 hour oversight and providing living and sleeping facilities, meal preparation,
laundry services, and room cleaning.
8. Automobile Repair, Major  Engine rebuilding or major reconditioning of worn or damaged motor
vehicles or trailers; collision services including body, frame of fender straightening or repairs; and
overall painting of vehicles.
9. Automobile Repair, Minor  The replacement of any part or repair of any part which does not
require the removal of the engine head or pan, engine transmission or differential, incidental body
and fender work, minor painting and upholstering service when said service above stated is applied
to passenger automobiles and trucks not in excess of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds gross
weight.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 3
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
10. Barrel - A cylindrical container that can store approximately 31.5 U.S. liquid gallons.
11. Basement - A portion of a building located partly underground but having half or more of its floor
to ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
12. Bed and Breakfast Home - A house, or portion thereof, where short-term lodging rooms and meals
are provided. The operator of the home shall live on the premises.
13. Bed and Breakfast Inn  A house, or portion thereof, where short-term lodging rooms and meals
are provided. A resident manager must occupy the site when guests are present.
14. Best Management Practices (BMPs) - Erosion and sediment control and water quality management
practices that are the most effective and practicable means of controlling, preventing and
minimizing the degradation of surface water, including construction-phasing, minimizing the
length of time soil areas are exposed, prohibitions, and other management practices published by
state or designated area-wide planning agencies. Techniques proven to be effective in controlling
runoff, erosion and sedimentation including those documented in the Minnesota Construction Site
Erosion and Sediment Control Planning Handbook (BWSR, 1988); Protecting Water Quality in
Urban Areas (MPCA, 2000); the Minnesota Urban Small Sites BMP Manual (Metropolitan
Council 2001); and other sources as approved by the City as such documents may be amended,
revised or supplemented.
15. Bluff - A topographical feature such as a hill, cliff, or embankment in which the average grade of
any portion of the slope is thirty (30) percent or greater and there is at least a 25-foot rise in
elevation.
16. Bluff Face - The area between the toe of the bluff and the top of the bluff.
17. Bluff Impact Zone - A 25-foot zone at the top of a bluff.
18. Bluff Overlay District - The Overlay District shown on the map: Bluff Overlay District of the
Scott WMO where potential bluffs exist. This map is located in the office of the Scott WMO.
19. Bluff, Toe of - The lower side of a bluff where the average slope levels off to 18 percent or less.
20. Bluff, Top of - The point on a bluff where there is, as visually observed, a clearly identifiable break
in the slope, from steeper to gentler slope above. If no break in slope is apparent, the top of the
bluff shall be determined as the highest end of a fifty (50) foot segment that exceeds eighteen (18)
percent slope.
21. Boarding House (Rooming or Lodging) - A building other than a motel or hotel where, for
compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals or lodgings are provided for three
or more persons, but not to exceed twenty (20) persons.
22. Board - The Board of Zoning Appeals.
23. Brewery - A facility that annually produces more than 20,000 but less than 250,000 barrels of malt
liquor.
24. Brewpub - A restaurant (as that term is defined in Minnesota Statutes, Section 340A.101) operated
on the same premises as a Small Brewery whose malt liquor on- or off-sale retail sales per calendar
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 4
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
year may be limited by MN State Statute but in no case exceeds 3,500 barrels annually. A
Brewpub is not a Drinking Establishment.
25. Buffer - Land area used to visibly separate one area from another or to shield or block noise, lights
or other nuisances or an area of natural, unmaintained, undisturbed vegetated ground cover abutting
or surrounding a watercourse, public waters wetland, or wetland.
26. Building - Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof, and used or built for the
shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. This shall include tents,
awnings or vehicles situated on private property and used for purposes of a building.
27. Building Height - The vertical distance measured from the established grade to the highest point of
the roof surface for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs and to the average height between
eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
28. Building Line - A line parallel to the street right of way line at any story level of a building and
representing the minimum distance which all or any part of the building is set back from said right
of way line.
29. Building, Main or Principal - A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which
it is situated.
30. Business - Any occupation, employment or enterprise wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold, or
where services are offered for compensation.
31. BWSR - The Minnesota Board of Water and Soil Resources.
32. Car Wash  A building or area that provides facilities for washing and cleaning motor vehicles,
which may use production line methods with a conveyor, blower, or other mechanical devices, and
which may employ some hand labor.
33. Cellar - That portion of a building having more than one-half (1/2) of the floor-to-ceiling height
above the average grade of the adjoining ground. The cellar shall not be counted as a story for
purposes of height limitations.
34. City - The City of New Prague.
35. Clear-Cutting - The entire removal of a stand of vegetation.
36. Clinic  Any establishment where human patients are examined, diagnosed or treated by licensed
practitioners, and does not involve overnight stays. For this purpose, a licensed practitioner
includes physicians, dentists, osteopaths, chiropractors, optometrists, psychologists, therapists, and
physical therapists.
37. Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Services - Licensed commercial wireless
telecommunication services including cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized
mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging and similar services
that are marketed to the general public.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 5
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
38. Commissioner - The Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources or Department of
Public Safety. Appointed members of the Watershed Board or the Watershed Planning
Commission.
39. Common Interest Community (CIC)  A method of allocating the ownership of land and structures
in a development as regulated by the Minnesota Condominium Act (Minnesota Statutes Chapter
515).
40. Community Center - A place, structure, area, or other facility used for and providing religious,
fraternal, social, or recreational programs generally open to the public and designed to a
accommodate and serve significant specific segments of the community.
41. Compensatory Storage - Excavated volume of material below the floodplain elevation required to
offset floodplain fill.
42. Comprehensive Plan - A compilation of goals, policy statements, standards, programs and maps for
guiding the physical, social and economic development of the city and its environs and includes
any unit or part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof.
43. Conditional Use - A use classified as conditional generally may be appropriate or desirable in a
specified zone, but requires special approval because if not carefully located or designed it may
create special problems such as excessive height or bulk or traffic congestion.
44. Condominium - A form of individual ownership within a multi-family building with joint
responsibility for maintenance and repairs of the common property. In a condominium, each
apartment or townhouse is owned out-right and each owner also owns a share of the land and other
common property.
45. Construction Activity - A disturbance to the land that results in a change in the topography,
existing soil cover (both vegetative and non-vegetative), or the existing soil topography that may
result in accelerated stormwater runoff, leading to soil erosion and the movement of sediment into
surface waters or drainage systems.
46. Convenience Store  An establishment where the principal use is the sale of gasoline or any other
automobile engine fuel (stored only in underground tanks), kerosene, motor oil, lubricants, grease
or minor accessories, directly to the public on the premises. In addition, household and
convenience items, food or other miscellaneous retail goods commonly associated with the same
also may be sold.
47. Cooperative - A multi-unit development operated for and owned by its occupants. Individual
housing units are not owned outright as in a condominium, but owners own shares in a total
enterprise.
48. County - Scott and Le Sueur Counties in Minnesota.
49. Curb Level - The grade elevation established per the approved utility plans of the curb in front of
the center of the building. Where no curb level has been established, the City Engineer shall
determine a curb level or its equivalent for the purpose of this Ordinance.
50. Day Care Facility: Any state licensed facility, public or private, which for gain or otherwise
regularly provides one or more persons with care, training, supervision, habitation, rehabilitation,
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 6
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
or developmental guidance on a regular basis, for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours per
day. Day care facilities include, but are not limited to: family day care homes, group family day
care homes, day care centers, day nurseries, nursery schools, daytime activity centers, day
treatment programs, and day services as defined by Minnesota Statutes Chapter 245A.
51. Day Care Facility, In-home: Any state licensed facility where child care is provided in the
principal residence as regulated by Minnesota Statute.
52. Dead Storage - The permanent pool volume of a water basin, or the volume below the runout
elevation of a water basin.
53. Detention Basin - Any natural or manmade depression for the temporary storage of stormwater
runoff.
54. Development -The construction of any public improvement project, infrastructure, structure, street,
or road, or the subdivision of land.
55. Dewatering - The removal of water for construction activity.
56. Distillery - A facility that produces ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, spirits of wine, whiskey,
rum, brandy, gin, or other distilled spirits, including all dilutions and mixtures thereof, for
nonindustrial use.
57. Drain or Drainage - Any method for removing or diverting water from waterbodies, including
excavation of an open ditch, installation of subsurface drainage tile, filling, diking, or pumping.
58. Drinking Establishment  A commercial establishment that derives the majority of its gross sales
from the sale and dispensing of alcoholic beverages which are consumed on the premises.
59. Drive-thru Business  An establishment that, by design of physical facilities or by service or
packaging procedures, encourages or permits customers to receive a service or obtain a product
while in a motor vehicle on the premises.
60. Dwelling, Attached  A dwelling unit which is joined to another dwelling or building at one (1) or
more sides by a party wall or walls.
61. Dwelling, Detached  A dwelling unit which is entirely surrounded by open space on the same lot
with no common party walls.
62. Dwelling Unit - A residential building or portion thereof intended for occupancy by a single family
but not including hotels, motels, boarding or rooming houses or tourist homes. There are two (2)
principal types, single-family and multiple family which are grouped into two-family, duplex,
twinhome, townhouse, and apartment groups.
A. Single-Family - A building in which a single housekeeping unit is maintained or intended
to be maintained.
B. Two Family Dwelling or Duplex - A building in which two housekeeping units are
maintained or intended to be maintained.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 7
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
C. Twinhome  A building designed exclusively for or occupied exclusively by no more than
two (2) families living independently of each other with each unit located on a separate,
single parcel of record, with the party wall separating the units acting as a dividing line.
D. Townhouse - A residential building containing two (2) or more dwelling units with at least
one (1) common wall, each unit so oriented as to have all exits open to the outside.
E. Apartment  A room or suite of rooms with cooking facilities available which is occupied
as a residence by a single family, or a group of individuals living together as a single
family unit. This includes any unit in buildings with more than two dwelling units.
63. Easement - A grant by an owner of land for a specific use to persons or agencies other than the
owner.
64. ECS - Erosion and Sediment Control.
65. Efficiency Unit - A dwelling unit with one primary room which functions as a living room, kitchen,
and bedroom.
66. Energy Dissipation - Methods employed at pipe outlets or along pipe alignments to prevent erosion
including but not limited to: concrete aprons, riprap, collars, splashguards, and gabions
67. Entertainment and Amusement Facilities  A facility which is designed for the entertainment of
people, in which the audience may participate either passively as in watching, or actively, in an
activity. Examples of entertainment and amusement facilities include movie theatres, bowling
alleys, art galleries, comedy clubs, and museums. This would not include uses as defined in this
Ordinance as Physical Recreation or Training, or Commercial Recreation uses.
68. Equal-Degree of Encroachment - A method of determining the location of floodway boundaries so
that flood plain lands on both sides of a stream are capable of conveying a proportionate share of
flood flows.
69. Erosion - The progressive wearing away of the ground surface as a result of wind, flowing water,
ice movement, or land disturbing activities.
70. Erosion Control - Methods employed to prevent erosion. Examples include soil stabilization
practices, horizontal slope grading, temporary or permanent cover, and construction phasing.
71. Essential Services - The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance by private or public
utilities, or municipal departments of underground, surface, or overhead services such as telephone,
gas, electrical, steam, hot water, communication, water and sewage transmission and collection
systems, and the equipment, appurtenances and related structures necessary for furnishing of
adequate service by such private or public utilities or municipal departments. Essential services
does not include personal wireless service antennas or support structures.
72. Excavation - Any breaking of ground, except common household gardening and ground care.
73. Exterior Storage (Includes Open Storage) - The storage of goods, materials, equipment,
manufactured products and similar items not fully enclosed by a building. It shall also include the
keeping of recreational vehicles or recreational equipment for personal use of the property owner
or resident in a residential zoning district.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 8
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
74. Fall Zone - The area on the ground within a prescribed radius from the base of a personal wireless
facility. The fall zone is the area within which there is a potential hazard from falling debris.
Examples of this could be ice or collapsing material. The fall zone is hereby defined as 50 percent
of the height of the tower.
75. Family - An individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, or a group
of not more than four persons not so related, living together as a single housekeeping unit using
common cooking and kitchen facilities.
76. Farm - A tract of land which is principally used for agricultural activities such as the production of
cash crops, livestock or poultry farming. Such farms may include agricultural dwelling and
accessory buildings and structures necessary to the operation of the farm.
77. Farm Animals  Those animals commonly associated with a farm or performing work in an
agricultural setting. Farm animals include, but are not limited to members of the equestrian family
(horses, mules), bovine family (cows, bulls), sheep, poultry (chickens, roosters, turkeys), fowl
(ducks, geese), swine (including Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs), goats, bees and other animals
associated with a farm, ranch or stable.
78. Farm Implement Dealer  A retail business specializing in the sale of agricultural machinery and
equipment.
79. Fence - Any partition, structure, wall or gate erected as a divider marker, barrier or enclosure and
located along the boundary, or within the required yard.
80. Fill - The deposit of soil or other earth material by artificial means.
81. Flood - A temporary rise in stream flow or stage that results in inundation of normally dry areas.
82. Flood Frequency - The average frequency, statically determined, for which it is expected that a
specific flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
83. Flood Fringe - That portion of the flood plain outside of the floodway. Flood fringe is synonymous
with the term "floodway fringe" used in the Flood Insurance Study for the City of New Prague.
84. Flood Plain - The areas adjoining a watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by
the regional flood.
85. Flood-Proofing - A combination of structural provisions, changes, or adjustments to properties and
structures subject to flooding, primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood damages.
86. F1oodway - The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining flood plain which
are reasonably required to carry and discharge the regional flood.
87. F1oor Area - The sum of the horizontal areas of each story of the building measured from the
exterior faces of the exterior walls. The floor area measurement is exclusive of areas of basements,
unfinished attics, attached garages, breezeways and enclosed and unenclosed porches.
88. Frontage - That boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated public street.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 9
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
89. Frontage Road - A local road or street auxiliary to and located on the side of a highway for service
to abutting property and adjacent areas and for control of access.
90. Funeral Home  A business that provides burial and funeral services for the deceased and their
family members. These services may include a prepared wake and funeral, and the provision of a
chapel for the funeral, but do not include any cremation services.
91. Garage, Private - An accessory building or accessory portion of the principal building which is
intended for and used to store the private passenger vehicles of the family or families resident upon
the premises.
92. Garage, Public - Any building or premises, except those used as a private or storage garage, used
for equipping, repairing, hiring, selling or storing motor driven vehicles.
93. Governing Body - City Council of New Prague.
94. Grade - The average of the finished level at the center of the exterior walls of the building.
95. Hardship, Undue -As set forth in Minnesota Statutes Section 462.357, Subdivision 6.
96. Health Care Facility  An institution providing health services primarily for human in-patient
medical or surgical care for the sick and injured and including related facilities such as laboratories,
out-patient, departments, training facilities, central services facilities, and staff offices that are an
integral part of the facilities.
97. Highly Susceptible Wetland Type - A wetland characterized as a sedge meadow; open or
coniferous bog; calcareous fen; low prairie; coniferous or hardwood swamp; or seasonally flooded
wetland.
98. Home Occupation - Any gainful occupation or profession engaged in by the occupant of a dwelling
at or from the dwelling when carried on within a dwelling unit that is clearly a customary,
incidental, and secondary use of the a residential dwelling unit and does not alter the exterior of the
property or affect the residential character of the neighborhood. Such uses include professional
offices, minor repair services, photo or art studies, dressmaking, barber shops, beauty shops, or
similar uses, but does not include automotive repair.
99. Hotel - A building which provides a common entrance, lobby, halls and stairway and in which
twenty (20) or more people can be, for compensation, lodged with or without meals.
100. Impervious Surface - A constructed hard surface that either prevents or retards the entry of water
into the soil and causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities and at an increased rate of
flow than prior to development. Examples include, but are not limited to, rooftops, sidewalks,
patios, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, concrete, asphalt, or gravel roads.
101. Industry, Heavy  A use engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or
products predominately from extracted or raw materials.
102. Industry, Light  A use engaged in the manufacture, predominately from previously prepared
materials, of finished products or parts.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 10
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
103. Infiltration Area - A stormwater retention method for the purpose of reducing the volume of
stormwater runoff by transmitting a flow of water into the ground through the earths surface.
104. Infrastructure - The system of public works for a county, state, or municipality including, but not
limited to, structures, roads, bridges, culverts, sidewalks; stormwater management facilities,
conveyance systems and pipes; pump stations, sanitary sewers and interceptors, hydraulic
structures, permanent erosion control and stream bank protection measures, water lines, gas lines,
electrical lines and associated facilities, and phone lines and supporting facilities.
105. Interim Use  A temporary use of property until a particular date, until the occurrence of a
particular event, or until zoning regulations no longer permit it.
106. Junk Yards/Salvage Yards - An open area where waste, used or secondhand materials are bought
and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including, but not limited to,
scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles.
107. Kennel, Commercial - Any lot or premises on which more than three (3) dogs, cats or other
household pets are either permanently or temporarily boarded, bred or sold.
108. Land Disturbing or Development Activities - Any change of the land surface including removing
vegetative cover, excavating, filling, grading, stockpiling soil, and the construction of any structure
that may cause or contribute to erosion, or the movement of sediment into water bodies. The use of
land for new and continuing agricultural activities shall not constitute a land disturbing activity
under this Ordinance.
109. Landlocked Basin - A basin that does not have a natural outlet at or below the existing 100-year
flood design elevation as determined using the Simplified Hydrologic Yield Method or other
acceptable hydrologic analysis method identified in the Surface Water Management Plan, as
amended.
110. Least Susceptible Wetland Type - A wetland characterized as a gravel pit, cultivated hydric soil,
dredged material or fill, or material disposal site.
111. Loading Space - An off-street space on the same lot with a building or group of buildings, for
temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials.
112. Local Government Unit (LGU) - The City of New Prague, Minnesota.
113. Local Water Plan - The City of New Pragues Surface Water Management Plan, as amended.
114. Lot - A parcel or portion of land in a subdivision or plat of land, separated from other parcels or
portions by description as on a subdivision or record of survey map, for the purpose of sale or lease
or separate use thereof.
115. Lot of Record - Any lot which is one (1) unit of a plat heretofore duly approved and filed, or one
unit of an auditor's Subdivision or a Registered Land Survey that has been recorded in the office of
the County Recorder.
116. Lot Area - The area of a lot in a horizontal plane bounded by the lot lines.
117. Lot, Corner - A lot situated at the junction of, and abutting on two or more intersecting streets.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 11
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
118. Lot coverage - The area of the lot occupied by the principal buildings and accessory buildings.
119. Lot Depth - The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot.
120. Lot Line - The property line bordering a lot except that where any portion of a lot extends into the
public right of way shall be the lot line for purposes of this Ordinance.
121. Lot Line, Front - That boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated public street, and in
the case of a corner lot it shall be the shortest dimension on a public street. If the dimensions of a
corner lot are equal, the front line shall be designated by the owner and filed with the County
Recorder.
122. Lot Line, Rear - That boundary of a lot which is opposite the front lot line. If the rear line is less
than ten (10) feet in length, or if the lot forms a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be a line ten
(10) feet in length within the lot, parallel to, and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.
123. Lot Line, Side - Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
124. Lot, Substandard - A lot or parcel of land for which a deed has been recorded in the office of the
County Recorder upon or prior to the effective date of this Ordinance which does not meet the
minimum lot area, structure setbacks or other dimensional standards of this Ordinance.
125. Lot Width - The horizontal distance measured at the front building setback line of a lot.
126. Low Floor Elevation - The finished surface elevation of the lowest floor of a structure.
127. Major Watershed - One of the 87 major watershed units delineated by the map titled State of
Minnesota Watershed Boundaries, 1979, produced by the Minnesota Department of Natural
Resources as included in the Wetland Conservation Act Minnesota Part Rules Chapter 8420.
128. Malt Liquor - any beer, ale, or other beverage made from malt by fermentation and containing not
less than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume.
129. Manufactured/Modular Home  A factory built, single-family structure that is manufactured under
the authority of the Federal Manufactured Construction and Safety Standards, is transportable in
one or more sections, and is used as a place of human habitation, but is not constructed with a
permanent hitch or other device allowing transport of the unit other than for the purpose of delivery
to a permanent site, and which does not have wheels or axles permanently attached to its body or
frame.
130. Manufactured/Modular Home Park - Any site, lot, field or tract of land under single ownership,
designated, maintained or intended for the placement of two (2) or more occupied homes. It shall
include any buildings, structures, vehicles, or enclosures intended for use as part of the equipment
of such mobile/manufactured home park.
131. Manufacturing, Light  Fabrication, processing or assembly employing substantially noiseless and
inoffensive power sources, utilizing hand labor or quiet machinery and processes, and free from
neighborhood disturbing agents, such as odors, gas, fumes, smoke, cinders, flashing or excessively
bright lights, excessive refuse matter, electromagnetic radiation, heat or vibration.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 12
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
132. Manufacturing, Heavy  All manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, treatment or
assembly of products and materials that may emit objectionable and offensive influences beyond
the lot on which the use is located. Such uses include, but are not limited to the following:
sawmill, refineries, commercial feedlots, acid, cement, explosives, flour, seed and grail milling or
storage, meat packing, slaughter houses, coal or tar asphalt distillation, rendering of fat, grease, lard
or tallow, alcoholic beverages, poisons, exterminating agents, glue or size, lime, gypsum, plaster or
parts, tanneries, automobile parts, paper and paper products, glass, chemicals, plastics, crude oil
and petroleum products, including storage, electric power generation facilities, vinegar works,
junkyard, auto reduction yard, foundry, forge, casting of metal products, rock stone, cement
products.
133. Metes and Bounds Description - A description of real property which is not described by reference
to a lot or block shown on a map, but is described by starting at a known point and describing the
bearing and distances of the lines forming the boundaries of the property or delineates a fractional
portion of a section, lot or area by describing lines or portions thereof.
134. Micro-distillery - A facility that produces Ethyl Alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, spirits of wine,
whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or other distilled spirits, including all dilutions and mixtures thereof, for
nonindustrial use not to exceed 40,000 proof-gallons per calendar year.
135. Mini Storage/Self-Service Storage Facility  A building consisting of individual, small, selfcontained
units that are leased or owned for the storage of business or household goods.
136. Mining - The extraction of sand, gravel, rock, soil or other material from the land in the amount of
1,000 cubic yards or more and the removal thereof from the site. The only exclusion from this
definition shall be removal of materials associated with construction of a building, provided such
removal is an approved item in the building permit.
137. Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) - The State organization responsible for the
NPDES/SDS permitting system.
138. Moderately Susceptible Wetland Type - A wetland characterized as shrub-carr, alder thicket; fresh
wet meadow not dominated by reed canary grass; or shallow or deep marsh not dominated by reed
canary grass, cattail, giant reed, or purple loosestrife.
139. Motel - A building or group of detached, semi-detached, or attached buildings containing guest
rooms or dwellings, with garage or parking space conveniently located to each unit, and which is
designed, used or intended to be used primarily for the accommodation of automobile transients.
140. Motor Home or Recreation Vehicle - Any vehicle mounted on wheels and for which a license
would be required if used on highways, roads or streets, and so constructed and designed as to
permit occupance thereof for dwelling or sleeping purposes and used for recreational purposes.
141. Motor Vehicle and Recreational Equipment Sales  The sale of new or used automobiles, trucks,
motorcycles, recreational vehicles and equipment, boats and marine sales, that involve open and
outdoor sales and display areas.
142. MSL - Mean Sea Level. It represents the average 19-year height of the surface of the sea for all
stages of the tide.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 13
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
143. Non-Conforming Lot  A lot of record, lawfully existing on the effective date of this ordinance,
which does not comply with one or more of the lot area or lot width regulations applicable in the
zoning district in which it is located because of the adoption of or an amendment to the regulations
set forth in this Ordinance.
144. Non-Conforming Structure  A structure, or portion thereof, lawfully existing on the effective date
of this Ordinance, which currently is not allowed, or which does not comply with one or more of
the regulations applicable in the zoning district in which it is located because of the adoption of or
an amendment to the regulations set forth in this Ordinance.
145. Non-Conforming Use  A use of land or structures, lawfully existing on the effective date of this
ordinance, which currently is not allowed, or which does not comply with one or more of the
regulations applicable in the zoning district in which it is located because of the adoption of or an
amendment to the regulations set forth in this Ordinance.
146. Non-Point Source - Nutrient and pollution sources not discharged from a single point e.g. runoff
from agricultural fields, feedlots or urban streets.
147. Normal Water Level (NWL) - For a reservoir with a fixed overflow, the NWL is the lowest crest
level of that overflow. For a reservoir whose outflow is controlled wholly or partly by movable
gates, siphons or other means, it is the maximum level to which water may rise under normal
operating conditions, exclusive of any provision for flood storage. For a closed depression wetland,
it is the maximum level to which the water may rise under normal precipitation conditions
exclusive of any provision for flood storage.
148. NPDES/SDS - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)/State Disposal System
(SDS). This permitting system is managed by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA).
149. NRCS - The Natural Resource Conservation Service.
150. NURP - The Nationwide Urban Runoff Program developed by the Environmental Protection
Agency to study storm water runoff from urban development.
151. Nursery, Landscape - A business growing and selling trees, flowering and decorative plants and
shrubs and which may be conducted within a building or without, for the purpose of landscape
construction.
152. Nursing Home - A building with facilities for the care of children, the aged, infirm, or place of rest
for those suffering bodily disorder. Said nursing home shall be licensed by the Minnesota
Department of Health.
153. Obstruction - Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection,
excavation, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or
matter in, along, across, or projecting into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory flood plain
which may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by
catching or collecting the debris carried by such water.
154. Office Use  A facility in which the handling of information or the performing of administrative
services is conducted as a principal building use. This includes services provided to persons both
on-site and off-site on a walk-in or appointment basis.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 14
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
155. Off-Sale - The sale of alcoholic beverages in original packages for consumption off the licensed
premises only.
156. On-Sale - The sale of alcoholic beverages by the glass for consumption on the licensed premises
only.
157. Ordinary High Water Mark (OHW) - A mark delineating the highest water level which has been
maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape. The ordinary high
water mark is commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from predominantly
aquatic to predominantly terrestrial.
158. Open Sales Lot (Exterior Storage) - Any land used or occupied for the purpose of buying and
selling any goods, materials, or merchandise and for the storing of same under the open sky prior to
sale.
159. Outdoor Seating - A commercial seating area for business patrons which is not located in an
Indoor Area as defined by Minnesota Statute Section 144.413 Subdivision 1a.
160. Outdoor Wood-Fired Boiler  A fuel burning device designed: (1) to burn primarily wood by handfiring;
(2) not to be located inside structures ordinarily occupied by humans; and, (3) to heat spaces
or water by the distribution through pipes of a fluid heated in the device, typically water. Examples
of common uses of outdoor wood-fired boilers include: residential or commercial space heating,
heating of domestic hot water, and heating of water for swimming pools, hot tubs or whirlpool
baths.
161. Outlot - A lot remnant or parcel of land that is part of a larger unified development that is intended
to remain as open space or as another use not containing buildings or structures. No building
permits will be issued by the City for a lot or parcel meeting this definition.
162. Owner- Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity
having proprietary interest in the land.
163. Parcel- A parcel of land designated by plat, metes and bounds, registered land survey, auditors
subdivision, or other accepted means and separated from other parcels or portions by its
designation.
164. Parking Space - A suitably surfaced and permanently maintained area on privately owned property
either within or outside of a building of sufficient size to store one standard automobile.
165. Partially Land-locked Basin- A stormwater storage area that discharges only for events larger than
the two-year design event. The two-year design event is a 24-hour rainfall using type II
distribution.
166. Pedestrian Way - A public or private right of way across or within a block, to be used by
pedestrians.
167. Permittee- The person or political subdivision in whose name a permit is issued pursuant to these
Ordinances
168. Person- Any individual, trustee, partnership, unincorporated association, limited liability company,
or corporation.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 15
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
169. Personal Wireless Services - Commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services, and
common carrier wireless exchange access services.
170. Physical Recreation or Training - A business that provides physical exercise, training or recreation
equipment or space for use on site. Health and fitness centers and clubs, dance studios, karate
facilities and gymnastics facilities shall be considered examples of such use. Training or self
improvement shall be an important component of the activity, which is differentiated from
commercial recreation uses, where sports are the predominate activity.
171. Planning Commission - The Planning Commission of New Prague appointed by the City Council.
172. Planned Unit Development  A development of land that is under unified control and is planned
and developed as a whole in a single development operation or programmed series of development
stages. The development may include streets, circulation ways, utilities, buildings, open spaces,
and other site features and improvements.
173. Plat - The drawing or map of a subdivision prepared for filing of record pursuant to Minnesota
Statutes Chapter 505 and containing all elements and requirements set forth in applicable local
regulations adopted pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Section 462.358 and Chapter 505.
174. Political Subdivision- A county, city, town, school district, or other local government jurisdiction
to which the state provides state aids or on which the state imposes state mandates.
175. Principal Structure or Use - One which determines the predominant use as contrasted to accessory
use or structure.
176. Property Line - The legal boundaries of a parcel of property which may also coincide with a right
of way line or a road, cartway, and the like.
177. Property Owner - Any person, association or corporation having a freehold estate interest,
leasehold interest extending for a term or having renewal options for a term in excess of one year, a
dominant easement interest, or an option to purchase any of same, but not including owners of
interests held for security purposes only.
178. Protective Covenant - A contract entered into between private parties which constitutes a restriction
of the use of a particular parcel of property.
179. Public Health and General Welfare- As defined in Minnesota Statutes, Section 103D.011,
Subdivisions 23 and 24.
180. Public Improvement Project- A public road or utility project that provides a common benefit to the
community (such as, but not limited to, collector and arterial roads, and trunk stormwater facilities)
and is included in an approved Capital Improvement Plan or Transportation Plan.
181. Public Land - Land owned or operated by municipal, school district, county, state or other
governmental units.
182. Public Utility - Any person, firm or corporation, municipal department, board or commission duly
authorized to furnish and furnishing under Federal, State or Municipal regulations to the public:
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 16
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal, communication, transportation or water, including
buildings used by said persons, municipal entities or corporations.
183. Public Waters Wetlands- All Type 3, 4, and 5 wetlands, as defined in United States Fish and
Wildlife Service Circular No. 39 (1971 edition), not included within the definition of public waters,
that are ten or more acres in size in unincorporated areas or 2-1/2 or more acres in incorporated
areas.
184. Quasi Public Organization  A service organization that is established to provide the community
and its residents with supplemental services and needs. Examples of these organizations include
but are not limited to Kiwanis, Rotary, Elks, Masons, VFW, and Womans Club.
185. Reach - A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a stream or river
influenced by a natural or man-made obstruction. In an urban area, the segment of a stream or
river between two consecutive bridge crossings would most typically constitute a reach.
186. Recreation, Commercial - Includes all uses such as tennis courts, ball fields, picnic areas, and the
like that are commonly provided for the public at parks, playgrounds, community centers, and other
sites owned and operated by a private enterprise for the purpose of providing recreation.
187. Recreation, Public - Includes all uses such as tennis courts, ball fields, picnic areas, and the like,
including accessory structures, that are commonly provided for the public at parks, playgrounds,
community centers, and other sites owned and operated by a unit of government for the purpose of
providing recreation.
188. Recreational Equipment  Recreational equipment shall include, but not be limited to
boats, boat trailers, boat lifts and rail systems, general purpose trailers, travel trailers,
camping trailers, truck toppers, fish houses, utility trailers, jet skis, all-terrain vehicles,
motorbikes, go-carts and snowmobiles. Recreational equipment does not include
recreational vehicles as defined by this ordinance.
189. Recreational Vehicle  A motor vehicle self-propelled on its own chassis and designed or
used for recreational, amusement or sporting purposes. The term recreational vehicle
includes, but is not limited to motor homes and converted trucks or busses, but excluding
motor vehicles designed for commercial, industrial or agricultural use.
190. Recycling Center  A facility that is not a junkyard and in which recoverable resources, such as
newspapers, glassware, and metal cans are collected, stored, flattened, crushed, or bundled, within
a completely enclosed building.
191. Redevelopment- The rebuilding, repair or alteration of a structure, land surface or facility that
creates less than one acre of new impervious surface, involves greater than one acre of land
disturbance, and for which over 50 percent of the parcel involved is disturbed by a land disturbing
activity. For the purposes of this Ordinance, if an activity creates more than one acre of new or
additional impervious surface, the activity is considered new development and exceptions in this
Ordinance for redevelopment do not apply to the increased (new) impervious surface.
192. Regional Flood - A flood which is representative of large floods known to have occurred generally
in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an average
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 17
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
frequency in the magnitude of the 100 year recurrence interval. Regional flood is synonymous
with the term "base flood" used in the Flood Insurance Study.
193. Registered Land Survey - A survey map of land as described by a duly registered land surveyor by
the State of Minnesota.
194. Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation- An elevation no lower than one foot above the elevation of
the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by encroachments in the flood plain
that result from designation of a floodway.
195. Religious Institution - A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where persons
regularly assemble for religious worship and which is maintained and controlled by a religious
body, organized to sustain public worship.
196. Research Facility  A facility where the primary activity is the discovering, interpreting and the
development of methods and systems for the advancement of human knowledge on a wide variety
of scientific matters.
197. Restaurant  Restaurants are divided into three classes. If a restaurant offers services which cause
it to meet the definition of more than one restaurant class, the restaurant shall be classified as the
highest classification, regardless of the amount of the various uses involved.
Class I (Fast Food)  An establishment that offers quick food service of items already
prepared, prepackaged or quickly served. Orders are not generally taken at the customers
table but at an order/pickup counter or at a drive-thru window. Food may be consumed on
site or carried out.
Class II (Sit Down Without Liquor/Entertainment)  An establishment whose principal
business is the selling of unpackaged food to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, in
individual servings, or in non-disposable containers, and where the customers consume
these foods while seated at tables or counters located within the building, and which does
not serve alcoholic beverages or provide live entertainment.
Class III (Sit Down With Liquor/Entertainment) - An establishment whose principal
business is the selling of unpackaged food to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, in
individual servings, or in non-disposable containers, and where the customers consume
these foods while seated at tables or counters located within the building, and which does
serve alcoholic beverages / on-sale liquor or provide live entertainment.
198. Retail and Service Establishment  Stores and shops selling personal services or goods for final
consumption or the provision of services to the general public that produces minimal off-site
impacts.
199. Retail Center (Strip Mall)  A commercial area containing one or more retail establishments with a
total building in excess of 5,000 square feet.
200. Retention- The prevention of direct discharge of stormwater runoff into receiving water or
conveyance networks; examples include systems that discharge through percolation, exfiltration,
infiltration and evaporation processes that generally have residence times of less than three days.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 18
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
201. Right-of-Way  An area or strip of land, either public or private, on which an irrevocable right of
passage has been recorded for the use of vehicles or pedestrians or both. Right-of-way includes the
driving surface of a street and adjacent boulevard.
202. Runoff- Rainfall, snowmelt, or irrigation water flowing over the ground surface.
203. Satellite Dish Antenna - A device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar
configured and is in the shape of a shallow dish, cone, horn or cornucopia. Such device is used to
transmit or receive radio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and orbitally based uses.
This definition shall include, but not be limited to, what are commonly referred to as satellite earth
stations, TVROs (television, receive only) and satellite microwave antennas.
204. School - A building used for the purpose of elementary or secondary education, which meets all the
requirements of compulsory education laws of the state of Minnesota, and not providing residential
accommodations.
205. School, Private - Any building or group of buildings, not operated by a public agency or unit of
government, the use of which meets compulsory education laws of the state of Minnesota, for
elementary school, middle school (junior high school), secondary (senior high school), or higher
education and which use does not secure the major part of its funding directly from any
governmental source.
206. School, Public - Any building or group of buildings, the use of which meets compulsory education
laws of the state of Minnesota, for elementary school, middle school (junior high school),
secondary (senior high school), or higher education and which secures all or the major part of its
funding from governmental sources and is operated by a public agency or governmental unit.
207. Scott SWCD- The Scott Soil and Water Conservation District.
208. Screening  A device or materials used to conceal one element of a development from other
elements or from adjacent or contiguous development. Screening may include one or a
combination of the following materials  walls, berms, or plantings.
209. Seasonal Produce Stand  A temporary use for the purposes of selling seasonal produce.
210. Sediment- The solid mineral or organic material that is in suspension, is being transported, or has
been moved from its original location by erosion and has been deposited at another location.
211. Sedimentation- The process or action of depositing sediment.
212. Setback - The minimum distance between the building line and related front, side and rear setback
lines.
213. Setback Line  The setback line shall be measured from the property line.
214. Shoreland District- Consists of land located within a floodplain, within 1,000 feet of the OHW of a
public water or public waters wetland, or within 300 feet of a stream or river.
215. Sign - Any letter, word or symbol, poster, picture, statuary, reading matter or representation in the
nature of advertisement, announcement, message, or visual communication, whether painted,
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 19
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
posted, printed, affixed or constructed, including all associated brackets, braces, supports, wires
and structures, which is displayed for informational or communicative purposes.
A. Sign, Banner - A temporary sign typically made of cloth, plastic or vinyl materials. Banner
signs shall not be considered as permanent signage.
B. Sign, Billboard - A sign structure with a surface area over one hundred (100) square feet
per surface that identifies or communicates a commercial or non-commercial message.
C. Sign, Building  A sign attached to the outside of a building wall, roof, canopy or awning.
D. Sign, Commercial Speech  Speech or graphics advertising a business, profession,
commodity, service or entertainment.
E. Sign, Electronic Variable Message  Signs whose message may be changed at reasonable
intervals as determined by this ordinance by electronic process or remote control and
whose movement is the periodic changing of information against a solid, colorless
background, engineered for maximum legibility and readability, and having a constant
light level and glare reduced screens.
F. Sign, Freestanding  A sign supported by one or more upright poles, columns, or braces,
placed in or on the ground and not attached to any building or structure.
G. Sign, Monument  Any freestanding sign with its sign face mounted on the ground or
mounted on a base at least as wide as the sign and solid from the grade to the top of the
sign structure and is typically encased or supported by masonry materials.
H. Sign, Non-Commercial Speech  A sign that contains a non-commercial message.
Examples of non-commercial messages include, but are not limited to, messages
concerning political, religious, social, ideological, public service and informational topics.
I. Sign, Off-Premise  A commercial speech sign which directs the attention of the public to
a business not on the same lot or site where such a sign is located.
J. Sign, Portable - A non-permanent sign not permanently attached to the ground or other
permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to,
signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; balloons used as messages, umbrellas
used for messages; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the
public right-of-way, unless said vehicles are used in the normal day-to-day operations of
the business. This definition does not include those defined in this Ordinance as sandwich
boards.
K. Sign, Projecting  A sign that projects from the wall of a face of a building or structure,
including an awning, canopy or marquee.
L. Sign, Readerboard  A sign having a message not permanently affixed to the sign face and
the copy is manually changed.
M. Sign, Sandwich Board - A freestanding temporary sign, with no moving parts or flashing
lights, no larger than eight square feet total sign size per side (no taller than four feet from
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 20
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
grade); displayed outside an establishment during business hours. It is not intended as
permanent business signage.
N. Sign, Temporary  A non-permanent sign erected, affixed, or maintained on-premise for a
limited period of time.
216. Site - A lot, or group of adjacent lots intended, designated or approved to function as an integrated
unit, that is proposed for development in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and is in
a single ownership or has multiple owners, all of whom execute a joint application for
development. The joint application for development includes but is not limited to Conditional Use
Permit Applications and Planned Unit Development Applications.
217. Slightly Susceptible Wetland Type- A wetland characterized as a floodplain forest; fresh wet
meadow dominated by reed canary grass; or a shallow or deep marsh dominated by reed canary
grass, cattail, giant reed, or purple loosestrife.
218. Small Brewery - A facility that annually produces no more than 20,000 barrels of malt liquor.
219. Solar Structure - A structure designed to utilize solar energy as an alternate for, or supplement to, a
conventional energy system.
220. Stabilized- The exposed ground surface that has been covered by staked sod, erosion control
blanket, riprap, mulch, wood fiber blanket or other material that prevents erosion from occurring.
Grass seeding alone is not stabilization.
221. Standard- A preferred or desired level of quantity, quality, or value.
222. Stormwater Detention Pond- A natural or created ponding area that provides temporary storage of
excess stormwater for the purpose of attenuating the peak rate of runoff by controlling the rate of
pond discharge. Ponding areas that drain completely between storm events are dry detention
ponds. Ponding areas that provide temporary storage in combination with a permanent wet pool
are wet detention ponds.
223. Stormwater Management Plan- A plan for the permanent management and control of runoff
prepared and implemented in accordance with the standards set forth in this Ordinance.
224. Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) - A plan of BMPs or equivalent measures designed
to control runoff and erosion and to retain and control sediment on site during the period of land
disturbing activities in accordance with the standards set forth by the MPCA and this Ordinance.
225. Stormwater Quality Pond- A created ponding area per W. W. Walker (1987) criteria that provides a
permanent pool for the purpose of sediment and pollutant removal to reduce water quality impacts
of urban development.
226. Stormwater Retention Pond- A natural or created ponding area that provides permanent storage of
excess stormwater for the purpose of attenuating the peak volume of runoff, from which the only
release of flow is by infiltration or evaporation.
227. Story - That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the
floor next above, including below ground portions of earth sheltered buildings.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 21
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
228. Story, Half - A story under a gable, hip, or gambel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two
opposite exterior walls are not more than two (2) feet above the floor of such story.
229. Street - A public right of way which affords primary means of access to abutting property, and
shall also include avenue, highway, road or boulevard.
230. Street, Arterial (Minor)  A street that has a primary function of carrying larger volumes of traffic
at higher speeds, typically from one part of the city to another, or from one city to another, and is
intended to provide for the collection, distribution and mobility of traffic. Access is limited to this
type of street in order to preserve the mobility function.
231. Street, Arterial (Principal)  A street that has a primary function of carrying large volumes of
traffic from one city to another, that typically serves longer trips, and is intended to provide for the
mobility of traffic and not land access; hence direct access to property is not intended and
regulation of access is limited in order to preserve the ability of the roadway to accommodate the
mobility function. Access is typically provided by grade separated interchanges or ramps.
232. Street, Collector  A street that carries traffic from local streets to minor arterials and serves a dual
function of providing both mobility and land access. Collector streets provide principal access to
residential neighborhoods and development centers, and may also serve land access to commercial
developments. Access spacing is limited in order to balance the streets function of providing both
mobility and land access.
233. Street, Cul-de-Sac  A local street with only one outlet and having an appropriate terminal for the
safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
234. Street, Local  A street which is used primarily for access to abutting properties and for local
traffic movement. Local streets generally connect to collector streets or other local streets.
235. Street Pavement - The wearing or exposed surface of the roadway used by vehicular traffic.
236. Street, Private  A street serving as vehicular access to two or more parcels of land which is not
dedicated to the public and is owned and maintained by one or more private parties.
237. Street Width - The width of the right-of-way, measured at right angles to the centerline of the
street.
238. Structure - Anything constructed, the uses of which requires permanent location on the ground, or
attached to something having a permanent location on the ground.
239. Structural Alteration - Any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls,
columns, beams, or girders, or any change in the roof or in any exterior walls.
240. Subdivision - The division or re-division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots
either by plat or by metes and bounds description.
241. Surface Water- All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, wetlands, reservoirs, spring, rivers, drainage
systems, waterways, watercourses, and irrigation systems whether natural or artificial, public or
private.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 22
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
242. Surface Water Management Plan - The City of New Pragues Surface Water Management Plan
which was prepared to meet requirements of the Scott Watershed Management Organization.
Adopted and implemented in accordance with Minnesota Statutes, Section 103B.231 and
Minnesota Rules Chapter 8410 for Local Water Management.
243. Swimming Pool  Any outdoor permanent or temporary structure located in or above ground
intended for swimming, wading or recreational bathing and contains, or is capable of containing
water over 24 inches at any point or has a surface area exceeding 150 square feet (14 foot
diameter).
244. Taproom - An area for the on-sale consumption of malt liquor produced by the brewer for
consumption on the premises of or adjacent to one brewery location owned by the brewer. A
taproom may also include sales for off-premises consumption of malt liquor produced at the
brewery location or adjacent to the taproom and owned by the brewer for off-premises
consumption, packaged subject to MN Statute 340A.301, subdivision 7(b), or its successor. A
Taproom is not a Drinking Establishment.
245. Tower - Any ground or roof mounted pole, spire, structure, or combination thereof taller than
fifteen feet, including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, and masts, intended primarily for the
purpose of mounting an antenna, meteorological device, or similar apparatus above grade.
246. Tower, Multi-User - A tower which is designed to accommodate the antennas of more than one
personal wireless service provider or governmental entity.
247. Tower, Single User: A tower to which is attached only the antennas of a single user, although the
tower may be designed to accommodate the antennas of multiple users as required in this
ordinance.
248. Undue Hardship- As defined in Minnesota Statutes Section 462.357, Subdivision 6.
249. Unlicensed Wireless Services: The offering of telecommunications services using duly authorized
devices, which do not require individual licenses; direct-to-home satellite services are excluded
from this definition.
250. Use - The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is designated, arranged, or
intended, or for which it is occupied, utilized, or maintained.
251. Use, Accessory - A use subordinate to and serving the principal use or structure on the same lot and
customarily incidental thereto.
252. Use, Non-Conforming - Use of land, buildings, or structures legally existing at the time of adoption
of this Ordinance which does not comply with all the regulations of this Ordinance or any
amendments hereto governing the zoning district in which such use is located.
253. Use, Permitted - A public or private use which of itself conforms with the purposes, objectives,
requirements, regulations, and performance standards of a particular zoning district.
254. Use, Principal - The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from subordinate or accessory
use. A principal use may be either permitted or conditional.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 23
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
255. Use, Temporary - A building permitted to exist during periods of construction of the main building
or use, or for special events.
256. Useable Open Space - The open space required to be provided for Multiple Family Buildings in the
RM and RH District. Such open space must not have a least dimension in any case less than 30
feet. That required portion of a lot at ground level, unoccupied by buildings, and available to all
the occupants of the building. This space of minimum prescribed dimensions shall not be devoted
to service driveways or off-street parking space and/or loading berths but shall be usable for
greenery, recreational space, and other leisure activities normally carried on outdoors.
257. Variance - A modification or variation of the provisions of this Ordinance where it is determined
that by reason of unique circumstances relating to a specific lot, that strict application of the
Ordinance would cause practical difficulties.
258. Veterinary Clinic  A clinic operated by a licensed veterinarian exclusively for the diagnosis,
treatment, correction, relief, or prevention of animal disease, deformity, defect, injury, or other
physical or mental conditions; the performance of obstetrical procedures for animals, including
determination of pregnancy and correction of sterility or infertility; and the rendering of advice or
recommendations with regard to any of the above.
259. Warehouse and Distribution  A use engaged in storage, wholesale, and distribution of
manufactured products, supplies, and equipment, but excluding bulk storage of materials that are
flammable or explosive or that create hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions.
260. Water Basin- An enclosed natural depression with definable banks capable of containing water that
may be partly filled with public waters
261. Water Body- All surface waters, water basins, watercourses, and wetlands as defined in this
Ordinance.
262. Watercourse- Any natural or improved stream, river, creek, ditch, channel, culvert, drain, gully,
swale, or wash in which waters flow continuously or intermittently in a definite direction.
263. Waters of the State- All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs,
reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of
water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within,
flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof.
264. Wellhead Protection Plan- A document that provides for the protection of a public water supply,
submitted to the Minnesota Department of Health, is implemented by the public water supplier, and
complies with: A) the wellhead protection elements specified in the Federal Safe Drinking Water
Act, United States Code, title 42, Chapter 6A, subchapter XII, Part C, section 300h-7; and B)
Minnesota Rules Parts 4720.5200 to 4720.5290.
265. Wetland- Any wetland as defined in Minnesota Statutes Section 103G.005, subdivision 19.
266. Wetland Conservation Act (WCA)- The Minnesota Wetland Conservation Act of 1991.
267. Yard - A required open space on a lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed by a structure from its
lowest level to the sky except as permitted in this Ordinance. The yard extends along the lot line at
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 24
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
right angles to such lot line to a depth or width specified in the setback regulations for the zoning
district in which such lot is located.
268. Yard, Rear - The portion of the yard on the same lot with the principal building located between the
rear line of the building and the rear lot line and extending for the full width of the lot.
269. Yard, Side - The yard extending along the side lot line between the front yard and rear yard to a
depth or width required by setback regulations for the zoning district in which such lot is located.
270. Yard, Front - A yard extending along the full width of the front lot line between side lot lines and
extending from the abutting street right-of-way line to depth required in the setback regulations for
the zoning district in which such lot is located. For lots that abut more than one street such as
corner and through lots, there may be more than one front yard for purposes of calculating setbacks
of setbacks. Front yard setbacks shall apply to all yard spaces adjacent to a street right-of-way.
271. Zero Lot Line - A type of residential development that allows one of the sides of the principal
structure to be located immediately adjacent to the side lot line.
272. Zoning Administrator - The duly appointed person charged with enforcement of this Ordinance.
273. Zoning Amendment - A change authorized by the city either in the allowed use within a district or
in the boundaries of a district.
274. Zoning District - An area or areas within the limits of the city for which the regulations and
requirements governing use are uniform as defined by this Ordinance.
SECTION IV: GENERAL PROVISIONS
401 Application of this Ordinance
1. This Ordinance shall be applicable to all lands and waters within the corporate limits of New
Prague, Minnesota.
2. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to the
minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and welfare.
3. No part of the yard or open space required for a given building shall be included as a part of the
yard or other space required for another building, and no lot shall be used for more than one
principal building.
4. Each new occupied building shall be required to connect to the city utilities.
5. Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this Ordinance are either more restrictive or less
restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other law, ordinance, statute, resolution, or
regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards
or requirements shall prevail.
6. Except as in this Ordinance specifically provides, no structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged,
reconstructed, or altered; and no structure or land shall be used for any purpose or in any manner
which is not in conformity with this Ordinance. Temporary buildings that are used in conjunction
with construction work, including trailers and manufactured/mobile homes used as offices and for
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 25
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
tool storage, may be permitted in any district during the period that construction is taking place, but
such temporary buildings shall be removed within 30 days after completion of construction work.
7. No building permit for new developments shall be issued on land described by metes and bounds.
8. All international, federal, state, county and other official monuments, benchmarks, triangulation
points, and stations shall be preserved in their precise locations; and it shall be the responsibility of
the applicant to insure that these markers are maintained in good condition during the following
construction and development. All section, 1/4 section and 1/16 section corners shall be duly
described and tied.
9. Where adjoining structures existing at the time of adoption of this Ordinance have a different
setback from that required, the front setback of a new structure shall conform to the average
prevailing setback in the immediate vicinity. The Planning Commission shall determine the
necessary front yard setback in such cases subject to approval by the City Council.
10. A 50 percent increase in height over the requirements of the zoning district is permitted for barns,
silos, and other structures on farms; to church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes; monuments;
chimneys and smokestacks; flag poles; public and semipublic utility facilities; transmission towers
of commercial and private radio broadcasting stations; television antennae; and grain elevators.
Uses exceeding the district height limitation by more than 50 percent shall require a Conditional
Use Permit.
11. No cellar, garage, tent, trailer, basement with unfinished structure above, or accessory building
shall at any time be used as a dwelling unit in excess of fourteen (14) days.
12. In the event that land is annexed into the City, the City shall assign a zoning district consistent with
the Comprehensive Land Use Plan. In the event land not identified in the Comprehensive Plan is
annexed, the Planning Commission shall review and provide recommendation to the Council who
shall approve an appropriate zoning district.
402 Separability
It is hereby declared to be the intention that several provisions of this Ordinance are separable in accordance
with the following:
1. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall judge any provisions of this Ordinance to be invalid,
such judgment shall not affect any other provisions of this Ordinance not specifically included in
said judgment.
2. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall judge invalid the application of any provision of this
Ordinance to a particular property, building, or structure, such judgment shall not affect other
property, buildings, or structures.
403 Nonconforming Uses and Structures
It is the intent of this Ordinance to permit legal nonconforming lots, structures or uses to continue until they
are removed but not to encourage their survival.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 26
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
It is recognized that there exists within the district established by this Ordinance and subsequent
amendments, lots, structures and uses of land and structures which were lawful before this Ordinance was
passed or amended, which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this Ordinance or
future amendments.
Such uses are declared by this Ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved.
It is further the intent of this Ordinance that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or,
extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same
district.
1. Any nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land or a nonconforming use of a
structure and land existing at the time of the adoption of this ordinance may be continued including
through repair, replacement, restoration, maintenance, or improvement but not including
expansion. Expansion shall be defined as any structural alteration, change or addition that is
made outside of the original building or any change in the buildings occupancy capacity or
parking demand except those required by law or ordinance).
2. Nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent the placing of a structure in safe condition when said
structure is declared unsafe by the Building Inspector.
3. When any lawful nonconforming use of any structure or land in any district is discontinued for a
period of more than one (1) year or is changed to a conforming use, any future use of said structure
or land shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.
4. When any lawful nonconforming use of any structure or land in any district is damaged by wind,
fire, flood, explosion, earthquake, war, riot or other similar peril to the extent of greater than 50
percent of its estimated market value as indicated in the records of the County Assessor at the time
of the damage and no building permit has been applied for within 180 days of the date of when the
property is damaged, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this
Ordinance. When a nonconforming structure in the shoreland district with less than 50
percent of the required setback from the water is destroyed by fire or other peril to greater
than 50 percent of its estimated market value, as indicated in the records of the county
assessor at the time of damage, the structure setback may be increased if practicable and
reasonable conditions are placed upon a zoning or building permit to mitigate created
impacts on the adjacent property or water body. In the event that a building permit is applied
for within 180 days of the date of destruction, the City may impose reasonable conditions upon the
building permit in order to mitigate any newly created impact on adjacent properties or water
bodies.
5. A lawful nonconforming use of a structure or parcel of land may not be changed to a similar
nonconforming use or to a more restrictive nonconforming use.
6. Alterations may be made to a building containing lawful nonconforming residential units in a nonresidential
district when they will improve the livability thereof, provided they will not increase the
number of dwelling units or extend outside of the original building with the exception of a garage
or a free standing deck in instances where none previously existed.
7. Expansion of an existing principal building found to be nonconforming only by reason of height
and yard setback in which a permitted use is conducted may be allowed provided the expansion
does not create a new nonconformance. Furthermore, expansions in these instances shall not be
allowed to any part of the building that is within a setback that is not currently being met.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 27
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
8. Shoreland Lots. Nonconforming shoreland lots of record shall be regulated by the City as set forth
in Minnesota Statutes Section 462.357, Subdivision 1e (e)(f).
404 Nonconforming Lots
In any district in which single family dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other
provisions of this Ordinance, a single family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on
any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance. This provision
shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally
applicable in the district; provided that yard dimensions and other requirements not involving area or width,
or both, of the lot, shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
405 Existing Farm Operations
All farms currently in existence will be permitted to continue operation subject to the following conditions.
1. Any new private stable or other new building in which farm animals are kept shall be a minimum
distance of two hundred (200) feet or more from any other occupied lot in a Residential District,
and shall require a Conditional Use Permit.
2. The owner of any roadside stand shall be required to apply for a Conditional Use Permit.
3. All properties are prohibited from keeping, maintaining or harboring any Farm Animals as defined
by this ordinance.
SECTION V: ADMINISTRATION
501 Enforcing Officer
The City Council shall appoint a Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall enforce this
Ordinance and shall perform the following duties:
1. Determine if applications comply with the terms of this Ordinance.
2. Conduct inspections of buildings and use of land to determine compliance with the terms of this
Ordinance.
3. Maintain permanent and current records of this Ordinance, including but not limited to, maps,
amendments, Conditional Use Permits, Interim Use Permits, variances, appeals and applications.
4. Receive, fi1e and forward all applications for appea1s, variances, Conditional Use Permits, Interim
Use Permits, and amendments to the designated official bodies.
5. Institute in the name of the City of New Prague any appropriate actions for proceedings against a
violator as provided for in this Ordinance.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 28
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
502 Appeals and the Board of Adjustment and Appeals
1. A Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall be established for the City of New Prague.
2. The Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall consist of the New Prague City Council. The Board
shall provide for a record of its proceedings, which shall include the minutes of its meetings, its
findings, and the action taken on each matter heard by it, including the final order.
3. The Board shall act upon all questions as they may arise in the administration of this Ordinance,
including the interpretation of zoning maps, and it shall hear and decide appeals from and review
any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official charged with
enforcing this Ordinance. Such appeal may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer,
department, board or bureau of a town, municipality, county or state.
4. Hearings by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall be held within a reasonable time and upon
such notice to interested parties as is provided in this Ordinance. The Board shall make its order
deciding the matter and shall serve a copy of such order upon the appellant or petitioner by mail.
Any party may appear at the hearing in person or by agent or attorney.
5. The Board may reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision,
or determination as in its opinion ought to be made in the premises and to that end shall have all the
powers of the officer from whom the appeal was taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a
permit. The reasons for the Board's decision shall be stated. The decision of the Board shall be
final.
503 Planning Commission
1. The City Council shall establish a Planning Commission which shall consist of five (5) members
appointed by the City Council from the citizens. The City Council shall appoint one of its
members and may appoint up to two Council Members to serve as liaison with the Commission
with voting privileges.
2. The Commission shall elect a chairperson from among its members and may create and fill such
other offices as it may determine is necessary to conduct business. The City shall provide a
secretary for the purpose of taking minutes.
3. The Commission shall hold a regular meeting each month and adopt rules for the transaction of
business along with keeping public records of any resolutions, transactions, findings and
recommendations of the Commission.
4. The Planning Commission shall provide recommendation to the City Council and Zoning
Administrator in the administration of this Ordinance and the recommendation of the Planning
Commission shall be advisory in nature. Specifically, the Planning Commission shall review, hold
public hearings, and make recommendations to the City Council on all applications for zoning
amendments, variances, Conditional Use Permits, and Interim Use Permits using the criteria in
Sections 504, 505, 506 and 507 of this Ordinance. The Planning Commission shall also review and
provide recommendation to the City Council on Comprehensive Plan amendments.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 29
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
504 Zoning Amendments
1. Criteria for Granting Zoning Amendments.
The City Council may adopt amendments to this Ordinance and zoning map in relation both to land
uses within a particular district or to the location of a district line. Such amendments shall not be
issued indiscriminately, but shall only be used as a means to reflect changes in the goals and
policies of the City as reflected in the Comprehensive Plan or changes in conditions in the City.
2. Types of Amendments.
A. A change in a district's boundary (rezoning);
B. A change in a district's regulations; and
C. A change in any other provision of this Ordinance.
3. Initiation of Proceedings.
Proceedings for amending this Ordinance shall be initiated by at least one of the following three
methods:
A. By petition of an owner or owners of property which is proposed to be rezoned, or for
which district regulation changes are proposed;
B. By recommendation of the Planning Commission; or
C. By action of the City Council.
4. Required Exhibits for Rezoning or District Regulation Changes Initiated by Property Owners.
A. A preliminary building, site development plan, and boundary survey of the property.
B. Evidence of ownership or enforceable option on the property.
5. Procedure.
The procedure for a property owner to initiate a rezoning or district regulation change applying to
his or her property is as follows:
A. The property owner or his or her agent shall meet with the Zoning Administrator to explain
the situation, learn the procedures, and obtain an application form.
B. The applicant shall file the completed application form together with the required exhibits
with the Zoning Administrator and shall pay a filing fee as established by the City Council.
C. The Zoning Administrator shall transmit the application and required exhibits to the
Planning Commission and shall notify all property owners within the affected zone and
within three hundred fifty (350) feet of the outer boundaries of the property in question;
however, failure of any property owner to receive such notification shall not invalidate the
proceedings.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 30
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
D. The Zoning Administrator shall set the date for a public hearing and shall have notices of
such hearing published in the legal newspaper at least once, not less than ten days and not
more than 30 days prior to said hearing. The City Council may waive the mailed notice
requirements for a city-wide amendment to the zoning ordinance initiated by the Planning
Commission or City Council.
E. The Planning Commission shall hold the public hearing and then shall recommend to the
City Council within 30 days, one of three actions -- approval, denial or conditional
approval.
F. The City Council shall act upon the application within 30 days after receiving the
recommendation of the Planning Commission. The zoning amendment shall require the
affirmative vote of two-thirds of the members of the City Council.
G. No application of a property owner for an amendment to the text of the ordinance or the
zoning map shall be considered by the Planning Commission within the one (1) year period
following a denial of such request, except the Planning Commission may permit a new
application, if in the opinion of the Planning Commission, new evidence or a change of
circumstances warrant it.
H. An amendment to this ordinance or the zoning map shall be construed as an amendment to
the Comprehensive Plan and its map.
505 Conditional Use Permits
The purpose of a Conditional Use Permit is to provide the City with a reasonable degree of discretion in
determining the suitability of certain designated uses upon the general welfare, public health and safety. In making
this determination, whether or not the conditional use is to be allowed, the City may consider the nature of the
adjoining land or buildings, the effect upon traffic into and from the premises, or on any adjoining roads, and all
other or further factors as the City shall deem a prerequisite of consideration in determining the effect of the use on
the general welfare, public health and safety.
1. Criteria for Granting Conditional Use Permits
In granting a conditional use permit, the City Council shall consider the advice and recommendations of the
Planning Commission and the effect of the proposed use on the Comprehensive Plan and upon the health,
safety, and general welfare of occupants of surrounding lands. Among other things, the City Council shall
make the following findings where applicable.
A. The use will not create an excessive burden on existing parks, schools, streets and other
public facilities which serve or are proposed to serve the area.
B. The use will be sufficiently compatible or separated by distance or screened from adjacent
residentially zoned or used land so that existing homes will not be depreciated in value and
there will be no deterrence to development of vacant land.
C. The structure and site shall have an appearance that will not have an adverse effect upon
adjacent residential properties.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 31
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
D. The use, in the opinion of the City Council, is reasonably related to the overall needs of the
City and to the existing land use.
E. The use is consistent with the purposes of the zoning ordinance and the purposes of the
zoning district in which the applicant intends to locate the proposed use.
F. The use is not in conflict with the Comprehensive Plan of the City.
G. The use will not cause traffic hazards or congestion.
H. Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and necessary facilities have been or will be
provided.
2. Additional Conditions.
The City Council may consider a conditional use permit for a use which is not specifically listed in this
Ordinance as a conditional use within the affected District and may grant a permit provided such new use,
after careful review by the Planning Commission and the City Council, is found to otherwise meet the
criteria for granting a conditional use within the affected District.
In permitting a new conditional use or in the alternative of an existing conditional use, the City Council
may impose, in addition to these standards and requirements expressly specified by this Ordinance,
additional conditions which the City Council considers necessary to protect the best interest of the
surrounding area or the community as a whole. These conditions may include, but are not limited to the
following:
A. Increasing the required lot size or yard dimension.
B. Limiting the height, size or location of buildings.
C. Controlling the location and number of vehicle access points.
D. Increasing the street width.
E. Increasing the number of required off street parking spaces.
F. Limiting the number, size, location or lighting of signs.
G Requiring diking, fencing, screening, landscaping or other facilities to protect adjacent or
nearby property.
H. Designation sites for open space.
The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of all conditional use permits issued including
information on the use, location, and conditions imposed by the City Council; time limits review
dates, and such other information as may be appropriate.
3. Special Conditions for Public and Institutional Uses
Because of the potential for neighborhood impacts, a CUP shall not be issued for any proposed use that will
result in the loss of one or more single-family homes unless the City determines that the new use will have
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 32
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
minimal adverse impact on and will be compatible with the neighborhood. Uses which propose to remove
single-family dwellings shall be subject to all of the following requirements:
A. Setbacks. Where a facility abuts a residential use and there is no intervening street, the
side yard setback shall be at least twice that required for the residential use. Where the use
shares frontage with single-family residences on the same side of the street, the front-yard
setback shall be the same or greater than the established residential setback.
B. Traffic increase. A traffic study shall be required at the discretion of the City.
C. Neighborhood compatibility. The removal of single-family homes shall not change the
character of the neighborhood. Wherever housing is removed it shall be replaced by a use
that is compatible in size, scale, orientation (e.g. orientation to the street), and architectural
character with immediately adjacent properties. Properties which are directly across the
street from housing shall be replaced by a building or buildings that are architecturally
compatible, in scale with and oriented consistent with existing housing units (if the housing
faces the street, the replacement use must also orient to the street). If a park or open space
is adjacent or across the street, green space, yards and even landscaped parking lots may be
acceptable (a parking lot across the street from established homes would not be acceptable
because neighborhood patterns would be significantly altered).
D. Landscaping and buffering. Wherever a parking lot abuts or is across the street from a
residential area, there shall be a landscaped buffer yard at least 15 feet in width. Screening
and buffering shall be required in accordance with Section 707 of this ordinance except
that fences shall not be permitted along street frontages.
E. Other impacts. Exterior lighting, noise or drainage impacts on adjoining properties which
are significantly greater than the pre-existing use.
F. Comprehensive Plan consistency. The project shall be consistent with the Citys
Comprehensive Plan.
G. Neighborhood involvement. The applicant shall initiate neighborhood meetings for
residents within 350 feet of the subject property.
4. Required Exhibits for Conditional Use Permits.
A. A certificate of survey of the property.
B. A preliminary site development plan which includes a utility plan, grading and erosion
control plan, a lighting plan, a signage plan, and a landscaping plan.
C. Evidence of ownership or enforceable option on the property.
D. A noise or traffic study may be required at the discretion of the City.
E. Proposed building elevations may be required at the discretion of the City.
5. Procedure.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 33
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
The procedure for obtaining a Conditional Use Permit is as follows:
A. The property owner or his agent shall meet with the Zoning Administrator to explain his or
her situation, learn the procedures and obtain an application form.
B. The applicant shall file the completed application form together with the required exhibits
with the Zoning Administrator and shall pay a filing fee as established by the City Council.
C. The Zoning Administrator shall transmit the application to the Planning Commission and
shall notify all property owners within 350 feet of the outer boundaries of the property in
question; however, failure of any property owner to receive such notification shall not
invalidate the proceedings.
D. The Zoning Administrator shall set the date for a public hearing and shall have notice of
such hearing published at least once in the legal newspaper, not less than 10 days and not
more than 30 days prior to said hearing.
E. The Planning Commission shall hold the public hearing and then shall study the
application to determine possible adverse effects of the proposed Conditional Use and to
determine what additional requirements may be necessary to reduce such adverse effects.
The Planning Commission shall recommend one of three actions to the City Council within
30 days after holding the public hearing - approval, denial, or conditional approval.
F. The City Council shall take appropriate action on the request for a Conditional Use Permit
after receiving the recommendations by the Planning Commission. If it grants the
conditional use permit, the City Council may impose conditions it considers necessary to
protect the public health, safety and welfare and such conditions may include a time limit
for the use to exist or operate.
G. Revocation of Conditional Use Permit. The City Council may revoke a conditional use
permit in the event any of the conditions set forth in the permit are violated The property
owner shall be provided with notice of the City Councils intention to revoke a conditional
use permit at least 30 days prior to revocation in order to allow him or her to bring the
property into compliance or respond to the violations.
H. No application of a property owner for a conditional use shall be considered by the within
a one year period following a denial for such a request, except the City may permit a new
application if in its opinion new evidence or a change in circumstances warrant it.
506 Interim Use Permits
Purpose. An interim use is a use not currently allowed by this Ordinance, which may be allowed as a temporary
use of property until an established date, until the occurrence of a particular event, or until the zoning regulations no
longer allow it. The City Council may approve an interim use of property as defined and authorized by Minnesota
Statutes Section 462.3597.
1. Criteria for Granting Interim Use Permits
The City Council may consider an interim use permit for a use which is not specifically listed in this
Ordinance as an interim use within the affected district and may grant a permit provided such interim use,
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 34
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
after review by the Planning Commission and the City Council, is found to otherwise meet the criteria for
granting an interim use permit within the affected district. The City Council shall make the following
findings in order to approve an interim use:
A. The proposed interim use will utilize property where it is not reasonable to utilize it in a
manner provided for the Citys Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Ordinance.
B. The proposed interim use is presently acceptable but, given anticipated development, will
not be acceptable in the future.
C. The proposed use will not hinder permanent development of the site.
D. The proposed use will not adversely impact implementation of the Comprehensive Plan for
the area.
E. The proposed use will not be injurious to the surrounding neighborhoods or otherwise
harm the public health, safety and welfare.
F. The use will not create an excessive burden on existing parks, schools, streets and other
public facilities which serve or are proposed to serve the area.
G. Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and necessary facilities have been or will be
provided.
H. The date or event that will terminate the use has been identified with certainty.
I. Permission of the use will not impose additional costs on the public if it is necessary for the
public to take the property in the future.
2. Conditions.
In permitting a new interim use, the City Council may impose, in addition to the standards and
requirements expressly specified by this Ordinance, additional conditions which the City Council considers
necessary to protect the best interest of the surrounding area or the community as a whole. Any City
Council approval of an interim use shall be subject to the following conditions:
A. Except as otherwise authorized by this section, an interim use shall conform to this
Ordinance as if it were established as a conditional use.
B. The date or event that will terminate the interim use shall be identified with certainty. The
City Council may require the applicant to deposit a cash amount with the City, or provide
some other form of security, to ensure compliance.
C. In the event of a public taking of property after the interim use is established, the property
owner shall not be entitled to compensation for any increase in value attributable to the
interim use.
D. Other conditions as the City Council deems reasonable and necessary to protect the public
interest and to ensure compliance with the standards of this Ordinance and policies of the
Comprehensive Land Use Plan.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 35
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
3. Procedure
A. Any person having a legal or equitable interest in a property may file an application to use
such land for one or more interim uses. An application for interim use shall be filed with
the Planning Department on an approved form and shall be accompanied by such
information as is requested by the City Planner to facilitate review.
B. The Planning Director may request special studies when there is evidence that the proposed
use may negatively impact public infrastructure, the environment or adjacent land uses.
Such studies may include but are not limited to traffic, environmental, wetland, and utility
studies.
C. The Planning Director shall transmit the application to the Planning Commission and shall
notify all property owners within three hundred fifty (350) feet of the outer boundaries of
the property in question; however, failure of any property owner to receive such
notification shall not invalidate the proceedings.
D. The Planning Director shall set the date for a public hearing and shall have notice of such
hearing published at least once in the legal newspaper, not less than ten (10) days and not
more than thirty (30) days prior to said hearing.
E. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on each valid and complete
application for an interim use as provided in Section 505 for conditional use permits. After
the close of the hearing on a proposed interim use, the Planning Commission shall make
findings and shall submit the same together with its recommendations to the City Council.
F. The City Council shall make the final decision regarding all applications for interim use
permits. Approval shall require a simple majority vote of the City Council.
G. If an interim use permit application is denied, an applicant may not submit a subsequent
interim use permit application for the same use on the same site until one year has passed.
4. Termination of Interim Use.
An approved interim use permit shall terminate upon the occurrence of any of the following events:
A. The termination date or termination event specified in the interim use permit.
B. Any violation of the conditions under which the interim use was approved.
C. A change in this Ordinance which would render the interim use non-conforming.
D. The interim use has been discontinued for at least one year.
E. Unused interim use permits expire, without further action from the Planning Commission
or City Council, one year after approval if the proposed use has not commenced or a
building permit for a structure to support the interim use has not been issued. An applicant
and/or owner may apply to the Planning Director for no more than one time extension of
up to six months for an unused interim use permit.
5. Suspension or Revocation.
The City Council may suspend or revoke an interim use permit upon the failure of the permittee,
owner, operator, tenant or user to comply with the provisions of this Code, state or federal laws or
regulations, or any condition established at the time of approval of the interim use permit. A
suspension or revocation of an interim use permit must be preceded by written notice to the
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 36
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
permittee and a hearing. The notice must provide at least 10 days notice of the time and place of
the hearing and must state the nature of the violations.
507 Variances
1. Criteria for Granting Variances.
A variance to the provision of the Zoning Ordinance may be issued by the Board of Adjustment to provide
relief to the landowner in those cases where this Ordinance imposes practical difficulties to the property
owner in the use of his or her land. Practical difficulties include, but are not limited to, inadequate access
to direct sunlight for solar energy systems. No variances shall be granted that would allow any use that is
not allowed in the zoning district in which the subject property is located. A variance may be granted only
in the event that all of the following circumstances exist:
A. The variance is in harmony with the general purposes and intent of this Ordinance.
B. The variance is consistent with the comprehensive plan.
C. The applicant proposes to use the property in a reasonable manner not permitted by this Ordinance,
the City Code or the City Subdivision Ordinance.
D. Unique circumstances apply to the property which do not apply generally to other properties in the
same zone or vicinity and result from lot size or shape, topography or other circumstances over
which the owner of the property since enactment of this Ordinance has had no control. The unique
circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant.
E. The variance does not alter the essential character of the neighborhood.
F. That the variance requested is the minimum variance which would alleviate the practical
difficulties. Economic conditions alone do not constitute practical difficulties.
G. The Board of Adjustment may impose such conditions upon the premises benefited by a variance
as may be necessary to comply with the standards established by this Ordinance, or to reduce or
minimize the effect of such variance upon other properties in the neighborhood, and to better carry
out the intent of the variance. The condition must be directly related to and must bear a rough
proportionality to the impact created by the variance. No variance shall permit a lower degree of
flood protection than the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation for the particular area or permit
standards lower than those required by federal, state or local law.
2. Required Exhibits for Variances.
A. A survey of the property.
B. A preliminary building / site development plan showing the location of proposed structures
for which a variance is being requested.
B. Evidence of ownership of the property or enforceable option to purchase the property.
3. Procedures.
The procedures for obtaining a variance from the regulations of this Ordinance are as follows:
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 37
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
A. The property owner or his or her agent shall meet with the Zoning Administrator to explain
his or her situation, learn the procedures and obtain an application form.
B. The applicant shall file the completed application form together with the required exhibits
with the Zoning Administrator and shall pay a filing fee as established by the City Council.
C. The Zoning Administrator shall transmit the application to the Planning Commission for
review and recommendation and shall notify all property owners located adjacent to the
outer boundaries of the property in question; however, failure of any property owner to
receive such notification shall not invalidate the proceedings.
E. The Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall make a decision after receiving the
recommendation from the Planning Commission. It shall recommend one of three actions
-approval, denial, or conditional approval.
F. No application by a property owner for a variance shall be submitted to the Board of
Adjustment and Appeals within a six (6) month period following a denial of such a request,
except the Board may permit a new application if, in the opinion of the Board, new
evidence of change or circumstances warrant it.
G A violation of any condition set forth in granting a variance shall be a violation of this
Ordinance and automatically terminates the variance.
H. Unless the variance is used within one year after being issued, it shall be null and void. If
not used within one year, the applicant may request an extension of up to an additional 180
days by submitting a written request for extension to the Board of Adjustment.
508 Enforcement
1. Enforcing Officer.
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator and Building Inspector to cause the provisions of
this Ordinance to be properly enforced through the proper legal channels.
2. Building Permit.
No person shall construct, alter, demolish or move any kind of structure or building or part thereof
without first obtaining a building permit from the city.
3. Surveys.
No person shall construct a new dwelling unit or new commercial or industrial structure on a
property without submitting a certificate of survey prior to the commencement of any construction.
The survey shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator, shall be in conformance with any
approved grading plans for the subdivision in which the property is located, and shall comply with
all provisions of this Ordinance. The certificate of survey shall be prepared by a land surveyor
licensed in the State of Minnesota, and shall include the following information: legal description,
boundary lines of the property, lot dimensions, scale, north arrow, existing spot elevations around
the perimeter of the property and within the property, location and elevation of proposed dwelling
unit or commercial structure, proposed elevations of property, easements of record, location of
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 38
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
wetlands, trees, all other existing and proposed conditions on the property, and any other
information necessary to establish compliance with this Ordinance or the availability of adequate
utility capacity.
No final foundation inspection will be performed or framing will be allowed by the City for a
dwelling unit or commercial or industrial structure unless the building permit holder has submitted
and the Building Official has approved written verification by a registered land surveyor that the
actual foundation elevation matches the approved foundation elevation within the acceptable
tolerances of -.2 feet and + .5 feet.
No final certificate of occupancy for a dwelling unit or commercial or industrial structure will be
issued by the City unless written verification by a registered land surveyor that the final (or asbuilt)
grades for the site are consistent with the approved grading plan that has been submitted to
the Building Official for approval. The permit holder must also submit written verification to the
Building Official that the subject site contains the amount of topsoil required under Section 736 of
this Ordinance prior to issuance of a final certificate of occupancy. The topsoil amount verification
need not need be by a registered land surveyor.
4. Site Plans.
A site plan shall be submitted with all building permit applications which result in an expansion of
a structure, or for construction of any accessory building. The site plan shall be approved by the
Zoning Administrator and shall comply with all provisions of this Ordinance. The site plan shall
include the following information: legal description, boundary lines of the property, lot
dimensions, north arrow, the size and location of existing structures, the size and location of
proposed structures. In the event that the Zoning Administrator cannot verify all provisions of this
Ordinance are being met based on the submitted site plan, the Zoning Administrator may require
submittal of a certificate of survey to verify items such as setbacks.
5. Review of Survey or Site Plan.
Upon receipt of any survey or site plan, the Zoning Administrator shall review it to determine
whether it is in proper form, contains all of the required information, shows compliance with this
and all other Ordinances of the City and demonstrates the adequacy of utility service. The City
shall inform the applicant as to any defect in form or required information, any violation of any
provision of this or any other Ordinance or the inadequacy of any utility, and any changes which
would make the plan acceptable.
6. State and Federal Permits.
Prior to the granting of a building permit, the Zoning Administrator shall determine that the
applicant has obtained all necessary state and federal permits.
7. Fees.
A. The fees for a building permit, rezoning, variance, amendment, conditional use permit, or
interim use permit shall be established by the City Council. The City Council may review
and revise the fee schedule periodically. The Zoning Administrator shall issue a building
permit only after the fee has been paid and a determination has been made that the building
plans, together with the application, comply with the terms of this Ordinance.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 39
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
B. Any person filing a petition for an amendment to this Ordinance, requesting a variance or a
change in regulations within any use district shall pay the prescribed fees according to the
fee schedule before any work proposed may commence. The fee is payable at the time of
filing a petition and is not refundable.
C. Municipal corporations and the City of New Prague shall be exempt from the fee
requirements as prescribed by this Ordinance.
SECTION VI: ZONING DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT PROVISIONS
601 Zoning Districts
The zoning districts are so designed as to assist in carrying out the intent and purposes of the
Comprehensive Plan which has the purpose of protecting the public health, safety, convenience and general
welfare. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the City of New Prague is hereby divided into the following
Zoning Districts.
RL-90 Single Family Residential District
RL-84 Single Family Residential District
RL-70 Single Family Residential District
RM Medium Density Residential District
RH High Density Residential District
B-1 Central Business District
B-2 Community Commercial District
B-3 Highway Commercial District
I-1 Light Industrial District
PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay
The following procedure shall apply for establishing zoning in areas annexed to the City:
1. Interim zoning. Upon annexation, and until permanent zoning is adopted as provided below, each
parcel of annexed land shall be automatically zoned as RL90 Low Density Residential district until
permanent zoning is adopted.
2. Permanent zoning. Within a reasonable time after annexation, permanent zoning shall be established
by the City for all annexed areas, according to the procedures set forth in this Ordinance.
602 Zoning Map
The zoning map is a graphic representation of locations of all zoning districts within the City as adopted by
specific ordinances. It also shows future designations for those areas lying outside the City limits as guided
by the Comprehensive Plan.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 40
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
603 RL-90 Single Family Residential District
1. Purpose
This district is intended for detached single family, low density development in developed and developing
areas of the City that are predominantly residential in character.
2. Permitted Uses
A. Accessory uses
B. Day Care Facilities, In-home
C. Essential services
D. Home occupations
E. Recreation, Public
F. Single family dwelling units
3. Permitted Accessory Uses
A. Accessory buildings
B. Fences
C. Residential recreation equipment
D. Off-street parking serving the property
E. Nameplate and temporary signs
F. Gardening, where no sale of products is conducted
G. Landscaping and landscaping features
4. Conditional Uses
A. Educational buildings and uses including primary and secondary public and private schools
and institutions for higher education
B. Bed and Breakfast Homes
C. Religious Institution
D. Nursing homes and assisted living facilities
E. Any house or other principal structure moved onto a lot
5. Bulk Standards
A. Minimum Lot Area: 9,000 square feet
B. Minimum Lot Width: 65 feet
C. Minimum Front Yard Setback: 30 feet
D. Minimum Side Yard Setback: 7 feet
E. Minimum Rear Yard Setback: 30 feet
F. Maximum Height: 35 feet
G. Maximum Land Coverage by Structures: 40 percent
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 41
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
604 RL-84 Single Family Residential District
1. Purpose
This district is intended to allow existing and infill detached single family, low density development in
previously platted areas of the community.
2. Permitted Uses
A. Accessory uses
B. Day care facilities, in home
C. Essential services
D. Home occupations
E. Recreation, public
F. Single family dwelling units
3. Permitted Accessory Uses
A. Accessory buildings
B. Fences
C. Residential recreation equipment
D. Off-street parking serving the property
E. Nameplate and temporary signs
F. Gardening, where no sale of products is conducted
G. Landscaping and landscaping features
4. Conditional Uses
A. Educational buildings and uses including primary and secondary public and private schools
and institutions for higher education
B. Religious Institutions
C. Nursing Homes and Assisted Living Facilities
D. Bed and breakfast homes, if lot size is 9,000 square feet or larger
E. Any house or other principal structure moved onto a lot
5. Bulk Standards
A. Minimum Lot Area: 8,400 square feet
B. Minimum Lot Width: 60 feet
C. Minimum Front Yard Setback: 30 feet
D. Minimum Side Yard Setback: 7 feet
E. Minimum Rear Yard Setback 30 feet
F. Maximum Height: 35 feet
G. Maximum Land Coverage By Structures: 40 percent
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 42
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
605 RL-70 Single Family Residential District
1. Purpose
This district is intended to allow existing and infill detached single family residences in areas historically
platted for small lots.
2. Permitted Uses
A. Accessory uses
B. Day care facilities, in home
C. Essential services
D. Home occupations
E. Recreation, public
F. Single family dwelling units
3. Permitted Accessory Uses
A. Accessory buildings
B. Fences
C. Residential recreation equipment
D. Off-street parking serving the property
E. Nameplate and temporary signs
F. Gardening, where no sale of products is conducted
G. Landscape features
4. Conditional Uses
A. Educational buildings and uses including primary and secondary public and private schools
and institutions for higher education
B. Religious Institution
C. Health Care Facilities
D. Nursing homes and assisted living facilities
E. Bed and breakfast homes, if lot size is 9,000 square feet or larger
F. Any house or other principal structure moved onto a lot
5. Bulk Standards
A. Minimum Lot Area: 7,000 square feet
B. Minimum Lot Width: 50 feet
C. Minimum Front Yard Setback: 25 feet
D. Minimum Side Yard Setback: 7 feet
E. Minimum Rear Yard Setback: 30 feet
F. Maximum Height: 35 feet
G. Maximum Land Coverage by Structures: 40 percent
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 43
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
606 RM Medium Density Residential District
1. Purpose
This district is intended for single family attached two to eight unit residences at medium densities of up to
12 units per acre in areas appropriate for buffering single family districts from business and industrial
districts and major roadways.
2. Permitted Uses
A. Single family dwelling unit
B. Two family dwelling units and twinhomes
C. Townhouses, up to eight attached units
D. Apartments, up to eight attached units
E. Essential services
F. Home occupations
G. Accessory uses
H. Day care facilities, In-home
I. Recreation, public
3. Permitted Accessory Uses
A. Accessory buildings
B. Fences
C. Residential recreation equipment
D. Off-street parking serving the property
E. Nameplate and temporary signs
F. Gardening, where no sale of products is conducted
G. Landscaping and landscaping features
4. Conditional Uses
A. Educational buildings and uses including primary and secondary public and private schools
and institutions for higher education
B. Religious Institutions
C. Nursing homes and assisted living facilities
D. Bed and breakfast homes, if lot size is 9,000 square feet or larger
E. Any house or other principal structure moved onto a lot
5. Bulk Standards
A. Minimum Lot Area:
1. Single family: 7,000 square feet
2. Two family units: 7,000 square feet per dwelling unit
3. Three through eight unit buildings: 3,000 square feet per dwelling unit
B. Minimum Lot Width: 100 feet for multi unit buildings
50 feet for single family dwelling units
C. Minimum Front Yard Setback: 30 feet
D. Minimum Side Yard Setback: 10 feet for multi unit buildings
7 feet for single family dwelling units
E. Minimum Rear Yard Setback: 30 feet
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 44
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
F. Maximum Height: 50 feet
G. Maximum Land Coverage by Structures: 40 percent
H. Minimum Floor Area (two or more unit buildings):
1. Efficiency Unit: 400 square feet
2. One bedroom apartment: 600 square feet
3. Two bedroom units: 750 square feet
4. Three bedroom units: 950 square feet
I. Useable Open Space Per Dwelling Unit (two or more unit buildings):
1. 400 square feet
607 RH High Density Residential District
1. Purpose
This district is created to allow high density multi-family dwellings of up to 22 units per acre in
buildings with nine or more units. This district is located in areas of transition, lower density
residential areas and nonresidential areas.
2. Permitted Uses
A. Single family dwelling unit
B. Two family dwelling units and twinhomes
C. Townhouses
D. Apartments
E. Essential services
F. Home occupations
G. Accessory uses
H. Day care facility, in home
I. Recreation, public
3. Permitted Accessory Uses
A. Accessory buildings
B. Fences
C. Residential recreation equipment
D. Off-street parking serving the property
E. Nameplate and temporary signs
F. Gardening, where no sale of products is conducted
G. Landscaping and landscaping features
4. Conditional Uses
A. Manufactured/Modular home parks
B. Educational buildings and uses including primary and secondary public and private schools
and institutions for higher education
C. Religious Institutions
D. Nursing homes and assisted living facilities
E. Bed and breakfast homes, if lot size is 9,000 square feet or larger
F. Bed and breakfast inns
G. Any house or other principal structure moved onto a lot
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 45
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
5. Bulk Standards
A. Minimum Lot Area: 2,000 square feet per dwelling unit for multi unit buildings
7,000 square feet per unit for single and two family dwelling units
B. Minimum Lot Width: 100 feet for multi unit buildings
50 feet for single family dwelling units
C. Minimum Front Yard Setback: 30 feet
D. Minimum Side Yard Setback: 20 feet for multi unit buildings
7 feet for single family dwelling units
E. Minimum Rear Yard Setback: 30 feet
F. Maximum Height: 50 feet
G. Maximum Land Coverage By Structures: 40 percent
H. Minimum Floor Area (2 or more unit buildings):
1. Efficiency Unit: 400 square feet
2. One bedroom apartment: 600 square feet
3. Two bedroom units: 750 square feet
4. Three bedroom units: 950 square feet
I. Useable Open Space Per Dwelling Unit (two or more unit buildings):
1. 400 square feet
608 B-1 Central Business District
1. Purpose
The purpose of this district is to encourage the continuation of a viable downtown area by allowing retail, service,
office and entertainment facilities as well as public and semi-public uses. In addition, residential uses will be
allowed to locate above the commercial establishments. Any use in this district shall not be required to provide offstreet
parking.
2. Permitted Uses
A. Automobile parking lots, parking garages, bus stations
B. Clinics
C. Day care facilities
D. Drinking establishments
E. Dwelling units, apartments - containing five or less units, located above the first floor of a
building
F. Entertainment and amusement facilities
G. Essential services
H. Hotels
I. Motels
J. Office uses
K. Physical recreation or training
L. Quasi-public organizations
M. Recreation, public
N. Restaurants, class I
O. Restaurants, class II
P. Restaurants, class III
Q. Retail establishments and service establishments
R. Seasonal produce stands
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 46
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
S. Brewpubs
3. Permitted Accessory Uses
A. Uses incidental to the principal uses such as off-street parking and loading and unloading
areas, interior storage of merchandise.
4. Conditional Uses
A. Auto repair, minor
B. Bed and breakfast inns
C. Convenience stores
D. Dwelling units, apartments - containing more than five (5) units, and located above the first
floor of a building
E. Outdoor seating for food service businesses and drinking establishments
F. Recreation, commercial
G. Any principal structure moved onto a lot
H. Religious institutions
I. Small Breweries
5. Interim Uses
Other temporary uses subject to Section 506 of the Zoning Ordinance determined by the City
Council to be of the same general character as the permitted uses and conditional uses above and
found not to be detrimental to existing uses and the general public health, safety, and welfare.
6. Bulk Standard
A. Lot size: No requirement
B. Front side and rear yards: Each permitted or conditional use including accessory uses in the
B-1 district shall have a front, side or rear yard of not less than 10 feet when such use is
abutting an alley, or any railroad right of way, which yard may be used only for access to
the use or for landscaping purposes.
C. Maximum Height: 36 Feet
609 B-2 Community Commercial District
1. Purpose
This district is established to accommodate the type of businesses that are oriented to the traveling public and
require highway access. To minimize unmanageable strip development, common access drives and frontage roads
should be integrated into site plans and platting.
2. Permitted Uses
A. Clinics
B. Day care facilities
C. Drive-thru businesses
D. Essential services
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 47
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
E. Hotels
F. Motels
G. Office uses
H. Physical recreation or training
I. Recreation, public
J. Restaurants, Class I
K. Restaurants, Class II
L. Restaurants, Class III
M. Retail and service establishments
N. Seasonal produce stands
O. Temporary buildings/uses
P. Brewpubs
3. Permitted Accessory Uses
A. Uses incidental to the principal uses such as off-street parking and loading and unloading
areas, storage of merchandise.
4. Conditional Uses
A. Automobile parking lots, parking garages, bus stations
B. Automobile repair, major
C. Automobile repair, minor
D. Bed and breakfast inns
E. Boat and motorcycle repair
F. Car washes
G. Convenience stores
H. Drinking establishments
I. Dwelling unit, apartments  must be located above the first floor of a building
J. Entertainment and amusement facilities
K. Exterior storage
L. Funeral homes
M. Health care facilities
N. Landscape nurseries and garden supply stores
O. Motor vehicle and recreation equipment sales
P. Outdoor seating for food service business and drinking establishments
Q. Quasi public organizations and fraternal clubs
R. Recreation, commercial
S. Religious institutions
T. Retail center (strip mall)
U. Veterinary clinic
V. Any principal structure moved onto a lot
W. Small Breweries
5. Interim Uses
A. Other temporary uses subject to Section 506 of the Zoning Ordinance determined by the
City Council to be of the same general character as the permitted uses and conditional uses
above and found not to be detrimental to existing uses and the general public health, safety,
and welfare.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 48
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
6. Bulk Standards
A. Minimum Lot Area: 20,000 square feet
B. Minimum Lot Width: 80 feet
C. Minimum Front Yard Setback: 30 feet along collector and arterial roadways
15 feet along residential and local roadways
D. Minimum Side Yard Setback: 10 feet
E. Minimum Rear Yard Setback: 30 feet
F. Minimum Alley Setback 10 feet
G. Maximum Height: 35 feet or 3 stories
H. Maximum Land Coverage by Structures: 40 percent
610 B-3 Highway Commercial District
1. Purpose
This district is established to accommodate the type of businesses that are oriented to the traveling
public and require highway access. This district is intended to allow existing businesses and
redevelopment/infill of certain types of businesses, but not encourage expansion of the overall
zoning boundary of the district.
2. Permitted Uses
A. Drive-thru businesses
B. Essential services
C. Hotels
D. Landscape nurseries and garden supply stores
E. Motels
F. Office uses
G. Physical recreation or training
H. Public utilities
I. Recreation, public
J. Restaurants, Class I
K. Restaurants, Class II
L. Restaurants, Class II
M. Retail and service establishments
N. Seasonal produce stands
O. Temporary building / use
P. Brewpubs
3. Permitted Accessory Uses
A. Uses incidental to the principal uses such as off-street parking and loading and unloading
areas, and storage of merchandise.
4. Conditional Uses
A. Automobile parking lots, parking garages, bus stations
B. Automobile repair, minor
C. Automobile repair, major
D. Bed and breakfast inns
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 49
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
E. Boat and motorcycle repair
F. Car washes
G. Convenience stores
H. Dwelling unit, apartments  must be located above the first floor of a building
I. Entertainment and amusement facilities
J. Exterior storage
K. Farm implement dealers
L. Kennel, commercial
M. Lumberyard
N. Manufactured home sales
O. Manufacturing, light
P. Mini storage / self storage
Q. Motor vehicle and recreation equipment sales
R. Outdoor seating for food service businesses and drinking establishments
S. Quasi-public and fraternal organizations
T. Recreation, commercial
U. Religious institutions
V. Veterinary clinic
W. Warehouse and distribution
X. Any principal structure moved onto a lot
Y. Small Breweries
5. Interim Uses
A. Other temporary uses subject to Section 506 of the Zoning Ordinance determined by the
City Council to be of the same general character as the permitted uses and conditional uses
above and found not to be detrimental to existing uses and the general public health, safety,
and welfare.
6. Bulk Standards
A. Minimum Lot Area: 20,000 square feet
B. Minimum Lot Width: 80 feet
C. Minimum Front Yard Setback: 40 feet
D. Minimum Side Yard Setback: 10 feet
E. Minimum Rear Yard Setback: 10 feet
F. Minimum Alley Setback 10 feet
G. Maximum Height: 35 feet or 3 stories
H. Maximum Land Coverage by Structures: 40 percent
611 I-1 Light Industrial District
1. Purpose
This district is intended to provide for industrial uses for activities that, because of their nature, are
not well suited for close proximity to residential and business areas of the community. Existing
industry that is located close to residential areas is allowed to continue and must meet certain
performance criteria when applicable. Industrial areas have good access to highway and railroad
lines because of their need to receive and distribute products and goods.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 50
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
2. Permitted Uses
A. Automobile repair  major
B. Automobile repair  minor
C. Billboard signs
D. Car washes
E. Essential services
F. Industry, light
G. Lumberyards
H. Manufacturing, light
I. Public utility
J. Recreation, public
K. Research facilities
L. Warehouse and distribution
M. Small Breweries
N. Breweries
3. Permitted Accessory Uses
A. Accessory buildings related to the operations of the principal use
B. Parking lots
4. Conditional Uses
A. Exterior storage
B. Industry, heavy
C. Manufacturing, heavy
D. Mini storage/self storage
E. Physical recreation or training
F. Recreation, commercial
G. Recycling centers
H. Any principal structure moved onto a lot
I. Distilleries
J. Micro-distilleries
5. Prohibited Uses
A. Sanitary landfills
B. Distillation processes
C. Manufacturing of explosives
D. Livestock feeding yards, slaughter houses, or processing plants
E. Mining operations
F. Any industry that creates an excessive odor, noise, air, or environmental pollution problem.
6. Interim Uses
A. Other temporary uses subject to Section 506 of the Zoning Ordinance determined by the
City Council to be of the same general character as the permitted uses and conditional uses
above and found not to be detrimental to existing uses and the general public health, safety,
and welfare.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 51
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
7. Bulk Standards
A. Minimum Lot Area: 40,000 square feet
B. Minimum Lot Width: 150 feet
C. Minimum Front Yard Setback: 40 feet
D. Minimum Side Yard Setback: 15 feet
E. Minimum Rear Yard Setback: 25 feet (50 when abutting a residential district)
F. Minimum Alley Setback 10 feet
G. Maximum Height: 50 feet
H. Maximum Land Coverage by Structures: 40 percent
SECTION VII: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
701 Purpose
The performance standards established in this section are designed to encourage a high standard of
development by providing assurance that neighboring land uses will be compatible. The performance
standards are designed to prevent and eliminate those conditions that cause blight or are detrimental to
environment. All future development in all districts shall be required to meet these standards and the
standards shall also apply to existing development where so stated.
Before any building permit is approved, the Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the proposed
use will conform to the performance standards. The applicant or landowners shall supply data necessary to
demonstrate such conformance. Such data may include a description of equipment to be used, hours of
operation, method of refuse disposal, and type and location of exterior storage.
702 Exterior Storage
In residential districts, except as specifically provided for by this section, all materials and
equipment shall be stored within a building.
(A) Exceptions.
1. Laundry drying equipment such as clothesline poles.
2. Childrens play equipment such as swing sets and sandboxes.
3. Construction and landscaping materials and equipment currently being used on the premises.
4. Agricultural equipment and materials if these are used or intended for use on the premises.
5. Off-street parking of passenger motor vehicles and pick-up trucks.
6. Firewood piles, provided they are kept or stored as follows:
a. In neat and secure stacks (maximum of four stacks), each of which shall be no higher than
five feet. The total volume of all stored wood shall not exceed five feet high by ten feet
wide by 25 feet long.
b. Stacks shall not be closer than six feet from side property lines and six feet from rear
property lines unless screened by a solid fence or wall.
c. The wood shall not be stored or kept in any front yard.
7. Recreational Vehicles and Recreational Equipment, as defined in Section 302, may be parked
or stored outside in a residential district provided that:
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 52
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
a. The items are immediately operable, without need of repair, and are currently licensed
and/or registered to the owner or occupant of the premises upon which they are stored;
b. A principal structure must first be located on the lot where the items are stored.
c. The items are parked or stored outside of a required minimum front yard setback and if
parked or stored within a public utility easement are subject to removal at any time for
required utility work within the easement.
d. During periods of seasonal use which are defined as April 1 through October 31 for
summer use items (which includes but is not limited to boats, personal watercrafts and
similar items that are only able to be used in warm weather months) and November 1
through March 31 for winter use items (which includes but is not limited to snowmobiles,
fish houses and similar items that are only able to be used in cold weather months), the
items may be located completely on an established and paved driveway within the required
minimum front yard setback, provided that:
i. The item is kept entirely on the vehicle owners property.
ii. The item does not obstruct the public sidewalk or public right of way.
iii. Recreational vehicles and recreational equipment used for a habitable space for
camping purposes are allowed to be stored year-round on an established and paved
driveway within the minimum front yard setback.
e. The item must be parked on a concrete, bituminous or gravel surface, except that gravel
parking areas are not acceptable for driveways used for vehicle parking except for items
defined specifically as Recreational Equipment, up to 20 feet in length are permitted to be
parked on lawn, turf or other similar surface subject to being parked outside of a minimum
front yard setback area.
f. Items parked outside of an enclosed building within a residential district may not exceed 40
feet in length, except as follows:
i. Items greater than 40 feet in length may be parked at a residential location for a
period not to exceed eight hours.
ii. Extended outdoor storage of items greater than 40 feet in length may be permitted
by conditional use permit. In these cases the applicant shall demonstrate that the
item is limited from the view of neighboring dwellings through screening or setback
from neighboring dwellings or a combination thereof.
703 Refuse
In all districts, all waste material, debris, refuse, or garbage shall be kept in an enclosed building or
property, contained in a closed container designed for such purposes. All dumpsters, garbage containers, or
refuse bins that are stored outside shall be screened from view. Acceptable methods of screening include
enclosures made of wood fencing material, brick or a combination thereof. Enclosure height shall be a
minimum of 5 feet for business and industrial districts. Gates and doors which allow access to the refuse
containers shall have a latching mechanism which keep them closed or locked when not in use.
Passenger vehicles and trucks in an inoperative state shall not be parked in residential districts for a period
exceeding 7 days. "Inoperative" shall mean incapable of movement under the vehicles own power and in
need of repairs. All passenger vehicles shall be currently licensed. All exterior storage material not
included as a permitted use, accessory use or conditional use, or otherwise permitted by provisions of this
Ordinance, shall be considered to be refuse and must be removed.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 53
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
All platted vacant lots must be maintained in a reasonable manner with the grass cut on a regular basis and
noxious weeds controlled. The owner of vacant land shall be responsible for keeping such land free of
refuse.
704 Glare
In all districts, any lighting used to illuminate an off street parking area, sign, or other; structure, shall be
arranged so as to deflect light away from any adjoining residential zone or from the public streets. Direct
or sky reflected glare, whether from floodlights or from high temperature processes such as combustion or
welding, shall be hooded or controlled in some manner so as not to light adjacent property. Bare
incandescent light bulbs shall not be permitted in view of adjacent property or public right of way. Any
light or combination of lights which cast light on a public street shall not exceed one (1) foot candle (meter
reading) as measured from the centerline of said street. Any light or combination of lights which cast light
on residential property shall not exceed 0.4 candles (meter reading) as measured from said property.
705 Bulk Storage (Liquid)
All uses associated with the above ground bulk storage of, oil, gasoline, liquid fertilizer, chemicals and
similar liquids shall require a Conditional Use-Permit in order that the City Council may have assurance
that fire, explosion or water or soil contamination hazards are not present that would be detrimental to the
public health, safety, and- general welfare.
The City Council may require the development of diking around said tanks. Diking shall be suitably sealed
and shall hold a leakage capacity equal to 115 percent of the tanks capacity. Any existing storage tank
that, in the opinion of the City Council, constitutes a hazard to the public safety shall discontinue operations
within one (1) year following enactment of this Ordinance.
706 This section intentionally left blank
707 Screening
Where any commercial, industrial or institutional uses are adjacent to property zoned for residential use,
that business or industry shall provide screening along the boundary of the residential property. Screening
shall also be provided where a business or industry is across the street from a residential zone, but not on
that side of a business or industry considered to be the front as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
Landscape screening required under this section shall not be allowed within public drainage and utility
easements. Screening is not required within any site triangle required under Section 723(6) of this
Ordinance. Screening shall consist of a 20 foot wide green belt strip as provided below:
A. A green belt planting strip shall consist of evergreen trees or deciduous trees and plants and
consist of a sufficient density to provide a visual screen and reasonable buffer. This planting strip
shall be designed to provide visual screening to a minimum height of six feet. The grade for
determining the height shall be the grade elevation of the building or use for which the screening is
providing protection. The planting plan and type of plantings shall require the approval of the
Zoning Administrator.
B. A fence may also be installed, but not in lieu of the green belt planting strip. The fence shall be
constructed of masonry, brick, vinyl, or wood. The fence must be located within the interior of the
lot such that the green belt plantings are visible from adjacent property.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 54
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
708 Fencing
1. Fencing in all Districts.
A. Fences may be placed along property lines provided no damage of any kind results to abutting
property. A clear zone of two feet shall be required for fences located adjacent to any
sidewalk or trail edge and a clear zone of five feet shall be required for fences located adjacent
to any alley or public roadway edge.
B. Fences may be installed along property lines, and within drainage and utility easements, but
shall be installed at the sole risk of the property owner. By installing a fence in a drainage and
utility easement, the property owner acknowledges the existence of the drainage and utility
easement and the Citys right to remove the fence, at the owners expense, in order to access
and utilize such easement areas for drainage and utility purposes. The property owner must
maintain access to the drainage and utility easement at all times, including existing and future
utility infrastructure.
C. Municipal electric boxes must have the following clear zones which means no fences can be
installed closer than the following distances as depicted below:
Front: 8 (the side that is padlocked)
Sides: 3 on two sides and at least 1 on the fourth side
D. Fences are not allowed in required sight triangles above 36 in height.
2. Residential Fences.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 55
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
A. Fences may be located on any lot line to a height of four (4) feet and a fence up to six (6) feet
in height may be erected behind the nearest rear corner of the principal building. The side of
the fence considered to be the face (facing as applied to fence posts) shall face abutting
property. For corner lots, a six (6) foot fence may only be erected at the 30 building setback
line. A fence up to six (6) feet in height may also be erected behind attached garages where
the location of the fence is not entirely erected behind the nearest rear corner of the principal
building.
Example of allowable residential fence heights and locations
3. Business and Industrial Fences.
A. Fences may be located along property lines to a height of six (6) feet.
B Fences over six feet in height that have a security arm and barbed wire shall require a
variance.
709 Drainage Standards
No land shall be developed and no use shall be permitted that results in water runoff causing flooding orerosion
on adjacent properties. Such runoff shall be properly channeled into a storm drain, watercourse,
ponding area or other suitable facility.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 56
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
710 Permitted Encroachments
The following shall be considered as permitted encroachments on setback and height requirements except
as provided in this ordinance.
In any yard: posts, off street open parking spaces, flues, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, cornices, eaves,
gutters, awnings, open terraces, service station pump islands, open canopies, steps, chimneys, flag poles,
ornamental features, open fire escapes, sidewalks and fences, and all other similar devices incidental and
appurtenant to the principal structure except as hereinafter amended. Decks are also exempted from the
rear yard setback requirements except that a deck may not be located closer than twenty (20) feet from the
rear property line.
711 Accessory Buildings and Structures
1. In Residential Districts.
A. The maximum allowed size of detached garages and accessory buildings, individual and
combined, for any parcel shall not exceed 1,000 square feet. In cases where existing lots are
less than 7,000 square feet, the maximum allowed size of detached garages and accessory
buildings, individual and combined, shall not exceed 15 percent of the total lot area. The
maximum allowed accessory building size for any parcel shall be a combined total of all
accessory buildings on the property.
B. Accessory buildings are permitted in any rear or side yard. Such building shall not be erected
within six feet of any lot line or 10 feet from any alley and provide a minimum of 20 feet of
direct access to the entrance.
C. In no case shall an accessory building over 200 sq. ft. in floor area exceed 15 in overall
height.
D. Accessory buildings which are 200 square feet and under in floor area shall not require a
building permit but must still meet applicable setback requirements and cannot exceed 12 in
height.
E. Pole buildings or post and beam constructed buildings shall be allowed as a construction
method if they are able to meet State building codes.
2. In Commercial and Industrial Districts.
A. No accessory building shall exceed the height of the principal building except by variance.
B. Accessory buildings may be located any place to the rear of the principal buildings, subject to
the building code and the fire zone regulations except where prohibited by other sections of
this Ordinance.
3. In All Districts.
A. Accessory buildings shall not be constructed prior to or in lieu of the principal building.
B. Any accessory building shall be considered as an integral part of the principal building if it is
located less than six feet from the principal building.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 57
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
712 Dwelling Units Prohibited
No basement, garage, tent, trailer, recreational vehicle or accessory building shall be used as a permanent
dwelling. The basement portion of a finished home or apartment may be used for normal eating and
sleeping purposes provided it is properly damp-proofed, has suitable fire protection and exits, and is
otherwise approved by the City Building Inspector.
713 Relocating Structures
1. Permit Required.
No person shall move any principal building from within or without the City limits to a new
location within the City without first obtaining a conditional use permit in accordance with the
provisions of Section 505 of this Ordinance. An application for such conditional use permit shall
indicate the origin and destination of such building, and the route over which it is to be moved.
The application shall also indicate the location of the lot on which the house is to be located, the
dimensions of the lot and the proposed location of the structure on the lot along with setback
distances. No permit to move a building shall be issued unless and until the following conditions
are fully complied with and approved by the City Council.
A. The building to be moved must comply in all respects with the State Building Code and other
pertinent State rules and regulations and the City Code.
B The lot on which the building is to be located must meet all the minimum dimensional
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
C. The building must be placed on the lot so as to meet all the front, side and rear yard
requirements as set forth in this Ordinance.
D. Payment of a $5,000 deposit, to be refunded upon final occupancy, grading and landscaping.
E. Factors that must be considered by the Planning Commission and City Council when
reviewing the conditional use permit application:
1. Whether the structure is at such a variance with the established or expected pattern of
development in the neighborhood that it would destroy the overall appearance of the
neighborhood;
2. The extent of variance, if any, of the proposed structure with the existing age, bulk,
architectural style and quality of construction; and
3. The structure will not substantially diminish or impair property values within the
neighborhood.
2. Electrical Corrections Requirements.
In every case in which the removal or displacement of any overhead electrical or other wires is
required, it shall be the duty of the person, association, or corporation owning, operating, or
controlling said wires to remove or displace the same, so far as the same way may be necessary to
effect the removal thereof, shall be authorized by such permit.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 58
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
The person moving the structure must notify the person, association, or corporation owning,
operating, or controlling said wires to remove or displace the same to facilitate the removal of said
wires sufficiently to allow the passage of said building along the street over which said wires are
suspended.
Any expenses incurred or to be incurred in the moving, removing or displacing of such wire shall
be paid for by the person moving the structure.
714 Home Occupations
1. Purpose. The purposes of these home occupation provisions are in recognition of:
A. The need to protect market value of existing residential properties;
B. The need to guarantee existing residential property owners freedom from excessive noise,
excessive traffic, nuisances, fire hazards, and other possible adverse effects from
commercial-type activities being conducted in residential areas;
C. The need of some citizens to use their place of residence for limited commercial type
activities to produce or supplement personal or family income;
D. The fact that certain limited home occupational uses can be useful to both the community
as well as the residential proprietor;
E. The fact that the nature of the investment or operation of some activities have a
pronounced tendency once started to rapidly increase beyond the limits permitted and
thereby impair the use and value of residentially zoned areas for residential purposes; and
F. The Citys obligation to protect the integrity of its residential areas from activities which
detract from the residential character of a neighborhood and infringe upon the rights of
neighborhood residents.
2. General Standards for Applicability. The following regulations and requirements shall apply to all
home occupations within the City:
A. Home occupations shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit. The area used for
the home occupation shall not exceed 25 percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling
unit.
B. The home occupation shall in no way cause the residential appearance or character of the
premises to differ from the surrounding residential area.
C. Home occupations shall not be conducted in such a manner as to produce noise, dust,
vibration, glare, smoke or smells, electrical interferences, fire hazards, traffic or any other
nuisance not typically experienced in the zoning district where the property is located.
D. The home occupation shall not result in or cause vehicular traffic that will create a
nuisance to abutting properties or be detrimental to the residential character of the
neighborhood.
E. No outside storage of materials, goods, supplies or equipment related to the operation of
the home occupation shall be allowed.
F. Retail sales, on premises, shall be prohibited except for the retail sales of merchandise or
products used in connection with and incidental to other permitted home occupations.
(Examples: A single-chair hair salon would be allowed to sell combs, hair spray, shampoo,
etc.)
G. The home occupation shall not employ any person who is not a resident of the home.
H. No more than one home occupation per residence shall be allowed and it must be
conducted by the occupant.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 59
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
I. For home occupations that involve classes or instruction, there shall be no more than four
students or pupils in the dwelling unit or on the premises at any one time.
J. Home occupations that attract customers, clients or students to the premises shall not be
allowed in apartment dwelling units.
K. Signs related to home occupations shall comply with Section 718 of this Ordinance.
3. The following is a non-exhaustive list of uses which may be conducted as home occupations within
the limits established in this section:
A. Music, writing, photography or similar studios.
B. Direct sale product distribution (Amway, Avon, Tupperware, etc.)
C. Dressmaker, seamstress, tailor.
D. Hair cutting and styling.
E. Home typing or computer services.
F. Mail-order sales.
G. Non-principal (secondary) offices of physician, dentist, veterinarian, insurance agent, real
estate or similar professions which typically serves several clients on a daily basis.
H. Offices of accountants, architect, engineer, surveyor, or similar professional.
I. Tutor.
J. Day care, subject to State and County requirements and licensing.
4. The following uses and other uses similar in character shall not be considered to be conducted as
home occupations:
A. Vehicle engine repair.
B. Vehicle body work.
C. Veterinary hospital.
D. Commercial kennel.
715 Structures for Habitation
All structures for habitation within the City shall meet the following minimum requirements.
1. Every dwelling shall have a minimum width of 22 feet for at least 70 percent of its length.
2. Every dwelling shall have a full load bearing perimeter foundation with a minimum clear span
floor loading capability to a center wall or beam which complies with the requirements of the
Minnesota State Building Code.
3. Every dwelling shall have a minimum roof overhang of one foot.
4. Every building shall comply with the City adopted building codes in all respects.
716 Manufactured Homes
Manufactured homes shall meet the following minimum standards.
1. Must exceed 24 feet in width.
2. Must have a minimum floor area of 800 square feet.
3. The dwelling must be placed on a permanent foundation.
4. All other local, state and federal requirements must be satisfied
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 60
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
717 Off-Street Parking and Loading
1. General Standards for Applicability.
The following regulations and requirements shall apply to all required and non-required off-street parking
and loading facilities in all zoning districts in the City except those located in the B-1 Central Business
District. Uses in the B-1 District are not required to provide off-street parking spaces. Design standards for
parking areas in the B-1 district are applicable if off-street parking is provided.
A. Reduction of Existing Off-Street Parking Space or Lot Area. Off-street parking spaces and
loading spaces or parking lot areas existing upon the effective date of these provisions shall
not be reduced in number or size unless the number exceeds the requirements set forth herein
for a similar new use.
B. Nonconforming Structures. Should a nonconforming structure or use be damaged or
destroyed by fire, it may be re-established if elsewhere permitted in this Ordinance, except
that in doing so, any off street parking or loading space which existed before shall be retained.
C. Change of Use or Occupancy of Land. No change of use or occupancy of land already
dedicated to a parking area, parking spaces, or loading spaces shall be made, nor shall any sale
of land, division or subdivision of land be made which reduces area necessary for parking,
parking stalls, or parking requirements below the minimum prescribed by this Ordinance.
D. Change of Use or Occupancy of Buildings. Any change of use or occupancy of any building
or buildings including additions thereto requiring more parking areas shall not be permitted
until there is furnished such additional parking spaces as required by this Ordinance.
E. Computation of Spaces Required. In computing the number of parking or loading spaces
required, the following rules shall govern:
(1) Floor space shall mean the gross floor area of the specific use;
(2) Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be construed to be
the nearest whole number;
(3) The parking space requirement for a use not specifically mentioned herein shall be the
same as required for a similar use as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
(4) When computing the total number of parking spaces required for a use, individual
activities within the building will be calculated separately and added together to arrive
at the total required parking spaces for each specific use proposed, unless the strip
mall / shopping center calculation applies.
(5) In assembly places where seating is provided on benches, pews, or other similar items,
each 22 inches of such seating shall be counted as one (1) seat for the purpose of
determining required parking.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 61
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
F. Maintenance. It shall be the responsibility of the lessee and the owner of the property and
buildings to maintain in a neat and adequate manner, the parking space, access ways, striping,
landscaping and required screening.
G. Use of Parking Areas. Required off-street parking spaces in any district shall be maintained in
a neat and orderly manner and shall not be utilized for vehicle repair, open storage,
stockpiling of snow, debris, materials, goods, or for the storage of vehicles which are
inoperable or for sale or lease.
H. Snow Storage. Adequate area shall be designated for snow storage so that required number of
parking spaces remain available for vehicle parking, and clear visibility must be maintained
from the property to any public street.
2. Design and Dimensions of Off-Street Parking Facilities.
A. Minimum Dimension Requirements for Drive Aisles and Parking Stalls. All off-street
parking facilities shall comply with the following dimensional standards:
Angle of
Parking Stalls
(A)
Minimum Stall
Width
(B)
Minimum
Curb Length
(C)
Minimum
Stall Depth
(D)
Minimum Parking
Lot Drive Aisle
Width
(E)
90 Degree 9 9 20 24 feet (two-way
traffic)
60 Degree 9
10 5 21 18 feet (one-way
traffic)
45 Degree 9 12 9 19 10 13 feet (one way
traffic)
Parallel 9 23 9 24 feet (two-way
traffic)
Depiction of angled parking
B. Angled Parking. Parking spaces oriented at less than 90 degrees to the aisle shall be limited to
one way circulation.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 62
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
C. Location.
(1) All required parking spaces shall be off street and located on the same lot as the
building or use to be served.
(2) Required off-street parking spaces may be provided within the principal building for
which they are required.
(3) Except for the case of single, two family and townhouses, parking areas requiring
backing into a public street is prohibited.
(4) In the B-1 Central Business District, no off-street parking shall be located on a
property between the building and the street.
D. Setback Requirements for Off-Street Parking Spaces and Lots.
(1) All areas designed and used as off-street parking areas shall be set back a minimum of
15 from a street right of way, and 5 from property lines, except in the case of a joint
parking lot, adjacent yard setbacks shall not apply.
(2) All parking areas must be located outside of public drainage and utility easements.
E. Parking Spaces Abutting Residential Uses. Off-street parking facilities which abut a property
zoned for residential purposes shall meet the screening requirements stated in Section 707 of
this Ordinance.
F. Handicap Parking Spaces. Required handicap spaces and ramps shall be provided as specified
in the State Building Code. All handicap stalls shall be located in close proximity to entrance
areas and shall not be hindered by inappropriately located curb cuts, catch basins, etc.
G. Surfacing. All areas intended to be utilized for drive aisles, parking spaces, and access drives
shall be surfaced with either concrete or plant mixed bituminous.
H. Curbing. A poured in place, six inch non-surmountable concrete curb shall be provided
around the perimeter of all parking lots designed for four or more cars. Such poured in place
curb is required along all internal access roads. Curbs or other means shall be provided to
prevent parked vehicles from overhanging property lines and sidewalks. The City Engineer
may waive the curbing requirement when it is determined that sheet drainage is an appropriate
stormwater management practice for a given location. When six inch non-surmountable
curbing is not recommended by the City Engineer for drainage purposes, flat concrete curb
with curb cuts or other appropriate methods may be used as approved by the City Engineer.
I. Striping. Except for single, two family and townhouses, all parking stalls shall be marked
with white or yellow painted lines not less than four inches wide.
J. Lighting. All lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall be so arranged as to
reflect the light away from adjoining residential property and public rights-of-ways. Glare
standards as stated in Section 704 of this Ordinance apply to parking lot lighting as they affect
adjacent properties.
K. Design. Off street parking areas shall be so designed that vehicles are parked in an orderly
fashion. Site plans shall show proposed parking spaces, driveways, loading areas, landscaping
and screening, and the parking area shall conform to such site plans. Aisle entrance shall be
kept clear by appropriate design.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 63
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
L. Drainage. There shall be adequate drainage of the surface of the parking or paved area to a
public storm sewer or to other City approved means. Plans for surfacing and drainage of all
parking lots for 20 spaces or more, or paved areas of 6,000 square feet or more must be
approved by the City.
M. Landscaping. Off street parking facilities shall meet the following landscaping requirements:
(1) Perimeter Landscaping Requirements.
(a) Along front yards, a minimum of one deciduous tree or coniferous tree shall be
planted every 40 feet along the perimeter of the parking lot.
(b) Along side and rear yards, a minimum of one deciduous tree or coniferous tree
shall be planted every 30 feet along the perimeter of the parking lot.
(c) A deciduous tree shall be a minimum of 2.5 inches in diameter. A coniferous
tree shall be a minimum of 6 feet in height
(d) Off-street parking facilities which abut a property zoned or used for residential
purposes shall meet the screening requirements stated in Section 707 of this
Ordinance.
(2) Interior Landscaping Requirements. In all parking areas, including those for the sale
and display of autos, trucks and other types of vehicles, that contain more than 50
parking spaces, planting islands must be provided to occupy a minimum of three
percent of the gross parking area, subject to the following:
(a) The interior dimensions of any planting or landscaped island shall be a
minimum of 240 square feet in area, and a minimum of 6 feet in width;
(b) Each planting island shall contain at least one tree that provides shade, which
shall be a minimum of 2.5 inches in diameter in size, and the remainder of the
landscape island shall be covered with turf grass, native grasses, ground cover
or other perennial flowering plants, vines, shrubs or trees. If landscape rock or
bark is to be utilized, provisions should be made to prevent material from
spilling into the parking area. Ash trees may be planted but will not count
towards the minimum landscape requirement; and
(c) Each landscape island shall be protected by vertical curbs or similar structures
and shall be designed and grouped into a parking area to create defined aisles
and entrances for on-site traffic circulation.
N. Joint Parking Requirements. Off-street parking facilities for separate uses may be provided
collectively in a joint parking lot if the total number of spaces so provided is not less than the
sum of the separate requirements of each use. No parking space shall serve as a required
space for more than one use. In the case of joint parking lots, the parking lot setback
requirements shall not apply to the property line where the joint parking facility is located. A
maintenance and joint use agreement for use of the joint parking facility must be filed with the
City and recorded with the County Recorder.
O. Proof of Parking Requirements. The City may allow a reduction in the number of required
parking spaces if unique characteristics of the proposed use are such that it will generate a
need for less parking than the requirements set forth in this Ordinance. All requests for
reductions in the amount of required parking shall be accompanied by a plan showing where
the total required parking spaces can be added on the lot, without requiring any variances, and
shall be approved by the Planning Commission and City Council.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 64
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
P. Required Parking Spaces. The minimum number of off-street parking spaces for each type of
use shall be determined in accordance with the following table:
Use Minimum Number of Spaces Required
Assisted Living Facilities 1 per bed + 1 per employee on the largest shift
Banks 1 per 250 square feet of floor area
Barber Shops and Hair Salons 2 + 1.5 per chair
Bed and Breakfast Homes 1 per room + spaces as needed for associated residential
use
Bed and Breakfast Inns 1 per room + 1 per employee on the largest
Bowling Alleys 5 per lane in addition to spaces required for restaurant
facilities
Clinics, Medical and Dental
Offices
1 per 150 square feet of floor area
Community Centers 1 per every 3 seats
Convenience Store 1 per pump, plus 1 per 300 square feet of floor area
Drinking Establishments 1 per every 3 seats
Entertainment & Amusement
Facilities
1 per every 3 seats
Funeral Homes 1 per 50 square feet of floor area
Health Care Facilities
(Hospitals)
1 per bed + 1 per employee on the largest shift, and
spaces as needed for associated clinics
Hotels 1 per room + 1 per employee on the largest shift in
addition to spaces required for restaurants, bars, meeting
rooms, and associated facilities.
Industrial Uses 1 per 1,000 square feet of floor area
Laundromats .5 per machine
Manufacturing Uses 1 per 1,000 square feet of floor area
Mobile/Manufactured Home
Parks
2 per dwelling unit
Offices 1 per 300 square feet of floor area
Physical Recreation 1 per 350 square feet of floor area
Residential, Single and Two
Family Dwellings
2 per unit
Residential, Apartment 2 per unit
Residential, Elderly Housing
(occupancy limited to persons
age 55 and over)
1 per unit
Residential, Townhouse 2 per unit; plus guest parking of  space per unit for
projects with more than 8 units
Restaurants, Class I 1 per every 100 square feet of floor area
Restaurants, Class II & III 1 per every 3 seats + 1 per employee on the largest shift
Religious Institutions 1 per every 3 seats (sanctuary seats only)
Retail Stores and Service
Establishments
1 per 300 square feet of floor space and outdoor sales
space
School, Elementary & Junior
High
1 per 7 students based upon building design
School, Senior High 1 per 3 students based upon building design
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 65
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
Strip Malls / Shopping Centers
under 100,000 square feet
1 per 200 square feet of floor area
Warehousing 1 per 1,000 square feet of floor area
Uses Not Listed The parking requirement for a use not specifically
mentioned herein shall be the same as required for a
similar use as determined by the Zoning Administrator
3. Design and Dimensions of Off-Street Loading Space.
A. Location. All required loading berths shall be off street and shall be located on the same lot as
the building or use to be served. A loading berth shall be located at least 25 feet from a street
intersection and at least 50 feet from a residential district unless it is within a building.
Loading berths shall not occupy the required front yard space.
B. Size. Unless otherwise specified in this Ordinance, a required loading berth shall not be less
than 12 feet in width, 50 feet in length and 14 feet in height, exclusive of aisle and
maneuvering space.
C. Required Loading Spaces. Determined by the City Council following review by the Planning
Commission.
D. Access. Each required loading berth shall be located with appropriate means of vehicular
access to a street or public alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic.
E. Surfacing. All loading berths and access ways shall be improved with a durable material to
control the dust and drainage.
F. Accessory Use. Any space allocated as a loading berth or maneuvering area so as to comply
with the terms of this Ordinance shall not be used for the storage of goods, inoperable vehicles
or be included as a part of the space requirements necessary to meet the off-street parking
area.
G. In connection with any structure which is to be erected or substantially altered, and which
requires the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles,
there shall be provided off-street loading space.
H. Screening. Except in the case of multiple dwellings, all loading areas shall be screened from
abutting and surrounding residential uses in compliance with other provisions of this
Ordinance.
I. Where noise from loading or unloading activity is audible in a residential district, the activity
shall terminate between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. except for the loading and
unloading of grain.
718 Signs
Purpose and intent: It is not the purpose or intent of this Ordinance to regulate the message displayed on any sign;
nor is it the purpose or intent of this Ordinance to regulate any building design or any display not defined as a sign,
or any sign which cannot be viewed from outside a building. The purpose and intent of this Ordinance is to:
A. Regulate the number, location, size, type, illumination and other physical characteristics of signs within the
City in order to promote the public health, safety and welfare.
B. Maintain, enhance and improve the aesthetic environment of the City by preventing visual clutter that is
harmful to the appearance of the community.
C. Improve the visual appearance of the City while providing for effective means of communication,
consistent with constitutional guarantees and the Citys goals of public safety and aesthetics.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 66
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
D. Provide for fair and consistent enforcement of the sign regulations set forth herein under the zoning
authority of the City.
E. Provide for the safety of the traveling public by limiting distractions, hazards and obstructions.
1. General Standards.
Signs are a permitted accessory use in all use districts subject to the following regulations:
A. Signs that are not posted by authorized government officials are prohibited within the public
right-of-way, easements or publicly owned land.
B. Illuminated signs may be permitted but devices giving off an intermittent or rotating beam or
rays of light shall be prohibited.
C. One sign with a commercial message on a residentially zoned property that does not exceed
six square feet per surface may be placed in the front yard of the property. One sign with a
commercial message on a commercial / industrial zoned property that does not exceed 32
square feet per surface may be placed in the front yard of the property. These signs must be
removed within 10 days after the closing date of the sale or lease of the property.
D. One sign with a commercial message that does not exceed 240 square feet of surface per side
(with a maximum of two sides) may be placed upon a construction site. These signs must be
removed within 10 days after the closing date of the sale of the last lot owned by the
development company.
E. No sign shall, by reason of position, shape or color interfere in any way with the proper
functioning or purpose of a traffic sign or signal.
F. Signs shall not be painted on fences, rocks, or similar structures or features nor shall paper or
similar signs be attached directly to a building wall by an adhesive or similar means.
G. Portable or temporary signs as defined by this Ordinance are allowed by permit only in
industrial and commercial zoning districts. There shall be no more than one portable or
temporary sign on any lot at a time and such sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in size per
surface with a maximum of two surfaces. Portable or temporary signs may not be displayed
for more than 15 days at a time and must be removed immediately after the event advertised.
Portable or temporary signs may not be placed in the public right-of-way, be flashing, having
moving parts or be fastened to any pylon or light pole. No permit shall be issued by the City
for a portable or temporary sign on a lot for a duration of more than 45 days within a calendar
year. Temporary signage is allowed over and above the typical signage limit allowed on a
property for permanent signage.
H. Non-commercial speech signs: Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance, all
signs of any size containing non-commercial speech may be posted in any number from 46
days before the state primary election in any general election year until ten (10) days
following the general election and 13 weeks prior to any special election until 10 days
following the special election. One non-commercial speech sign is allowed on each lot
outside of the above specified time period on all properties.
I. Building and projecting signs can only be located on the principal building on the lot.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 67
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
J. Substitution Clause: The owner of any sign which is otherwise allowed by this Ordinance
may substitute non-commercial speech signs in lieu of any other commercial speech sign or
other non-commercial speech sign. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent
favoring of commercial speech over non-commercial speech, or favoring of any particular
non-commercial speech over any other non-commercial speech. This provision prevails over
any more specific provision to the contrary.
K. Sign permits are required for all signs unless otherwise stated in this code. The fee for sign
permits shall be established by council resolution. All signs shall conform to the requirements
of this Ordinance whether or not a sign permit is required. All signs shall be constructed in a
matter and of such material that they shall be safe and substantial. All signs shall be properly
secured, supported and braced and shall be kept in good repair so that public safety and traffic
safety are not compromised.
L. Electronic Variable Message Signs are permitted in industrial and commercial zoning districts
(except for the B-1 Central Business District) as long as the message and/or picture on the sign
does not change more than once per five (5) seconds.
M. Illuminated signs shall be subject to the electrical requirements of the Electrical Code of the
State of Minnesota.
N. No sign shall be attached to or placed upon any building in such a manner as to obstruct any
window or door for fire escape or be attached to any fire escape. The minimum clearance of
any sign from unprotected electrical conductors shall be not less than 36 inches for conductors
carrying not over 600 volts and 48 inches for conductors carrying more than 600 volts.
O. All off-premise commercial signs are prohibited except for signs defined as billboards. Offpremise
non-commercial speech signs are exempted from this prohibition.
P. Up to three flags containing non-commercial speech only may be displayed upon a lot. Each
non-commercial speech flag may not exceed 100 square feet in size per surface.
Q. Window Signs are permitted in street facing windows of commercial and industrial zoned
buildings provided they do not exceed 25 percent of the window area which has street
frontage.
R. Building address signs are not counted towards overall permitted signage on a building.
2. Signs Permitted in Residential Districts.
A. One building sign for each dwelling not to exceed two square feet in area per surface, and no
sign shall be so constructed as to have more than two surfaces.
B. One building sign for each dwelling group of six or more units. Such sign not to exceed six
square feet in area per surface and no sign shall be constructed as to have more than two
surfaces.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 68
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
C. One building sign for each permitted nonresidential use or use by conditional use permit.
Such signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in area per surface and be so constructed as to have
more than two surfaces.
D. Non-residential uses of residential property as provided in this Ordinance and multi-family
dwelling groups of six or more units may be allowed one (1) freestanding or monument sign
not more than 32 square feet per surface and set back 10 feet from property lines.
E. Symbols, statues, sculptures and integrated architectural features on buildings may be
illuminated and must meet the glare standards listed in the zoning ordinance.
F. Any sign shall be set back at least 10 feet from any property line. No sign shall exceed 10 feet
in height above the average grade level. Signs may be illuminated and must meet the glare
standards listed in this Ordinance.
3. Signs Permitted in Business Districts.
A. For an individual lot or site as defined by this Ordinance with all buildings totaling a gross
floor area of greater than 100,000 square feet, the following signage is permitted:
1. Freestanding or monument signs. The maximum freestanding/monument sign surface
area shall be 250 square feet per public street frontage of the lot or site. This maximum
surface area applies to one sign surface of no more than two sides per sign structure. The
allotted maximum surface area per public street frontage for the lot or site may be
distributed to multiple freestanding/monument signs. In no case shall any one sign be
larger than 250 square feet per side.
2. All signs within a lot or site shall be spaced no closer than 250 feet apart as measured
along the public street frontage(s).
3. When placing signs on the corner of a lot at the intersection of two public streets, the
applicant shall designate which public street frontage for the lot or site that the total sign
square footage should be attributed to and in no case shall the sign area be allowed to be
divided between the frontages.
B. For an individual lot or site as defined by this Ordinance with all buildings totaling a gross
floor area of greater than 50,000 square feet up to 100,000 square feet, the following signage
is permitted:
1. Freestanding or monument signs. The maximum freestanding/monument sign surface
area shall be 200 square feet per public street frontage of the lot or site. This maximum
surface area applies to one sign surface of no more than two sides per sign structure. The
allotted maximum surface area per public street frontage for the lot or site may be
distributed to multiple freestanding/monument signs. In no case shall any one sign be
larger than 200 square feet per side.
2. All signs within a lot or site shall be spaced no closer than 250 feet apart as measured
along the public street frontage(s).
3. When placing signs on the corner of a lot at the intersection of two public streets, the
applicant shall designate which public street frontage for the lot or site that the total sign
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 69
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
square footage should be attributed to and in no case shall the sign area be allowed to be
divided between the frontages.
C. For an individual lot or site as defined by this Ordinance with all buildings totaling a gross
floor area of less than 50,000 square feet, the following signage is permitted:
1. Freestanding or monument signs. The maximum freestanding/monument sign surface
area shall be 100 square feet per public street frontage of the lot or site. This maximum
surface area applies to one sign surface of no more than two sides per sign structure. The
allotted maximum surface area per public street frontage for the lot or site may be
distributed to multiple freestanding/monument signs. In no case shall any one sign be
larger than 100 square feet per side.
2. All signs within a lot or site shall be spaced no closer than 250 feet apart as measured
along the public street frontage(s).
3. When placing signs on the corner of a lot at the intersection of two public streets, the
applicant shall designate which public street frontage for the lot or site that the total sign
square footage should be attributed to and in no case shall the sign area be allowed to be
divided between the frontages.
D. In all cases, a freestanding or monument sign shall not exceed a height of 20 feet from the
average grade for signs located in the B-1 Central Business District and the B-2 Community
Commercial District. The maximum freestanding or monument sign height in the B-3
Highway Commercial District shall be no more than 30 feet from the average grade.
E. In all cases, the minimum setback for all freestanding or monument signs shall be at least 10
feet from any property line. In cases where an easement encumbers area along the property
line, the sign must be set outside of the easement area, even if the easement area exceeds ten
feet from the property line.
F. No building sign shall extend in height more than six feet above the highest outside wall or
parapet of any principal building. Building signs can only be placed on the principal building.
Sign area is limited to 15 percent of the building face in the B-1 Central Business District, the
B-2 Community Commercial District and B-3 Highway Commercial District.
G. Projecting signs shall not exceed the sum of 16 square feet per surface, and must be located at
a height of eight feet above the top of curb elevation of the street. Such signs can project to
five feet from the building face, provided that they do not infringe on the public right-of-way.
H. Electronic Variable Message Signs and Readerboard Signs are permitted as part of the allowed
signage only in the B-2 Community Commercial and B-3 Highway Commercial Zoning
Districts.
I. Signs may be illuminated and must meet the glare standards listed in this Ordinance. Internally
illuminated freestanding/monument signs, including electronic variable message signs, located
in the B-2 Community Commercial Zoning District and B-3 Highway Commercial Zoning
District shall be a minimum distance of 100 feet from the leading edge of said sign to an
adjoining residential district boundary. This provision shall not apply to externally
illuminated signs which otherwise comply with the glare standards listed in this Ordinance.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 70
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
J. In the B-2 Community Commercial Zoning District, only monument signs are permitted.
K. If property was originally included in an application for development as part of a larger
development which met the definition of "site" pursuant to this Ordinance, any
signage permitted for that property, at the time of development of the site, or in the future, will
be counted towards the total amount of signage allowed for the entire site, regardless of
whether the property is further subdivided or there has been a change in ownership.
4. Signs Permitted in Industrial Districts.
A. One (1) freestanding or monument sign per lot for single street frontage lots. In cases where
lots have more than one street frontage, such lot shall be allowed up to two freestanding or
monument signs which must each be placed on different frontages. The total square footage
of all freestanding or monument signs on a lot shall not exceed the sum of one square foot for
each front foot of lot, or 100 square feet, per surface, whichever is smaller. Freestanding or
monument signs shall be set back 10 feet from any property line. Maximum height is 30 feet
from average grade.
B. No building sign shall extend in height more than six feet above the highest outside wall or
parapet of any principal building. Building signs can only be placed on the principal building.
Sign area is limited to 15 percent of the building face.
C. Billboard signs are allowed only as the principal use of a lot. Billboards shall not exceed 480
square feet of sign per surface with a maximum of two sides. Setbacks shall comply with
applicable district regulations for principal structures. Billboards shall maintain a spacing of
not less than 500 feet between billboards.
D. Electronic variable message signs and readerboard signs are permitted as part of the allowed
signage.
E. Signs may be illuminated but must meet the glare standards listed in this Ordinance.
5. Sign Removal.
Any sign legally existing at the time of the passage of this Ordinance that does not conform to the
provisions of this Ordinance shall be considered a legal nonconforming sign and may be continued through
repair, replacement, restoration, maintenance or improvement but not including expansion. Expansion
shall be defined as any structural alteration, change or addition that is made outside of the original sign
structure, sign area or design.
Nothing in this section shall prevent the return of a sign structure that has been declared unsafe by the
Citys Building Inspector to a safe condition.
When any legal nonconforming sign is discontinued for a period of more than one year or is changed to a
conforming sign, any future sign shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. Any legal
nonconforming sign shall be removed and shall not be repaired, replaced, or rebuilt if it is damaged by fire
or similar peril to the extent of greater than 50 percent of its estimated value as indicated in the records of
the County Assessor at the time of destruction and no sign permit or building permit has been applied for
within 180 days of the date of destruction. In the event there are no records of the County Assessor on the
sign, the Citys Building Inspector shall be responsible for making the determination of whether a
nonconforming sign has been destroyed greater than 50 percent of its estimated market value at the time of
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 71
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
destruction. In making the determination the Building Inspector shall consider the market value of the
entire sign at the time prior to the destruction and the replacement value of the existing sign. In the event
that a building permit or sign permit is applied for within 180 days of the date of destruction, the City may
impose reasonable conditions upon the building permit in order to mitigate any newly created impact on
adjacent properties.
6. Sandwich Board Signs.
A. Sandwich board signs shall be allowed in all zoning districts within the City except that in
residential districts, sandwich board signs will be permitted only for non-residential uses and uses
by conditional use permit.
B. There shall be only one sandwich board sign allowed for each entity.
C. Sandwich board signs shall not exceed eight square feet in size per surface area.
D. Sandwich board signs may be placed on a public sidewalk or within the public right-of-way
provided that the sign owner agrees to indemnify the City with respect to the sign and signs a
waiver to this effect. Upon application for a sign permit, the sign owner must also provide the City
with a certificate of insurance that covers the property in which the sign will be placed and the
value of sign. The City must be named as an additional insured on the certificate of insurance.
E. If placed on a sidewalk, a sandwich board sign shall not take up more than three feet of sidewalk
width and shall not be placed in the middle of the sidewalk.
F. All sandwich board signs require a sign permit which must be obtained prior to placement of the
sign. All permit applications shall contain a sketch of the sandwich board sign which includes the
signs dimensions, colors and design. The location of the sign shall also be indicated. Sandwich
board sign permits shall not be transferable.
G. A copy of the approved sign permit for the sandwich board sign shall be attached to the sandwich
board sign at all times. Sandwich boards signs that do not comply with this requirement may be
removed and disposed of by the City.
H. Sandwich board signs may be removed by the City if they interfere with any City activities (i.e.
snow removal, maintenance of the surrounding area, etc.).
I. Sandwich board sign permits are valid from the date of issuance until December 31st of each year.
J. Sandwich board signs shall be displayed only during the times that the entity is open. No sandwich
board sign shall be displayed overnight or when there has been any snow accumulation. Sandwich
board signs that do not comply with this requirement may be removed and disposed of by the City.
K. Sandwich board signs must either be weighted down or removed when there are wind gusts of 20
m.p.h. or greater.
L. Under no circumstances shall a sandwich board sign be used instead of permanent building
signage.
7. Exemptions
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 72
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
The following signs shall not require a permit. These exemptions, however, shall not be construed as
relieving the owner of the sign from the responsibility of its compliance with the provisions of this
Ordinance or any other law or ordinance regulating the same.
A. The changing of the display surface on a painted or printed sign only.
B. Signs six square feet or less in size, per surface, except for sandwich boards must always
obtain permits even if they are six (6) square feet or less in size.
C. Window Signage as permitted in the general standards.
D. Non-commercial speech signs.
8. Sign Area Calculations
The area of a sign shall be computed by means of the smallest circle, rectangle or triangle that will
encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display, together with any
material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign
from the building facade against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework, pole or
bracing.
For monument signs, the method in the previous paragraph shall be used. Only the face that is specifically
intended to be used for signage shall be included when computing the sign area. Any base or other
supporting structure, along with all adjoining structures such as fences or walls shall not be included when
computing the sign area.
719 Restaurants and Drinking Establishments
The following requirements shall apply to all restaurants and drinking establishments in the City.
1. Class I Restaurants (Fast Food)
A. Shall comply with all applicable provisions of the City Code.
B. All menu boards, order microphones, and speakers shall be located in the rear of the
building or other unobtrusive location if the rear yard is adjacent to a public street or alley
and shall not be directed towards residential areas.
2. Class II Restaurants (Sit Down)
A. Shall comply with all applicable provisions of the City Code.
3. Class III Restaurants (Sit Down with Alcohol or Entertainment)
A. Shall comply with all applicable provisions of the City Code.
B. Shall comply with all conditions imposed as part of the liquor license for the site.
C. Shall not be located on a lot or parcel of land adjacent to any low density residential
(RL70, RL84, or RL90) zoning district. Adjacent to shall be defined as property lines
that touch and are contiguous.
D. Shall be limited to the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. if located within 100 feet of any
residentially zoned property. The setback distance shall be measured from the property
line of the Class III Restaurant to the property line of the residentially zoned property.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 73
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
4. Drinking Establishments
A. Shall comply with all applicable provisions of the City Code.
B. Shall comply with all conditions imposed as part of the liquor license for the site;
D. Shall not be located on a lot or parcel of land adjacent to any low density residential
(RL70, RL84, or RL90) zoning district. Adjacent to shall be defined as property lines
that touch and are contiguous.
E. Shall be limited to the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. if located within 100 feet of any
residentially zoned property. The setback distance shall be measured from the property
line of the drinking establishment to the property line of the residentially zoned property.
720 Drive-thru Businesses
A. All order boards or microphones, and speakers shall be located in the rear of the building or
other unobtrusive location if the rear yard is adjacent to a public street or alley and shall not be
directed towards residential areas.
721 Car Washes
1. General provisions for car wash facilities.
A. Entry and exit doors shall be closed during wash/dry cycles.
B. Stacking spaces shall be provided and oriented to prevent traffic backup on adjacent
streets.
C. Parking and stacking spaces shall be screened from view of adjacent residentially zoned
areas.
D. Vehicular access points shall be limited to prevent traffic conflicts.
E. Vacuums must not interfere with stacking spaces and not be in a yard adjacent to
residentially zoned areas.
F. A six inch non-surmountable curb shall separate all walks and landscape areas from
parking areas.
722 Convenience Stores
1. General provisions for convenience stores.
A. For architectural purposes, each side of the building shall be considered a front face.
B. All trash, waste materials, and obsolete parts shall be stored within a separate enclosure
meeting the requirements of Section 703 of this Ordinance.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 74
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
C. All goods for sale, other than those required for the operation and maintenance of motor
vehicles shall be displayed within the principal structure. The storage of items for sale outside
the principal building shall be displayed in specially designed containers.
D. No sale or storage of motor vehicles or trailers or campers shall be permitted.
2. Site Requirements.
A. Driveway accesses shall meet the requirements of Section 723 of this Ordinance.
B. The total height of any overhead canopy or weather protection shall not exceed 20 feet.
3. Additional Bulk Requirements:
A. Lot Width: 150 feet
B. Setbacks:
Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard
Canopy (edge) 10 feet 25 feet 20 feet
Pump Island 25 feet 25 feet 25 feet
Accessory Building 30 feet 30 feet 30 feet
723 Access Spacing and Driveways
1. A streets functional classification shall be defined by the New Prague Comprehensive Land Use
Plans Future Functional Classification Map.
2. The distance from a driveway access to the intersection of two streets shall be in accordance with
the following table. The setback measurement shall be measured from the edge of the street right
of way to the nearest edge of the curb cut for the driveway access.
STREET WITH
PROPOSED PRIVATE
DRIVEWAY ACCESS
Nearest Intersecting Street
Local Street Collector
Minor
Arterial Principal Arterial
Local Street
Residential Driveway 40' 55' 70' 100'
Commercial/Industrial
Driveway 100' 150' 150' *500'
Collector Street
Residential Driveway 40' 55' 70' 100'
Commercial/Industrial
Driveway
100' 200' *500' *500'
*A driveway access may be located less than 500 feet from the nearest intersection if the proper
roadway geometrics are installed to limit access to right turns in and out of the property only. Such
exceptions are subject to the approval of the City Engineer. Review criteria shall include, but not
be limited to, sight lines and distances, traffic volumes and speeds on the public street, intersection
controls, street and driveway spacing, and trip generation from the property.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 75
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
Driveway Spacing to Intersection  Example #1
Driveway Spacing to Intersection  Example #2
3. Driveway accesses to streets shall be allowed in accordance with the minimum access spacing
guidelines shown in the following table:
TYPE OF ACCESS
BEING REQUESTED
FUNCTIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF STREET AFFECTED BY
ACCESS
Principal Arterial Minor Arterial Collector (Major) Local
Private Residential
Driveway
Not Permitted Not Permitted 1/8 Mile (660') No Restriction
Commercial/Industrial
Driveways, Or Private
Streets
Not Permitted Not Permitted 1/8 Mile (660) No Restriction
4. Driveways onto major arterial, minor arterial, and major collector streets shall be prohibited where
alternative street access is available. For existing lots of record, where alternative access is not
available, direct access onto arterial and collectors may be permitted, provided a site plan is
submitted for review and approval of the City Engineer or the Citys transportation consultant.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 76
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
5. Access will not be permitted within a right turn lane or taper areas of a turn lane.
6. Sight triangles shall be provided on corner lots. The area between 3 feet and 10 feet in height
above the road centerline grade shall be maintained clear of all obstructions at the intersections of
streets with other streets for safety of pedestrians and people in vehicles. Property in the B1
Central Business District shall be exempt from this sight triangle requirement. The chart below
specifies the required clear area for each street intersection based upon the functional classification
of the streets. The City Engineer may require additional sight triangle area if a traffic study or
special conditions indicate that additional area is needed.
Intersection of /
With
Major Arterial Minor Arterial Collector Local
Major Arterial A A B B
Minor Arterial A B B B
Collector B B B B
Local B B B B
Key:
A = 100 X 100 sight triangle
B = 30 x 30 sight triangle
7. Authorization to construct or alter a driveway on a road under the jurisdiction of Scott County,
LeSueur County, or the Minnesota Department of Transportation shall be received from the
applicable jurisdictional agency. No driveway shall be constructed until such authorization is
obtained.
8. The driveway angle to the street shall be as near to right angle as practical.
9. No residential driveway curb cut shall exceed 30 feet in width, unless approved by the City
Engineer or the Citys transportation consultant.
10. The maximum driveway grade shall not exceed 10 percent for residential uses. The percent of
grade shall be determined by calculating the difference in grade from the front of the garage to the
street right of way line. The maximum driveway grade for commercial or industrial uses shall not
exceed 5 percent.
11. All driveways shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete, paver bricks, or equivalent type of
materials.
724 Land Alterations
1. The approval of the City Engineer and City Council and a permit shall be required in all cases
where excavation, grading and filling of any land would:
B. Result in a substantial alteration of existing ground contour.
C. Change existing drainage or would cause flooding or erosion
D. Deprive an adjoining property owner of lateral support
E. Remove or destroy the present ground cover resulting in less beneficial cover for present and
proposed development.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 77
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
Substantial alteration shall be defined as the extraction, grading or filling of land involving
movement of earth and materials in excess of 25 cubic yards but less than 500 cubic yards. See
Section 734 of this Ordinance for additional provisions relating to land alterations in excess of 500
cubic yards.
2. Applications for a permit shall contain the following additional information:
A. Legal description of land to be altered.
B. Nature of proposed alteration and future use of the property.
C. Starting date and approximate completion date of the operation.
D. The names of all owners of the land to be altered.
E. The names and addresses of all owners and occupants of the adjoining land that may be
affected by said land alterations.
F. A construction plan showing existing and proposed elevations.
G. Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.
3. The City Council may require adequate proof of bonding in the form of a performance bond,
sufficient in value to cover the expense of the completion of the development plan or to bring such
portion of the completed project to a safe grade and elevation so as to be healthful and safe to the
general public and to provide safe and adequate drainage to the site.
4. If, during the land alteration work it becomes necessary for the person altering the land to create a
condition of grade or drainage not in the interest of health or safety, it shall become that person's
duty to correct immediately the dangerous situation created, as well as fence or screen the area from
the public upon order of the Building Inspector.
725 Commercial Building Design/Site Relationship for the B-2 District
1. Predominant exterior building materials must be of high quality, including brick, wood, or
concrete. When concrete or tilt-up concrete panels are used, detail using color, textures, and
material treatments must be integrated to provide a higher degree of aesthetic treatment.
Prefabricated steel panels are prohibited as predominant building materials but may be used for
aesthetic treatment.
2. Building mass and scale must be controlled through roof line variations, repeating patterns of color,
materials, and textures, windows, and awnings.
3. All facades of a building that are visible from adjoining properties or public streets shall contribute
to the pleasing scale features of the building and encourage community integration by featuring
characteristics similar to a front facade.
4. Internal pedestrian walkways must be provided from perimeter sidewalks to building entrances.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 78
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
726 Commercial Building Design for the B-1 District
1. Purpose.
The purpose of establishing design standards for the B-1 Central Business District is to preserve an
atmosphere consistent with the original character of the City, to protect and enhance the appeal and
attraction of the City to residents, visitors, and tourists, to foster civic pride in the beauty and notable
accomplishments of the past, and to preserve the value of existing buildings which are located in the City.
A. Finishes, construction techniques and craftsmanship that characterize the architectural
character of a building shall be preserved whenever reasonably possible.
B. Deteriorating features shall be repaired rather than replaced whenever reasonably possible.
When the severity of the deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new
feature shall match the old in design, color, texture, and other visual qualities, and where
reasonably possible, materials.
C. Masonry and other original surfaces shall be preserved. Brick shall not be covered with
stucco, shakes, or other veneer.
D. Windows must not be filled in with wood, brick, or any other materials. Window sizes and
shapes must be maintained if replacement or removal of original window is necessary.
E. For new construction, at least 40 percent of the first floor faade area must consist of
windows. For buildings being constructed on a corner lot, this requirement applies only to
the faade facing Main Street and the first 40 feet of the side street, or the more major of
the two adjacent streets. This provision shall not apply to accessory buildings located in
the B1 District.
F. The City encourages the uncovering of original windows that have since been covered.
G. For new construction, predominant exterior building materials must consist of brick to
complement historical downtown building materials.
H. Additions or exterior alterations to existing buildings shall be compatible in materials,
color, scale, and architectural features with the existing building.
I. Awnings shall be made of cloth or canvas. No plastic awnings shall be allowed.
J. Structures located in the B1 Central Business District are generally those structures where
early commerce occurred in New Prague, and therefore have historical significance. Prior
to issuing a demolition permit for any structure located in the B1 Central Business District,
the City Council shall evaluate its historical significance to the community, the economic
feasibility of renovating the structure versus demolition, and life safety issues associated
with the structure, and determine if the demolition permit shall be issued based upon these
factors.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 79
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
727 Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District
1. Purpose.
The purpose of this section is:
A. To encourage a more creative and efficient development of land and its improvements than
is possible under the more restrictive application of zoning requirements such as lot sizes
and building setbacks, while at the same time meeting the standards and purposes of the
Comprehensive Plan and preserving the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the
City.
B. To allow for a mixture of uses in an integrated and well planned area.
C. To ensure concentration of open space into more usable areas, and the preservation of the
natural resources of the site including wetlands, woodlands, steep slopes, and scenic areas.
D. To facilitate the economical provision of streets and public utilities.
2. Permitted Uses.
A. Residential Dwellings
B. Commercial and Office Uses
C. Industrial Uses
D. Public, Recreational, and Utility Uses
3. General Requirements.
A Conditional Use Permit shall be required of all planned unit developments. The City may
approve the planned unit development only if it is found that the development satisfies all the
following standards:
A. The proposed planned unit development is in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan.
At a minimum, the City shall find that the planned unit development does not conflict with
the Comprehensive Plan with regards to the following:
1. The use will not create an excessive burden on existing parks, schools, streets, and
other public facilities and utilities which serve or are proposed to serve the area.
2. The use is reasonably related to the overall needs of the City and is compatible with
the surrounding land use.
3. The planned unit development is an effective and unified treatment of the
development possibilities on the project site and the development plans provide for
the preservation of unique natural amenities such as streams, stream banks, wooded
cover, rough terrain, and similar areas.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 80
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
4. The uses proposed will not have an undue and adverse impact on the reasonable
enjoyment of neighborhood property, and will not be detrimental to surrounding
uses.
B. The planned unit development meets or exceeds the following development criteria:
1. A minimum of two principal structures are proposed.
2. The minimum size of the tract is one-half (1/2) acre in developed areas and two (2)
acres in undeveloped areas.
C. The use is consistent with the requirements of this Ordinance.
D. The planned unit development can be planned and developed to harmonize with any
existing or proposed development in the areas surrounding the project site.
E. Each phase of the proposed development is of sufficient size, composition, and
arrangement so that its construction, marketing, and operation are feasible as a complete
unit, and that provision for and construction of dwelling units and common open space are
balanced and coordinated. In addition, the total development is designed in such a manner
as to form a desirable and unified environment within its own boundaries.
F. Financing is available to the applicant on conditions and in an amount which is sufficient
to assure completion of the planned unit development. To evidence this finding, a written
statement of financial feasibility which is accepted by the City shall be submitted by the
applicant.
G. One (1) individual has been designated by the property owner(s) to be in control of the
development.
H. It is reasonable to anticipate that the entire planned unit development will be fully platted
in final form within five (5) years of approving the preliminary development plan.
4. Density Transfer.
A. In order to encourage the protection of natural resources, to allow limited development in
an area with unusual building characteristics due to subsoil characteristics or to encourage
creative land use, a density transfer system may be allowed whereby lot sizes smaller than
that normally required in a district will be allowed on the developable land in return for
leaving the natural resource areas open from development. The number of dwelling units
proposed for the entire site shall not exceed the total number permitted under the density
indicated in the Comprehensive Plan where the land is located.
If the planned unit development incorporates residential uses and is in more than one
density area, the number of allowable dwelling units must be separately calculated for each
portion of the planned unit development that is in a separate area according to the
underlying zoning district, and must then be combined to determine the number of
dwelling units allowable in the entire planned unit development.
B. The Zoning Administrator shall determine the number of dwelling units which may be
constructed within the residential portion of the planned unit development by dividing the
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 81
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
gross acreage of the project area by the maximum allowable density as set forth in Section
VI, Zoning Districts and Provisions.
5. Coordination with Subdivision Ordinance.
A. It is the intent of this Ordinance that subdivision review under the Subdivision Ordinance
be carried out simultaneously with the review of a planned unit development under this
Section.
B. The plans required under this Section must be submitted in a form which will satisfy the
requirements of the Subdivision Ordinance for the preliminary and final plats required
under the Subdivision Ordinance.
6. Pre-Application Meeting.
Prior to the submission of any plan to the Planning Commission, the applicant shall meet with the
Zoning Administrator and, if necessary, with the Planning Commission to discuss the contemplated
project relative to community development objectives for the area in question and to learn the
procedural steps and exhibits required. This includes the procedural steps for a Conditional Use
Permit and a preliminary plat. The applicant may submit the simple sketch plat at this stage for
informal review and discussion. The applicant is urged to avail himself or herself of the advice and
assistance of the planning staff to facilitate the review of the preliminary development plan and
preliminary plat.
7. Preliminary Development Plan.
A. An applicant shall make an application for a Conditional Use Permit following the
procedural steps as set forth in Section 505.4 of this Ordinance.
B. In order to grant approval of a Conditional Use Permit as required by this Section, or to
grant approval to a preliminary development plan, the City Council shall find that the
planned unit development complies with the requirements as established in Section 505 of
this Ordinance.
C. Preliminary Development Plan Documentation.
The following exhibits shall be submitted by the applicant as part of the application for a
Conditional Use Permit, as required by the Zoning Administrator and the Planning Commission.
1. An explanation of the character and need for the planned unit development and the
manner in which it has been planned to take advantage of the planned development
regulations.
2. A statement of proposed financing of the planned unit development.
3. A statement of the present ownership of all of the land included within the planned
development and a list of property owners within three hundred fifty (350) feet of
the outer boundaries of the property.
4. A general indication of the expected schedule of development including sequential
phasing and time schedules.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 82
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
5. A map giving the legal description of the property including approximate total
acreage and also indicating existing property lines and dimensions, ownership of
all parcels, platting, easements, street rights of way, utilities, and buildings for the
property, and for the area 350 feet beyond.
6. Natural features map or maps of the property and area 350 feet beyond showing
contour lines at no more than two foot intervals, drainage patterns, wetlands,
vegetation, soil and subsoil condition.
7. A map indicating proposed land uses including housing units and types, vehicular
and pedestrian circulation, and open space uses.
8. Full description as to how all necessary governmental services will be provided to
the development including sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water systems, streets
and other public utilities.
9. An engineering report presenting results of a soils review of the site. If conditions
warrant, soi1 borings of the site may a1so be required.
10. Any additional information requested by the Planning Commission and City
Council that may be required for clarification of the proposed project.
D. Preliminary Plat.
The applicant shall also submit a preliminary plat and all the necessary documentation of all or that
portion of the project to be platted as required under the Subdivision Ordinance. For purposes of
administrative simplification, the public hearings required for the Conditional Use Permit and
Preliminary Plat may be combined into one hearing or may be held concurrently.
8. Final Development Plan.
A. Within 60 days of City Council approval of the preliminary development plan and the
preliminary plat, the applicant shall file with the Zoning Administrator a final development
plan and the final plat shall contain those changes as recommended by the Planning
Commission and approved by the City Council during the preliminary review process.
B The Zoning Administrator shall submit the final development plan and the final plat to the
Planning and Zoning Commission for review.
C. The Commission shall review the final development plan and final plat and make its
recommendation to the City Council within 60 days of receiving the final development
plan and Final Plat.
D. The City Council shall review the final development plan and act on the final plat after
sixty (60) days of receiving the recommendation of the Planning Commission. The City
Council shall give notice and provide opportunity to be heard on the final development
plan to any person who has indicated to the City Counci1 in writing that he or she wishes
to be notified.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 83
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
E. If the final development plan is approved by the City Council, the Zoning Administrator
shall issue a Conditional Use Permit for the total development to the applicant. Said
permit to include any and all conditions as required by the preliminary development plan
and the final development plan.
F. Once the final development plan and the final plat have been approved, the final plat shall
be filed with the County Recorder's office.
G. A building permit may thereafter be issued for the area which is in compliance with the
approved plans without further review of the plans by the City.
9 . Enforcing Development Schedule.
The construction and provision of all of the common open spaces and public and recreational
facilities which are shown on the final development plan must proceed at the same rate as the
construction of dwelling units. At least once every six (6) months following the approval of the
final development, the Zoning Administrator shall review all of the building permits issued for the
planned development and examine the construction which has taken place on the site.
If the Zoning Administrator finds that the rate of construction of dwelling units is faster than the
rate at which common open space and public and recreational facilities have been constructed and
provided, he shall forward this information to the City Council, which may revoke the Conditional
Use Permit. If the applicant fails to complete the open spaces and recreation areas within 60 days
after the comp1etion of the remainder of the project, the City may complete the open space and
public and recreational facilities and assess the cost back to the developer or landowner.
10. Conveyance and Maintenance of Common Open Space.
A. All land shown on the final development plan as common open space must be conveyed
under one of the following methods at the discretion of the City:
(1) It may be conveyed to a public agency which will agree to maintain the common
open space and any buildings structures or improvements which have been placed
on it.
(2) It may be conveyed to a corporation, developer, homeowner association
(incorporated or non-incorporated) or trustee provided in an indenture establishing
association or similar organization for the maintenance of the planned development.
The common open space must be conveyed to the party involved subject to
covenants approved by the City Council which restrict the common open space to
the uses specified on the final development plan, and which provide for the
maintenance of the common open space in a manner which assures its continuing
use for its intended space.
B. If the common open space is conveyed to a private party and is not maintained properly to
standards established by the City, the City shall have the authority to maintain the property
and assess the costs incurred back to the land benefited by the improvement.
11. Standards for Common Open Space.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 84
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
No open area may be accepted as common open space under the provisions of this Ordinance
unless it meets the following standards:
A. The location, shape, size and character of the common open space must be suitable for the
planned unit development.
B. Common open space must be used for amenity or recreational purposes. The uses
authorized for the common open space must be appropriate to the scale and character of the
planned development, considering the size, density, expected population, topography, and
the number and type of dwellings to be provided.
C. Common open space must be suitably improved for its intended use, but common open
space containing natural features worthy of preservation may be left unimproved. The
buildings, structures and improvements which are permitted in the common open space
must be appropriate to the uses which are authorized for the common open space and must
conserve and enhance the amenities of the common open space having regard to its
topography and unimproved condition.
12. Planned Unit Development Review and Amendments
A. Annual Review.
The Zoning Administrator and Planning Commission shall review all Planned Unit
Developments within the City by March 1 of each year and shall make a report to the City
Council on the status of the development in each of the Planned Unit Developments. If the
Commission finds that development has not occurred within one year after the original
approval of the conditional use permit for the Planned Unit Development, the Commission
may recommend that the City Council revoke the Conditional Use Permit as set forth in
Section 505 of this Ordinance.
B. Revision to the Planned Unit Development.
(1) Changes in the location, placement, and heights of buildings or structures may be
authorized by the Zoning Administrator if required by engineering or other
circumstances not foreseen at the time the Final Plan was approved.
(2) Approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall be
required for other changes such as rearrangement of lots, blocks and building
tracts. These changes shall be consistent with the purpose and intent of the
approved final development plan.
C. Amendments to the Planned Unit Development.
Any amendment to the Planned Unit Development shall require the same procedures as for
the application for a Conditional Use Permit as set forth in Section 505 of this Ordinance.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 85
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
728 Bed and Breakfast Homes
1. Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to have predefined standards in place for the permitting and operation of a
bed and breakfast home.
2. General Standards.
The following regulations shall apply to bed and breakfast homes located in the city:
A. The bed and breakfast home must be owner occupied.
B. Building Codes. The bed and breakfast home shall meet all applicable housing, building,
and fire codes as required by the State of Minnesota. The home shall be subject to
inspection by the City Building Inspector.
C. Food. Food service shall be limited to breakfast, and separate kitchen or cooking facilities
shall not be available for guests.
D. Allowed Number of Rooms. The maximum number of allowed guest rooms in the RL-70,
RL-84 and RL-90 zoning district is three, unless the lot is greater than 20,000 square feet,
in which case five rooms will be allowed. The maximum number of allowed guest rooms
in the RM zoning district is five. All guest rooms must be located in the primary
residence.
E. Parking. Parking shall be in accordance with Section 717 of this Ordinance. Parking shall
be developed in such a manner that the residential character of the property is preserved.
Tandem parking is allowed; however, not more than two (2) cars per tandem will be
allowed.
F. Signs. Signs may be permitted in accordance with Section 718 of this Ordinance.
G. Appearance. Each residential property shall maintain an exterior residential appearance
and character, meaning that it has an exterior facade that is compatible with the
surrounding houses, and is of an appearance that would be found in a structure designed
for residential use. This is to ensure that bed and breakfast uses are clearly secondary and
incidental uses of residential buildings.
H. Rental Period. No guest shall be permitted to rent accommodations or remain in
occupancy for a period in excess of 30 total days within any 90 day period.
I. Special Functions. There shall be no catering to special or ancillary functions of a
commercial nature, whether guest related or not. Such functions include, but are not
limited to, wedding parties and receptions, other similar private parties and receptions,
corporate / institutional meetings, seminars, workshops, religious retreats, etc.
J. Annual Review. Any conditional use permit issued for a bed and breakfast home shall be
reviewed by the Planning Commission on an annual basis.
K. License. A bed and breakfast license must be obtained from the City.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 86
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
729 Bed and Breakfast Inns
1. Purpose:
The purpose of this section is to have predefined standards in place for the permitting and operation of a
bed and breakfast inn.
2. General Standards.
The following regulations shall apply to bed and breakfast inns located in the City:
A. A resident manager must occupy the site when guests are present.
B. Building Codes. The bed and breakfast inn shall meet all applicable housing, building, and
fire codes as required by the State of Minnesota. The inn shall be subject to inspection by
the City Building Inspector.
C. Allowed Number of Rooms. The maximum number of allowed guest rooms is eight.
D. Parking. Parking shall be in accordance with Section 717 of this Ordinance.
E. Signs. Signs may be permitted in accordance with Section 718 of this Ordinance.
F. Rental Period. No guest shall be permitted to rent accommodations or remain in
occupancy for a period in excess of 30 total days within any 90 day period.
G. Annual Review. Any conditional use permit issued for a bed and breakfast home shall be
reviewed by the Planning Commission on an annual basis.
H. License. A bed and breakfast license must be obtained from the City.
730 Commercial Towers and Antennas
1. Purpose:
In order to accommodate the communication needs of residents and businesses while protecting the public
health, safety, and general welfare of the community, the City Council finds that these regulations are
necessary to:
A. Provide for the appropriate location and development of towers and antennas to
accommodate the communication needs of the residents and businesses in the City;
B. Maximize the use of approved towers and buildings to accommodate new personal
wireless service antennas in order to reduce the number of new towers necessary to serve
the community;
C. Ensure antennas and towers are designed, located, and constructed in accordance with all
applicable Ordinance requirements to avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from
tower failure and weather related occurrences through structural standards and setback
requirements;
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 87
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
D. Require antennas and tower sites to be secured in order to discourage trespassing and
vandalism;
E. Require tower equipment to be screened from the view of persons located on properties
contiguous to the site or to be camouflaged in a manner to compliment existing structures
to minimize adverse visual effects of antennas and towers;
F. Utilize business, industrial and public land, buildings and structures for wireless
communications whenever possible and/or appropriate.
2. General Requirements:
A. Freestanding commercial towers shall conform to all applicable provisions of this
Ordinance and shall be allowed only with an approved Conditional Use Permit in the I1,
Light Industrial District, and with an approved Conditional Use Permit in the following
RL-90 Zoning District locations:
1. Religious institution sites when architecturally integrated into steeples or bell
towers.
2. Towers may be allowed on Park sites, if found to be compatible with the nature,
size and character of the park, as recommended by the Park Board. All revenues
generated though the lease of a City park for wireless telecommunications towers
and antennas will be transferred to the park fund;
3. Government, school, and public utility sites.
B. Antennas mounted on roofs, walls, and water towers are permitted uses in the following
districts:
1. RL-70, RL-84, RL-90 Single Family Residential Districts. RM, Medium Density
Residential, and RH, High Density Residential District.
2. B-1, Central Business District, B-3 Highway Commercial District
3. I-1, Light Industrial District.
C. Antenna co-locations are permitted uses on existing monopoles in the following districts:
1. RL-90 Single Family Residential District.
2. I-1, Light Industrial District.
D. Amateur radio towers are permitted uses in the RL-70, RL-84, RL-90 Single Family
Residential Districts and the RM, Medium Density Residential Districts, and shall conform
to the following standards:
1. Towers supporting amateur radio antennas and conforming to all applicable
provisions of this Ordinance shall be allowed only in the rear yard of residentially
zoned parcels.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 88
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
3. Tower Performance Standards:
A. Lighting: Commercial towers shall not be illuminated by artificial means and shall not display
strobe lights unless such lighting is specifically required by the Federal Aviation Administration or
other federal or state authority for a particular tower. When incorporated into the approved design
of the tower for camouflage purposes, light fixtures used to illuminate parking lots or other similar
areas may be attached to the tower.
B. Signs and Advertising: No signage, advertising, or identification of any kind intended to be visible
from the ground or other structures is permitted, except applicable warning and equipment
information signage required by the manufacturer or by federal, state, or local authorities.
C. Interference with Public Safety Telecommunications: No new or existing telecommunications
service shall interfere with public safety telecommunications.
D. Permit Required: No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct in place, or re-erect, replace
or make structural repairs to any tower without making application for and receiving an approved
conditional use permit, when applicable. In all cases, review by the City for all required permits
shall be necessary. The City may, in its discretion, condition approval of a conditional use permit
on the owner of the tower facilities entering into an agreement with the City under the terms of
which the owner agrees to remove, at the owners expense, all towers and associated facilities
following owners cessation of operations at the site.
E. Building Code Compliance: All towers, antennas, and accessory structures shall be in compliance
with the State Building Code, and shall obtain necessary permits.
F. Structural Design: Structure design, mounting and installation of the tower and antenna shall be in
compliance with the manufacturers specifications. The plans shall be approved and certified by a
structural engineer licensed in the State of Minnesota. In addition, communication towers shall be
designed, structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to accommodate both the applicants
antennas and comparable antennas for at least two additional users, if the tower is over 100 feet in
height, and at least one additional user if the tower is over 60 feet in height. Towers must be
designed to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accept antennas
mounted at various heights.
G. Electrical Grounding: Towers and antennas shall be grounded for protection against a direct strike
by lightning and shall comply, as to electrical wiring and connections, with all applicable
provisions of all state codes.
H. City Review: The Planning Department is authorized to employ, on behalf of the City, an
independent technical expert to review technical materials submitted by the applicant, or to
determine if additional information is necessary. The applicant shall pay the cost of such review or
independent analysis.
I. Location: No tower shall be located within any utility or drainage easement.
J. Insurance: The tower, antenna, accessory structure and associated equipment shall be insured
against injury or property damage caused by structural failure of the tower or associated equipment.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 89
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
K. Landscape Bond Requirements: The owner shall guarantee the growth and maintenance of all
plants for a minimum of two growing seasons. The guarantee period will not begin until a final
landscape inspection has occurred.
L. Construction Bond Requirements: A construction bond shall be posted with the City prior to the
issuance of a building permit. The bond shall ensure the installation of the tower.
M. Abandoned or Unused Tower or Antennas or Portions of Towers: All abandoned or unused towers
and associated facilities shall be removed within six months of the cessation of operations at the
site unless an extension is approved by the City. In the event that a tower is not removed, the tower
and associated facilities may be removed by the City and the costs of removal assessed against the
property. After the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an improved
state.
4. Design Standards:
A. Proposed or modified towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements:
1. Towers and antennas (including antenna cables) shall be designed to blend into the
surrounding environment to the maximum extent possible as determined by the
City through the use of building materials, colors, texture, screening, landscaping,
and other camouflaging architectural treatment, except in instances where the color
is dictated by federal or state authorities such as the Federal Aviation
Administration;
2. Communication towers shall be of a monopole design.
3. A galvanized finish shall be used on the tower, except in instances where the color
is dictated by federal or state authorities such as the Federal Aviation
Administration.
5. Height Restrictions:
A. The height of towers shall be determined by measuring the vertical distance from the towers point
of contact with the ground or rooftop to the highest point of the tower, including all antennas or
other attachments. When towers are mounted upon other structures, the combined height of the
structure at the towers point of attachment and tower must meet the height restrictions of this
Section.
B. The maximum heights for towers are as follows:
1. In residential zoning districts, the maximum height of any commercial tower, including all antennas
and other attachments, shall not exceed 200 feet.
2. In residential zoning districts, amateur radio antennas are a permitted use if 50 feet or less in height.
Amateur radio antennas in excess of 50 feet require a Conditional Use Permit, provided that such
height is technically necessary to receive and broadcast amateur radio signals. They shall be in
accordance with the preemption ruling PRB1 of the Federal Communications Commission.
3. In the I-1 Industrial zoning district, the maximum height of any commercial tower, including all
antennas and other attachments, shall not exceed 200 feet.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 90
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
C. The maximum height of antennas attached to a structure and not freestanding is 15 feet.
6. Setbacks:
A. Towers, accessory buildings, and their related equipment shall conform to the following
setback requirements:
2. Commercial towers in the Industrial zoning district shall be set back 50
percent of the height of the tower, from all property line lines.
3. For residentially zoned property, towers shall maintain property line
setbacks equal to two times the height of the tower from residentially
zoned property lines.
4. Towers shall only be allowed in the rear yard.
5. Accessory utility buildings and equipment shall meet the minimum
accessory use location and setback requirements of the underlying
zoning district.
7. Accessory Utility Buildings:
A. All utility buildings and structures accessory to a tower or antenna shall be architecturally
designed to blend in with the surrounding environment and shall meet the minimum
setback requirements for accessory structures of the underlying zoning district, except that
the B-1 district, accessory structures shall only be allowed in the rear yard and shall
maintain a five foot property line setback.
B. Ground mounted equipment shall be screened from view by suitable vegetation, except
where a design of non-vegetative screening better reflects and complements the
architectural character of the surrounding neighborhood.
8. Antennas Mounted on Roofs, Walls, and Existing Towers:
A. The placement of personal wireless service antennas on roofs, walls, and existing towers
may be approved by the City, without a conditional use permit, provided the antennas meet
the requirements of this Ordinance, with a building permit approved by the appropriate
City staff. In addition to the submittal requirements required elsewhere in this Ordinance,
an application for a building permit for antennas to be mounted on an existing structure
shall be accompanied by the following information:
1. A site and building plan showing the location of construction of the antennas and
the proposed method of attaching them to the existing structure, and documenting
that the request meets the requirements of this Ordinance;
2. Certification by a qualified and licensed professional engineer indicating the
existing structure or towers ability to support the antenna.
9. Landscaping and Security Fencing:
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 91
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
A. The following requirements shall govern landscaping and fencing surrounding towers and
accessory structures supporting towers and antennas, within all zoning districts:
1. Where adequate vegetation is not present, all towers and mechanical equipment
facilities shall be landscaped around its perimeter. Landscaping shall consist of
trees that are opaque year round, and are a minimum of six feet in height and four
feet in diameter at time of planting, and placed 10 feet on center, except that no
landscaping is required at the entrance to the tower facility.
2. Existing mature tree growth and natural landforms on the site shall be preserved to
the maximum extent possible. Where natural vegetation around the perimeter of
the site would provide an adequate visual screen, an undisturbed buffer may be
utilized.
3. A chain link or wood fence, a minimum of six feet in height, shall surround the
perimeter of the tower and mechanical equipment area. If equipment is housed
within a completely enclosed building, fencing is not required. Fencing shall meet
the Citys fencing requirements under Section 708.1.2.3 of this Ordinance
4. Landscaping and fencing requirements may be waived by the City Council, if it is
found to not be necessary.
5. Amateur radio towers are exempt from the landscaping requirements.
10. Co-Location Requirement:
A. A proposal for a new personal wireless communication service tower shall not be approved
unless it can be documented by the applicant that the communications equipment planned
for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved tower or
building within a one mile radius of the proposed tower due to one or more of the
following reasons:
1. The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing or
approved tower or building as documented by a qualified and licensed structural
engineer licensed in the State of Minnesota, and the existing or approved tower
cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent
equipment at a reasonable cost.
2. Existing or approved towers and buildings within a one mile radius cannot
accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably
as documented by a qualified radio frequency engineer.
3. The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting the
usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower or building as
documented by a qualified and licensed engineer.
4. Other unforeseen reasons that make it unfeasible to locate the planned
telecommunications equipment upon an existing or approved tower or building.
5. The applicant must demonstrate that a good faith effort to co-locate on existing
towers and structures was made, but an agreement could not be reached.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 92
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
11. Existing and Damaged Towers and Antennas:
A. Towers, antennas and tower accessory buildings in existence as of the date of adoption of
this Section which do not conform to or comply with this Ordinance are subject to the
following provisions:
1. When any lawful non-conforming tower is damaged or destroyed by wind, fire,
flood, explosion, earthquake, war, riot or other similar peril to the extent of greater
than 50 percent of its estimated market value as indicated in the records of the
county assessor at the time of damage and no building permit has been applied for
within 180 days of when the tower is damaged it shall not be reconstructed except
in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance
12. Submittal Requirements:
A. The following shall be required for both Building Permits and Conditional Use Permits for
towers and their antennas:
1. A report from a qualified and licensed structural engineer licensed in the State of
Minnesota which does the following:
a. Describes the tower height and design including a cross section and
elevation;
b. Documents the height above grade for all potential mounting positions for
co-located antennas and the minimum separation distances between
antennas;
c. Describes the towers capacity, including the number and type of antennas
that it can accommodate;
d. Describes information on non-interference; and
e. Documentation that the telecommunications equipment planned for the
proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved
tower.
2. A certificate of survey and documentation which describes the following:
a. All existing conditions on the subject parcel.
b. All proposed features relating to the tower location, including the tower,
fencing, accessory structures, and driveways.
c. Landscaping and/or screening plans;
d. Legal description of the property;
e. Any additional information as deemed necessary by the Planning or
Building Department.
3. Before the issuance of a building permit, the following supplemental information
shall be submitted:
a. Confirmation that the proposed tower complies with the requirements of
the Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Communications
Commission, and any appropriate state review authority or that the tower
is exempt from those regulations; and
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 93
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
b. A report from a qualified professional engineer licensed in the State of
Minnesota which demonstrates the towers compliance with the State and
City structural and electrical, but not radio frequency, standards.
c. Any additional information as deemed necessary by the Planning or
Building Department.
13. Exemptions:
A. The following antennas are exempt from the requirements under this Section except as otherwise provided
in Subsection B, C & D of this Section:
1. Satellite earth station antennas that are two meters or less in diameter and located or proposed to be
located in a Business or Industrial District;
2. Antenna designed to receive signals as follows:
a. Antennas that are one meter or less in diameter and that are designed to
receive direct broadcast satellite service, including direct-to-home satellite
services;
b. Antennas that are one meter or less in diameter and that are designed to
receive video programming services via multipoint distribution services,
including multi-channel multipoint distribution services, instructional
television fixed services, and local multipoint distribution services; or
c. Antennas designed to receive television broadcast signals.
B. Residential District Standards. Satellite earth station antennas in excess of one meter in diameter and
antennas designed to receive direct broadcast services or multi-channel multipoint distribution services in
excess of one meter in diameter may be allowed as a conditional use within the residential zoning districts
of the City and, in addition to the requirements of this Section, shall comply with the following standards:
1. The lot on which the antenna is located shall be of sufficient size to assure that an
obstruction-free receive window can be maintained within the limits of the
property ownership;
2. Except where the antenna is screened by a structure exceeding the antenna height,
landscape buffering and screening shall be maintained on all sides of the antenna
in a manner in which growth of the landscape elements will not interfere with the
receive window;
3. The antenna is not greater than three meters in diameter; and
4. The conditional use permit provisions of this Section are considered and
determined to be satisfied.
C. Business District Standards. Satellite earth station antennas in excess of two meters in diameter and
antennas designed to receive direct broadcast services or multichannel multipoint distribution services in
excess of one meter in diameter are allowed as a conditional use within the B-1, B-2, and B-3 districts of
the City and, in addition to the requirements of this Section, shall comply with the following standards:
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 94
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
1. The lot on which the antenna is located shall be of sufficient size to assure that an
obstruction free transmit-receive window or windows can be maintained within the
limits of the property ownership;
2. Except where the antenna is screened by a structure exceeding the antenna height,
landscape buffering and screening shall be maintained on all sides of the antenna
in a manner in which growth of the landscape elements will not interfere with the
transmit-receive window; and
3. The conditional use permit provisions of this Section are considered and
determined to be satisfied.
D. Industrial District Standards. Satellite earth station antennas in excess of two meters in diameter and
antennas designed to receive direct broadcast services or multichannel multipoint distribution services in
excess of one meter in diameter may be allowed as a conditional use within the I-1 District of the City and,
in addition to the requirements of this Section, shall comply with the following standards:
1. The lot on which the antenna is located shall be of sufficient size to assure that an obstruction
free transmit-receive window or windows can be maintained within the limits of the property
ownership;
2. Except where the antenna is screened by a structure exceeding the antenna height, landscape
buffering and screening shall be maintained on all sides of the antenna in a manner in which
growth of the landscape elements will not interfere with the transmit-receive window; and
3. The conditional use permit provisions of this Section are considered and determined to be
satisfied.
731 Outdoor Wood-Fired Boilers
1. Purpose:
It is generally recognized that the types of fuel used, and the scale and duration of burning by outdoor wood
burning boilers, creates noxious and hazardous smoke, soot, fumes, odors and air pollution, can be
detrimental to citizens' health, and can deprive neighboring residents of the enjoyment of their property or
premises. Therefore, with the adoption of this article, it is the intention of the City to establish and impose
restrictions upon the construction and operation of outdoor wood burning boilers within the limits of the
City for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and
prosperity of the City and its inhabitants.
2. Prohibition:
No person shall install or allow the installation of an outdoor wood-fired boiler within the City.
732 Second Kitchen in a Single Family Dwelling
1. Purpose:
The purpose of this section is to establish use and development regulations for a second kitchen within a
single family residence. These regulations are adopted for the following purposes:
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 95
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
A. To allow City residents to have a second kitchen within a single family dwelling unit for
use by the family residing within the dwelling unit for the purpose of entertaining,
recreation or convenience, which is accessory to the first kitchen within the dwelling unit.
B. Approval of a second kitchen within a single family dwelling unit shall not be an approval
of a second dwelling unit or accessory dwelling unit.
2. Development Standards - Permitted Use:
A. A second kitchen in a single family residence (dwelling unit) may be allowed in the RL-90
Single Family Residential, RL-84 Single Family Residential, RL-70 Single Family
Residential, RM Medium Density Residential and RH High Density Residential zones if all
of the following requirements are met:
1. The residence shall have only one front entrance.
2. The residence shall have only one address.
3. An interior access shall be maintained to all parts of the residence to assure that an
accessory unit or apartment is not created. There shall be no keyed and dead bolt
locks or other manner of limiting or restricting access from the second kitchen to
the remainder of the residence.
4. The residence shall have no more than one electrical meter.
5. A second kitchen shall exist only as part of the primary structure and shall not be
installed in an accessory building/structure.
6. The residence owner shall sign a written document prescribed by the City which
declares that the residence will not be converted into two or more units without
meeting the requirements of this Ordinance to do so (if possible). The signature on
such a document shall be notarized and the document shall be recorded with the
County Recorders Office prior to issuance of a building permit. The permit fee
shall be set annually by the City Council.
7. Once a second kitchen is approved under the above criteria, both present and future
owners of the residence shall limit use of the single family residence to a single
family only. No roomers or boarders shall be permitted.
8. Construction of any such kitchen shall meet standards of the current building codes
adopted by the City.
B. A second kitchen shall not be established in a single family residential structure which
contains an accessory dwelling, whether or not such accessory dwelling was established
legally.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 96
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
733 Outdoor Seating for Restaurants and Drinking Establishments
1. Restaurants, drinking establishments, and restaurants, may provide outdoor seating for their patrons
with an approved Conditional Use Permit provided that the following requirements are met:
2. For all establishments:
A. The seating shall be located on private property and outside of any recorded easement areas
and demonstrated on a site plan.
B. The seating shall consist of good quality patio or caf type furniture that enhances the
appearance of the business.
C. No beverages or food shall be served to persons outside of the designated outdoor seating
area.
D. The seating area, if not slab on grade, shall be subject to applicable setback requirements.
E. The seating area shall have a permanent surface of concrete, asphalt, wood or other
fabricated construction material.
F. The seating shall be located so as not to compromise safety. Seating shall not obstruct the
entrance or any required exits or be located on landscaping or parking areas. If located on
private sidewalks or walkways, it shall be located so as to leave a minimum of a four foot
(4) wide passageway for pedestrians. Applicable building and fire codes for ingress and
egress shall be met.
G. No additional parking is required for 30 outdoor seats or less. Any additional seating over
30 seats shall provide required parking based on one space per three seats.
H. The outdoor seating area shall be subordinate to the principal use and shall not exceed 40
percent of the square footage of the principal use building space.
I. Noises on the outdoor seating area shall be subject to City Code Section 92.18(S).
J. Lighting shall be permitted to the extent that it only illuminates the designed area.
Lighting must otherwise meet the standards listed in Section 704 of this Ordinance for
Glare.
K. The business owner or designated person shall inspect the premises on a daily basis
including all adjacent streets, sidewalks, alleys, parking areas and sidewalks within 100
feet and remove all litter. Appropriate receptacles for rubbish, garbage, cigarette
paraphernalia, etc. must be provided in close proximity to the outdoor seating area.
L. Additional conditions may be imposed by the City and listed on the approved conditional
use permit including but not limited to hours of outdoor seating area use and additional
screening or buffering to residential zoned or used areas.
M. No external music, live or recorded, shall be allowed after 10:00PM. It also shall not be
audible from a distance of more than 50 from the edge of the defined patio area at any
time.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 97
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
3. For establishments with liquor licenses the following regulations apply in addition to those listed
above:
A. The seating shall be located in a compact and contiguous location to the principal structure.
No alcoholic beverages shall be served or consumed in an outdoor seating area unless the
liquor license approved by the City specifies the compact and contiguous location.
B. The outdoor seating area shall be defined with the use of landscaping and permanent
attractive fencing which is a minimum of four feet in height with at least 50 percent
opacity that contains the tables and chairs for the use as demonstrated on a site plan. It
shall also prohibit the free passage of any person or substance from the area.
C. No alcoholic beverages shall be served to persons outside of the designated outdoor seating
area or those not seated at tables. Signage shall be posted that restricts consumption of
alcohol outside of the designated outdoor seating area as approved by the Conditional Use
Permit.
D. Bars are prohibited in outdoor seating areas (with the exception of a service bar for the
exclusive use of the establishments employees).
E. Patrons shall only access the outdoor seating area through the interior of the main building
and seated by wait staff if at full service restaurants. No other ingress or egress shall be
allowed other than required emergency exits.
734 Land and Water Preservation
1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Section is to ensure that sensitive physical features such as bluff land, ravines, wetlands
and natural waterways are protected.
2. Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control.
A. General Standards.
1. All development shall conform to the natural limitations presented by the
topography and soil in order to create the best potential for preventing soil erosion.
2. Slopes over 30 percent in grade shall not be used as a building site.
3. Development on slopes with a grade between 20 percent and 30 percent shall be
carefully reviewed to ensure adequate measures have been taken to prevent
erosion, sedimentation and structural damage.
4. Erosion and siltation control measures, as determined by the City Engineer, shall
be coordinated with the different stages of development. Appropriate control
measures shall be installed prior to development when necessary to control
erosion.
5. Land shall be developed in increments of workable size such that adequate erosion
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 98
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
and siltation controls can be provided as construction progresses. The smallest
practical area of land shall be exposed at any one period of time and no exposure
shall exceed the requirements of the NPDES Construction Stormwater Permit. For
sites not controlled by the NPDES Construction Stormwater Permit, no exposure
shall exceed 65 days unless extended by the City Council.
6. Where the topsoil is removed, sufficient arable soil shall be set aside for respreading
over the disturbed area or new topsoil shall be brought in. The topsoil
shall be restored to a depth of four inches and shall be of a quality at least equal to
the sod quality prior to development.
7. Public and private properties and water bodies adjacent to the development site
shall be protected from the effects of erosion, sedimentation, flooding or other
damage caused by the development or construction activity. Any violations of this
provision must be corrected by the owner to the satisfaction of the City within five
days of receiving notification of such. If the violation is not remedied within the
time period specified, the City may correct the problem and assess the costs
incurred to the property owner.
8. All land disturbing activities, whether requiring a permit under these Ordinances or
otherwise, shall be undertaken in conformance with best management practices
and in compliance with the standards and criteria in these Ordinances.
a. Land disturbing activities shall be planned and conducted to minimize the
extent of disturbed area, runoff velocities and erosion potential, and to
reduce and delay runoff volumes. Erosion and runoff controls, consistent
with Best Management Practices (BMPs), shall be properly installed
before commencing land disturbing activities, shall be sufficient to retain
sediment on-site, and shall not be removed without approval. Erosion and
runoff controls shall be regularly inspected and maintained. Vegetation
shall be installed over the disturbed areas promptly if the land disturbing
activity ceases or is suspended, and upon completion. Pipe outlets must be
provided with temporary or permanent energy dissipation if connected to
surface water.
b. Whenever the City determines that any land disturbing activity has become
a hazard to any person, or endangers the property of another, adversely
affects water quality or any water body, increases flooding, or otherwise
violates this Ordinance, the owner of the land upon which the land
disturbing activity is located, or other person or agent in control of such
land, upon receipt of written notice from the City, shall within the time
period specified therein repair or eliminate such condition. The owner of
the land upon which a land disturbing activity is located shall be
responsible for the cleanup and any damages from sediment that has
eroded from such land. The City may require the owner to obtain a permit
from the City under this Ordinance before undertaking any repairs or
restoration.
c. Erosion and sediment control measures shall meet the standard for the
General Permit Authorization to Discharge Storm Water Associated With
Construction Activity Under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 99
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
System/State Disposal System Permit Program Permit MN R100001
(NPDES General Construction Permit) issued by the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency, August 1 2003, as amended; except where more specific
requirements are provided in this Ordinance below.
d. If the activity is taking place on a site where the soils are currently
disturbed (e.g. a tilled agricultural site that is being developed), areas that
will not be disturbed as part of the development and areas that will not be
disturbed according to the time frames and slopes specified in the NPDES
General Construction permit Part IV.B.2, shall be seeded with temporary
or permanent cover before commencing the proposed land disturbing
activity.
e. Where five or more acres of disturbed soil drain to a common location, a
temporary (or permanent) sediment basin must be provided prior to the
runoff leaving the site or entering surface waters. The basins must be
designed and constructed according to the standards in the NPDES
General Construction Permit Part III.B.
f. The permittee or applicant must ensure final stabilization of the site in
accordance with the NPDES General Construction Permit requirements.
The site will be considered as having achieved final stabilization following
submission of Certificate of Completion by the permittee or applicant, and
inspection and approval by the City.
9. All on-site stormwater conveyance channels shall be designed and constructed to
withstand the expected velocity of flow from a 100-year frequency storm without
erosion.
B. Exposed Slopes.
The following control measures shall be taken to control erosion during construction.
1. No exposed slopes shall be steeper in grade than five feet horizontal to one foot
vertical unless stabilized as describe below. This does not apply to utility
construction.
2. At the foot of each exposed slope, a channel and berm shall be constructed to
control runoff. The channeled water should be diverted to a sedimentation basin
(debris basin, silt or silt trap) before being allowed to enter the natural drainage
system.
3. Along the top of each exposed slope, a berm shall be constructed to prevent runoff
from flowing over the edge of the slope. Where runoff collecting behind said berm
cannot be diverted elsewhere and must be directed down the slope, appropriate
measures shall be taken to prevent erosion. Such measures shall consist of either
an asphalt-paved flow apron and drop chute laid down the slope or a flexible slope
drain. At the base of the slope drain or flow apron, a gravel energy dissipater shall
be installed to prevent erosion at the discharge end.
4. Exposed slopes shall be protected to whatever means will effectively prevent
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 100
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
erosion considering the degree of slope, soils material and expected length of
exposure. Slope protection shall consist of mulch, sheets of plastic, burlap or jute
netting, sod blankets, fast growing grasses or temporary seeding of annual grasses.
Mulch consists of hay, straw, wood chips, cornstalks, bark or other protective
material. Mulch shall be anchored to slopes with stakes, and netting, or shall be
worked into the soil to provide additional slope stability.
5. Control measures, other than those specifically stated above, may be used in place
of the above measures if it can be demonstrated they will as effectively protect
exposed slopes.
3. Preservation of Natural Drainageways.
A. Waterways.
1. The natural drainage system shall be used as far as is feasible for storage and flow
of runoff water. Untreated stormwater drainage may be discharged to retention
basins or other treatment facilities. Only treated stormwater may be discharged to
wetlands, marshlands or swamps. Diversion of treated stormwater to wetlands,
marshlands or swamps shall be considered for existing or planned surface
drainage. Marshlands and swamps used for treated stormwater shall provide for
natural or artificial water level control. Temporary storage areas or retention
basins scattered throughout developed areas shall be encouraged in order to reduce
peak flow, erosion damage and construction cost.
2. The widths of a constructed waterway shall be sufficiently large to channel runoff
from a 100 year storm. Adequacy shall be determined by the expected runoff
when full development of the drainage area is reached.
3. No fences or structures shall be constructed across the waterway that will reduce or
restrict the flow of water.
4. The banks of the waterway shall be protected with permanent vegetation.
5. The banks of the waterway should not exceed five feet horizontal to one foot
vertical in gradient.
6. The gradient of the waterway bed should not exceed a grade that will result in a
velocity that will cause erosion of the banks of the waterway.
7. When possible, existing natural watercourses and vegetated soil surfaces shall be
used to convey, store, filter and retain runoff before discharge into public waters or
a stormwater conveyance system. If the waterway must be constructed, the bed of
the waterway should be protected with turf, sod or other approved stabilizing
materials. If turf or sod will not function properly, rip rap may be used.
8. If the flow velocity in the waterway is such that erosion of the turf sidewall will
occur and said velocity cannot be decreased via velocity control structures, then
other materials may replace turf on the side walls. Either gravel or rip rap would
be allowed to prevent erosion at these points.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 101
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
9. Development of housing and other structures shall be restricted as stated in this
Ordinance.
B. Sediment Control of Waterways.
1. To prevent sedimentation of waterways, sediment control structures shall be
incorporated throughout the contributing watershed. Such structures would serve
as temporary sediment control features during the construction state of
development.
2. Sediment control structures consist of sediment basins (debris basins, de-silting
basins or silt traps) and shall be utilized to remove sediment from runoff prior to its
disposal in any permanent body of water.
4. Wetland Preservation.
A. General Provisions and Policy.
To the extent possible, all wetlands shall be retained in their natural state to serve as natural water
ecosystems and also as wildlife habitat. The rules and regulations applicable to wetlands and set
forth by the Minnesota Wetland Conservation Act and Minnesota Clean Water Act are hereby
incorporated.
It is the policy of the City to:
1. Achieve no net loss of wetlands in the City, in conformance with the Minnesota
Wetland Conservation Act (WCA) and associated rules (Minnesota Rules Chapter
8420).
2. Encourage wetland avoidance for all new developments and land disturbing
activities.
3. Require mitigation of unavoidable wetland disturbance by replacing the lost
wetland functions and values in the same major watershed with a wetland of equal
or greater value.
4. Require transportation projects to pursue wetland mitigation projects to the extent
practical along the transportation corridor. (This does not preclude the use of the
BWSR Replacement Program.)
5. Identify and preserve wetlands for water retention, recharge, soil conservation,
wildlife habitat, aesthetics, and natural enhancement of water quality.
6. Manage changes in volume and quality of local stormwater systems to minimize
negative impacts to existing wetland functions, value, or biological diversity.
7. Replace affected wetlands where avoidance is not feasible and prudent.
B. Discharges into Wetlands.
1. No part of any sewage disposal system requiring on-land or in-ground disposal of
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 102
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
waste shall be located closer than 150 feet from the normal high water mark unless
it is proven by the applicant that no effluent will immediately or gradually reach
the wetland because of existing physical characteristics of the site or the system.
2. Organic and other waste which would normally be disposed of at a solid waste
disposal site or which would normally be discharged into a sewage disposal system
or sewer shall not be directly or indirectly discharged to the wetland.
3. Stormwater runoff from construction sites may be directed to the wetland only
when substantially free of silt, debris and chemical pollutants and only at rates that
will not disturb vegetation or increase turbidity.
C. Building Constraints.
1. The lowest floor elevation of buildings if used for living quarters or work area
shall be at least two (2) feet above the seasonal high water level of any/all
wetland(s) in the vicinity.
2. Development that will result in unusual road maintenance costs or utility line
breakages due to soil limitations, including high frost action, shall not be
permitted.
3. The minimum setback for all buildings shall be 50 feet from the seasonal high
water level of any/all wetland(s) in the vicinity.
D. Regulations.
1. No person or political subdivision shall drain, fill, excavate or otherwise alter a
wetland or public waters wetland without first obtaining the approval of a wetland
replacement plan from the local government unit with jurisdiction over the activity.
2. For any parcel created or redeveloped after the effective date of this Ordinance, a
buffer shall be maintained around the perimeter of all wetlands and public waters
wetlands. The buffer provisions of this Ordinance shall not apply to any parcel of
record as of the date of this Ordinance until such parcel is subdivided or
developed. The City of New Prague has been enforcing a 40 wetland buffer since
2002.
3. The buffer portions of this Ordinance do not apply to any wetland or public waters
wetland with a surface area equal to or less than the area of wetland impact
allowed without replacement as de minimus under the Wetland Conservation Act
(WCA), and to those portions of wetlands that will be filled under approved
wetland replacement plans per the WCA.
E. Criteria.
1. Any drainage, filling, excavation or other alteration of a public waters wetland or
wetland shall be conducted in compliance with Minnesota Statutes, section
103G.245, the WCA, and regulations adopted thereunder.
2. A public waters wetland or wetland may be used for storm water storage and
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 103
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
treatment only if the use will not adversely affect the function and public value of
the wetland as determined by the City.
3. Wetland replacement/mitigation sighting must follow the priority order below:
a. Mitigation on-site.
b. Mitigation within the same subwatershed.
c. Mitigation within the Scott Watershed Management Organization
boundaries.
d. Mitigation within Scott County/ Le Sueur County.
e. Mitigation within the same major watershed.
4. A wetlands functional assessment for vegetative diversity must be completed with
each wetland, and public waters wetlands, delineated for a project and buffers
established according to the following table. The functional assessment and
wetland rankings will be determined using the Minnesota Routine Assessment
Method version 3.0 (MnRAM 3.0, as amended). Rankings are summarized as
follows.
Buffer
Requirement
Exceptional High Medium Low Stormwater
Ponds
Average Buffer
Width
65 feet 50 feet 35 feet 25 feet 0
Minimum Buffer
Width
25 feet 25 feet 25 feet 25 feet 0*
*Must have a building setback of minimum 50 feet from delineated edge of wetland and elevated as
necessary to meet the requirements of this Ordinance.
Exceptional Wetland  Wetlands assigned the exceptional rating using MnRAM 3.0 for evaluating
wetland functions. These wetlands are most susceptible to human impacts, are most unique, have the
highest community resources significance such as rare species habitats, and similar characteristics.
High Wetland  Wetlands assigned the high rating using MnRAM 3.0 for evaluating wetland functions.
These wetlands are relatively undisturbed but exhibit evidence of more disturbance or degradation than
Exceptional wetlands. High wetlands have conditions and functions that are susceptible to human impacts,
are connected to other wetlands or watercourses, and may contain locally significant or rare wetland types.
Moderate Wetlands  Wetlands assigned a moderate rating using MnRAM 3.0 for evaluating wetland
functions. These wetlands typically provide a diversity of habitats, and are connected to other wetland or
upland habitats to provide wildlife habitat.
Low Wetlands  Wetlands assigned a low rating using the MnRAM 3.0 for evaluating wetland functions.
These wetlands tend to be less susceptible to further impacts than the other wetland management
classifications. They also have low diversity and connectivity to other wetlands and watercourses.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 104
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
Stormwater Ponds  are designated strictly for treating and retaining stormwater.
5. All structures shall have a minimum set-back of 50 feet from the delineated edge
of wetlands and public waters wetlands.
6. The first 25 feet of a wetland buffer as measured from the wetland or public waters
wetland cannot be disturbed during project construction (i.e., cleared or graded,
except for temporary disturbances for public roads and utility construction) and
must be protected from disturbance with temporary fencing prior to construction.
Vegetation can be replaced and site soils preparation work completed within this
first 25 feet if necessary to establish acceptable vegetation in accordance with
(Section 4, (E)(8)) of this Ordinance.
7. Buffer requirements shall apply whether or not the wetland or public waters
wetland is on the same parcel as a proposed development. An applicant is required
to delineate the boundary for any wetland or public waters wetland on the project
land. An applicant shall not be required to delineate wetlands on adjacent
property, but must review available information to estimate the wetland boundary.
8. Buffer vegetation shall be established and maintained as follows:
a. Where acceptable natural vegetation exists in buffer areas, the retention of
such vegetation in an undisturbed state is required unless an applicant
receives approval to replace such vegetation. A buffer has acceptable
natural vegetation if it:
1) Has a continuous, dense layer of perennial grasses that has been
uncultivated or unbroken for at least five consecutive years; or
2) Has an overstory of trees or shrubs that has been uncultivated or
unbroken for at least five consecutive years; or
3) Contains a mixture of the plant communities described in this
Ordinance above that has been uncultivated or unbroken for at
least five years.
b. Notwithstanding the performance standards set forth in of this Ordinance,
the City may determine existing buffer vegetation unacceptable if:
1) It is composed of undesirable plant species including but not
limited to common buckthorn, purple loosestrife, leafy spurge or
noxious weeds; or
2) It has topography that tends to channelize the flow of runoff; or
3) For some other reason it is unlikely to retain nutrients and
sediment.
c. Where buffers are not vegetated or have been cultivated or otherwise
disturbed within five years of the permit application, such areas shall be
replanted and maintained. The buffer plantings must be identified on the
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 105
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
permit application. The buffer landscaping shall comply with the
following standards:
1) Buffers shall be planted with a seed mix approved by MnDOT,
BWSR, NRCS or SWCD, with the exception of a one-time
planting with an annual nurse or cover crop such as oats or rye.
2) The seed mix shall be broadcast according to MnDOT, BWSR,
NRCS or SWCD specifications of the selected mix. The annual
nurse cover crop shall be applied at a minimum rate of 30 pounds
per acre. The MnDOT, BWSR, or NRCS seed mix selected for
permanent cover shall be appropriate for the soil site conditions
and free of invasive species.
3) Native shrubs may be substituted for native forbs. All
substitutions must be approved by the City. Such shrubs may be
bare root seedlings and shall be planted at a minimum rate of 60
plants per acre. Shrubs shall be distributed so as to provide a
natural appearance and shall not be planted in rows.
4) Any groundcover or shrub plantings installed within the buffer are
independent of any landscaping required elsewhere by the City.
5) Grasses and forbs shall be seeded or planted using a method of
application that shall be approved by the City prior to planting or
seeding.
6) No fertilizer shall be used in establishing new buffers, except on
highly disturbed sites when necessary to establish acceptable
buffer vegetation and then limited to amounts indicated by an
accredited soil testing laboratory.
7) All seeded areas shall be mulched immediately with clean straw at
a rate of 1.5 tons per acre. Mulch shall be anchored with a disk or
tackifier.
8) Buffers (both natural and created) shall be protected by erosion
and sediment control measures during construction in accordance
with (Section 2) of this Ordinance. The erosion and sediment
control measures shall remain in place until the area crop is
established.
d. Buffer vegetation shall be established and maintained in accordance with
the requirements found in this Ordinance. During the first 2 full growing
seasons, the owner must replant any buffer vegetation that does not
survive. The owner shall be responsible for reseeding/or replanting if the
buffer changes at any time through human intervention or activities. At a
minimum the buffer must be maintained as a no mow area.
9. When a buffer is required the applicant shall, as a condition to issuance of a
permit:
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 106
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
a. Submit to the City for its approval a conservation easement for protection
of approved buffers, or include the buffer in a dedicated outlot as part of
platting and subdivision approval. The easement shall describe the
boundaries of the wetland or public waters wetland and buffer, identify the
monuments and monument locations, and prohibit any the alterations set
forth in (Section 4, (E) (10) of this Ordinance below and the removal of
the buffer monuments within the buffer, wetland, or public waters wetland.
Outlot descriptions shall provide for an equivalent level of protection of
the buffer and prohibit any alterations set forth in (Section 4, (E) (10) of
this Ordinance below.
b. File the approved easement for record and submit evidence thereof to the
City, or complete preliminary and final plats including dedicated outlot(s);
and
c. Install the signage required by (Section 4, (E) (12)) of this Ordinance
below.
10. Subject to the requirements of this Ordinance below, alterations including building,
storage, paving, mowing, plowing, introduction of noxious vegetation, cutting,
dredging, filling, mining, dumping, grazing livestock, agricultural production, yard
waste disposal or fertilizer application, are prohibited within any buffer. Noxious
vegetation, such as European buckthorn, purple loosestrife and reed canary grass,
may be removed. Permitted alterations would not include plantings that enhance
the natural vegetation or selective clearing or pruning of trees or vegetation that are
dead, diseased or pose similar hazards.
11. The following activities shall be permitted with any buffer, and shall not constitute
prohibited alterations under this Ordinance above:
a. Use and maintenance of an unimproved access strip through the buffer, not
more than 20 feet in width, for recreational access to the watercourse or
wetland and the exercise of riparian rights;
b. Placement, maintenance, repair or replacement of public roads, and utility
and drainage systems that exist on creation of the buffer or are required to
comply with any subdivision approval or building permit obtained from
the City or County, so long as any adverse impacts of public road, utility
and drainage systems on the function of the buffer have been avoided or
minimized to the extent practical;
c. Construction, maintenance, repair, reconstruction or replacement of
existing and future public roads within a buffer, so long as any adverse
impacts of the road on the function of the buffer have been avoided or
minimized to the extent practical.
d. Clearing, grading and seeding is allowed if part of an approved wetland
replacement plan.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 107
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
12. Buffers shall be signed to clearly designate the boundaries of all buffers within
new residential developments. A sign shall be required at each parcel line where it
crosses a buffer strip and shall have a maximum spacing of 200 feet along the edge
of the buffer. Additional signs shall be placed as necessary to accurately define the
edge of the buffer. A sign shall consist of a post and a buffer sign. The signs shall
be obtained from the City and includes warnings about fines for disturbing and/or
developing buffers. The signs shall be a minimum of 12 inches wide by 12 inches
vertical, and shall be securely mounted on a post to a minimum height of 4 feet
above grade.
13. Other activities which would change the character of a wetland shall not diminish
the quantity, quality or biological diversity of the wetland.
14. A land disturbing activity within a wetland may require a permit under (Section
734) of this Ordinance.
15. An activity within a wetland that alters or fills a floodplain may require a permit
under (Section 734) of this Ordinance.
5. Bluff Preservation
A. Criteria
Minimum Bluff Standards: Any land disturbing activity, development or the redevelopment of land
in a Bluff Overlay District shown on Map 1: Bluff Overlay District of Scott County WMO shall
require a topographic survey to determine if a bluff is present. At its discretion, the City may
waive the topographic survey requirement where a review of the available contour information
clearly indicates a bluff is not present.
1. Where bluffs deemed unsuitable for land disturbance activity are present, the
following rules shall apply:
a. All grading, clear cutting, removal of vegetation and/or other land
disturbing activities are prohibited in the bluff impact zone and bluff face;
b. Access to any buildings (except stairways and landings) shall not be
placed within the bluff impact zone;
c. Setback from top or toe of bluff to any structure in any district shall be no
less than 30 feet;
d. All storm water ponds, swales, infiltration basins, or other soil saturationtype
features shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from the top of bluff.
2. For those bluffs deemed suitable for land disturbance activity, the following rules
shall apply:
a. Grading, clear cutting, removal of vegetation and/or other land disturbing
activities may be allowed within the bluff impact zone provided the
activity is in compliance with the storm water management plans
minimum performance standards. The Plan shall, at a minimum, require
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 108
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
the following:
1) The identification of any bluff preservation areas where
disturbance would be prohibited by the City Code.
2) The minimum erosion and sediment control BMPs include site
stabilization and slope restoration measures needed to ensure the
proposed activity shall not result in:
-Adverse impact to adjacent and/or downstream properties or
water bodies;
-Unstable slope conditions; or
-Degradation of water quality due to erosion, sedimentation,
flooding and other damage as stated in this Ordinance.
3) Prohibit all activities that would result in disturbances or
destabilization of the fluff face.
4) Preservation of existing hydrology and drainage patterns. Land
disturbing activities shall not result in any new water discharge
points along the bluff.
b. The following activities shall be permitted within the fluff face, and shall
not constitute prohibited activities under this Ordinance.
1) Maintenance, repair or replacement of public roads, and utility and
drainage systems that exist on creation of the Bluff Overlay
District.
2) Disturbances that are part of a City-approved plan to repair, grade
or re-slope existing bluff faces that are eroding or unstable as
necessary to establish stable slopes and vegetation.
3) Vertical cuts into the bluff face up to 10 vertical feet, measured
from the existing top of bluff, provided that no storm water is
directed over the bluff face and storm water runoff, including roof
drainage, is collected and conveyed to a stable discharge point.
4) Plantings that enhance the natural vegetation or the selective
clearing of noxious, exotic or invasive vegetation or the pruning of
trees or vegetation that are dead, diseased or pose similar hazards.
B. Standards for City-Sponsored Projects
The City must demonstrate that any City-proposed activity in the bluff does not: 1) impact adjacent
properties, 2) result in unstable slope conditions and, 3) result in the degradation of water bodies
from erosion, sedimentation, flooding and other damage as stated in (Section 2, (A) (6, 7, 8, and
9)).
C. Exceptions
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 109
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
1. Where the City has determined mining is appropriate, mining activities shall be
exempt from (Section 6, (A) (1)&(2)) provided that:
a. An extractive use site development and restoration plan is developed,
approved by the City, and followed over the course of the project;
b. The mining operation is conducted in such a manner as to minimize
interference with the surface water drainage outside of the boundaries of
the mining operation;
c. That erosion and sediment control is provided in a manner consistent with
(Section 2, (A)) of this Ordinance; and
d. The landowner complies with all other applicable state and local
regulations governing mining.
2. Disturbances, grading or re-grading of abandoned mine slopes necessary to
establish stable slopes and vegetation are exempt from this Section.
3. For the purposes of constructing public improvement projects, land disturbances
in the bluff impact zone and bluff Face may be permitted provided that the project
proposed demonstrates to the City an appropriate need for these activities to occur
and that avoidance and minimization sequencing was followed.
6. Groundwater Preservation.
The City has a Wellhead Protection Plan. A Wellhead Protection Area (WHPA) was delineated in this plan
and is shown on the plan in Figure 1: WHPAS and DWSMA  WELLHEAD PROTECTION PLAN 
PART II.
A. Policy
Groundwater is the primary source of potable water for the residents of the City. It is the policy of
the City to:
1. Support identification and reduction of groundwater contamination from both point
and nonpoint sources;
2. Require that all ISTS on a property be removed once sanitary sewer service is
available to the property;
3. Continue to support programs that promote efficient administration of groundwater
pollution programs;
4. Target high priority water bodies for water quality projects: including working
with those waters listed as impaired by the MPCA for listing under Section
303(d) of the Clean Water Act. These include waters listed for excess nutrients
and fecal coliform bacteria where failing individual sewage treatment systems and
contaminated groundwater contribute to the impairment;
5. To allow constructed infiltration practices within the Wellhead Protection Area,
within 400 feet of a community water system or within 100 feet of a private well.
B. Regulation
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 110
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
The City requires all ISTS on a property be removed once sanitary sewer service is available to the
property. If sanitary sewer service is not available to the property, the City shall require all known
non-compliant individual sewage treatment systems in the 10-year capture area of Wellhead
Protection Area (WHPA) to be upgraded to conform to Minnesota Rule Chapter 7080 within three
years of adoption of this Ordinance.
C. Exceptions
An exception may be granted by the City where non-compliant systems will be provided with
municipal sewer service within five years. However, in no case should noncompliant systems
remain in violation for more than five years from the date of establishment of this Ordinance or
five years of establishment of the wellhead protection area.
7. Storm Water Management
A. Findings.
The City hereby finds that uncontrolled and inadequately planned use of wetlands, woodlands,
natural habitat areas, areas subject to soil erosion and areas containing restrictive soils adversely
affects the public health, safety and general welfare by impacting water quality and contributing to
other environmental problems, creating nuisances, impairing other beneficial uses of environmental
resources and hindering the ability of the City of New Prague to provide adequate water, sewage,
flood control and other community services. In addition, extraordinary public expenditures may be
required for the protection of persons and property in such areas and in areas that may be affected
by unplanned land usage.
B. Purpose.
The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote, preserve and enhance the natural resources within the
City. The City will protect water quality and unique and fragile environmentally sensitive land
from adverse effects occasioned by poorly sited development or incompatible activities by
regulating land disturbances or development activities. The Ordinances purpose is also to control
or eliminate storm water pollution along with soil erosion and sedimentation in the City. The City
intends to minimize conflicts and encourage compatibility between land disturbances and
development activities, and water quality and environmentally sensitive lands. The City will do this
by requiring detailed review standards and procedures for land disturbing or development activities
proposed for such areas, thereby achieving a balance between urban growth and development and
protection of water quality and natural areas. This Ordinance establishes standards and
specifications for conservation practices and planning activities, which minimize storm water
pollution, soil erosion and sedimentation.
C. Scope and Effect.
1. Applicability.
All applicants shall comply with current NPDES/SDS permitting requirements. No permit
shall be issued until approval of the storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) or a
waiver of the approval requirement has been obtained from the City in conformance with
the provisions of this Section. At a minimum, these pollution abatement practices must
conform to those in the current version of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agencys
publication Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 111
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
2. Exemptions.
The provisions of this Section do not apply to:
a. Any land disturbing activity for which plans have been approved by the
City within six months prior to the effective date of this Section;
b. A lot for which a building permit has been approved on or before the
effective date of this Section, provided that improvements are completed
in compliance with previous approvals;
c. Installation of fences, signs, telephone and electric poles and other kinds of
posts or poles;
d. Emergency work to protect life, limb or property; or
e. Projects involving less than 500 cubic yards of material.
3. General Policy.
For rivers and streams, storm water discharge rates from storm water treatment basins shall
not increase over the predevelopment two year, 10 year and 100 year peak storm discharge
rates. Also, accelerated channel erosion must not occur as a result of the proposed activity.
All on-site storm water conveyance channels shall be designed and constructed to
withstand the expected velocity of flow from a 100-year frequency storm without erosion.
As land is annexed into the City, the land being annexed carries with it the existing
condition.
4. Grading Plan.
The storm water pollution prevention plans measures, the limit of disturbed surface and
the location of buffer areas shall be marked on the approved grading plan, and identified
with flags, stakes, signs etc. on the development site before work begins.
D. Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan Approval Procedures.
1. Application.
A written application for storm water pollution prevention plan approval, along with the
proposed storm water pollution prevention plan, shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator and shall include a statement indicating the grounds upon which the
approval is requested, that the proposed use is permitted by right or as an exception in the
underlying zoning district, and adequate evidence showing that the proposed use will
conform to the standards set forth in this Section. Prior to applying for approval of a storm
water pollution prevention plan, an applicant may have the storm water pollution
prevention plan reviewed by the appropriate departments of the City.
Two sets of clearly legible blue or black lined copies of drawings and required information
shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator and shall be accompanied by a receipt
evidencing the payment of all required fees for processing and approval as set forth and a
bond if required.
Drawings shall be prepared to scale appropriate to the site of the project and suitable for
the review to be performed.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 112
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
2. Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan.
At a minimum, a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) must contain the
following information:
a. Existing Site Map: A map of existing site conditions showing the site and
immediately adjacent areas, including:
1) The name and address of the applicant; a legal description of the
property directly associated with the request; north point; date;
scale of drawing; and number of sheets;
2) Location of the tract by an insert map at a scale sufficient to
clearly identify the location of the property and giving such
information as the names and numbers of adjoining roads,
railroads, utilities, subdivisions, towns and districts or other
landmarks;
3) Existing topography with a contour interval appropriate to the
topography of the land;
4) A delineation of all streams, rivers, public waters, and wetlands
located on and immediately adjacent to the site, including depth of
water, a description of vegetation which may be found in the
water, a statement of general water quality, and any classification
given to the water body or wetland by the Minnesota Department
of Natural Resources, the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, or
the United States Army Corps of Engineers;
5) Location and dimensions of existing storm water drainage systems
and natural drainage patterns on and immediately adjacent to the
site delineating in which direction and at what rate storm water is
conveyed from the site, identifying the receiving stream, river,
public water, or wetland, and setting forth those areas of the
unaltered site where storm water collects;
6) Vegetative cover and clearly delineating any vegetation proposed
for removal; and,
7) 100 year floodplains, flood fringes and floodways.
b. Site Construction Plan: A site construction plan including:
1) Locations and dimensions of all proposed land disturbing activities
and any phasing of those activities;
2) Locations and dimensions of all temporary soil or dirt stockpiles;
3) Locations and dimensions of all construction site erosion control
measures necessary to meet the requirements of this Section;
4) Schedule of anticipated starting and completion dates of each land
disturbing activity including the installation of construction site
erosion control measures needed to meet the requirements of this
Section; and
5) Provisions for maintenance of the construction site erosion control
measures during construction.
c. Plan of Final Site Conditions: A plan of final site conditions on the same
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 113
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
scale as the existing site map showing the site changes including:
1) Finished grading shown at contours at the same interval as
provided above or as required to clearly indicate the relationship
of proposed changes to existing topography and remaining
features;
2) A drainage plan of the developed site delineating in which
direction and at what rate storm water will be conveyed from the
site and settling forth the areas of the site where storm water will
be allowed to collect;
3) The proposed size, alignment and intended use of any structures to
be erected on the site; and
4) Any other information pertinent to the particular project, which in
the opinion of the applicant, is necessary for the review of the
project.
E. Criteria.
Stormwater pollution prevention plans shall comply with the following criteria:
1. A hydrograph method based on sound hydrologic theory must be used to analyze
runoff for the design or analysis of flows and water levels. Hydrologic models and
design methodologies used for the determination of runoff and analysis of storm
water management structures shall be approved by the City Engineer. Plan
specification and computations for storm water management facilities submitted
for review shall be sealed and signed by a registered professional engineer. All
computations shall appear on the plans submitted for review, unless otherwise
approved by the City Engineer.
2. Runoff rates for the proposed activities, development or redevelopment within the
City shall:
a. Not exceed existing runoff rates for the two-year, 10-year and 100-year
critical duration storm events;
b. Not accelerate on or off-site water course erosion, downstream nuisance,
flooding or damage as demonstrated by the applicant according to this
Ordinance below; and
c. Runoff rates may be restricted to less than the existing rates when
necessary for the public health, safety and general welfare of the City.
3. As land is annexed into the City, the land being annexed carries with it the existing
condition. Parcels developed after the date of this Ordinance within
unincorporated areas will be regulated using pre-settlement conditions and this
would then become the existing condition for the City once the area is annexed. If
agricultural land is annexed, agriculture is the existing condition. If roads or
streets are present, they are considered to be part of the existing condition.
4. An assessment of the potential for adverse impacts downstream of site
improvements, whether on- or off-site, is required except when the proposed
activity, development or redevelopment is less than 20 acres and less than eight
percent of the site is covered by impervious surface, or when the rate control
provisions of this Ordinance, as applicable, are met; and the proposed activity,
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 114
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
development or redevelopment does not increase runoff volume for the two-year
critical duration event (not including snow melt). To demonstrate that the
proposed activity does not accelerate on or off-site erosion, downstream nuisance,
flooding or damage, the applicant must complete an evaluation downstream to the
point where the proposed activity is 10 percent of the drainage area (e.g. a 10 acre
development must evaluate downstream to the point where the drainage area is 100
acres). The evaluation at a minimum must consist of an assessment as described in
Scott County WMO Rule D.
a. Potential impacts to areas surrounding landlocked lakes or ponds, or lakes
or ponds with inadequate outlets where flood levels would be increased by
added runoff volume.
1) Evaluations must include:
An assessment of water levels in the water body resulting from the
contributing watersheds full annual runoff yield during a 100-year
wet year using the Simplified Hydrologic Yield Method (SHYM),
or more rigorous methods for back to back 100-year critical
events, for both existing conditions and fully developed watershed
conditions; and
The identification of public and private structures (including low
floor and entry elevations of residences, and individual sewage
treatment systems (ISTS)), and infrastructure (sanitary sewer,
stormwater pipes and facilities, and roads) surrounding the water
body and located within two vertical feet of the future conditions
water level elevation predicted using the SHYM, or the elevation
for the back to back 100-year critical event. Information regarding
the SHYM can be found in the Scott WMOs Comprehensive
Water Resource Management Plan Rules Attachment 1:
Simplified Hydrologic Yield method.
2) If there are public or private structures or infrastructure located
within 2 vertical feet of the future conditions SHYM, or back-toback
100-year critical event elevation, the applicant must
demonstrate that no adverse impacts to health, safety and welfare,
or property damage, would occur; or provide corrective actions.
Corrective actions shall include the following as necessary to
mitigate in proportion to the proposed project impact:
a. Controlling runoff rates to less than existing conditions
within the City as described in (Section 8, (E) (2)) of this
Ordinance;
b. Protecting or re-locating impacted structures or
infrastructure, or securing easements for additional
flooded areas; or
c. Other actions necessary to mitigate the impact.
b. Potential impacts to downstream infrastructure, public and private
structures, and erosion along the drainage path and downstream public
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 115
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
waters.
1) Evaluations must include:
a. The identification of existing public and private drainage
easements;
b. The locations, condition, and dimensions of the existing
drainage infrastructure;
c. The location and elevation of structures with low floors, or
entries within two vertical feet of the 100-year critical
storm flood level;
d. The location and description of known existing flooding
problems;
e. A hydrologic and hydraulic assessment of flooding
impacts of the proposed project on downstream public and
private structures.
f. An assessment of existing and potential watercourse
erosion, bank stability, bank protection, and watercourse
slope;
g. An assessment of the hydrologic and hydraulic capacity of
the downstream public and private infrastructure;
h. An assessment of property damages; and health, safety
and welfare impacts relative to increased flooding of
public and private infrastructure. Minnesota Department
of Transportation guidelines shall be used to assess safety
of flood levels at downstream driveways and road
crossings.
2) If property damage, erosion, public health, safety and welfare
impacts are identified the applicant must provide corrective action.
Corrective actions shall include the following as necessary to
mitigate in proportion to the proposed project impact:
a. Actions described in this Ordinance;
b. Obtaining easements;
c. The installation of stream bank stability and protection
measures;
d. The upgrading, protecting or re-locating impacted
infrastructure; or
e. Other actions necessary to mitigate the impact.
c. Potential impacts to exceptional value wetland.
1) Evaluation must include:
a. Delineation and functional assessment of wetlands
according to of this Ordinance;
b. A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the before and
after project water level bounce and period of inundation
for wetlands with exceptional vegetative diversity for the
one year, two year and 10-year critical duration events.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 116
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
2) The applicant must provide corrective actions that mitigate in
proportion to the proposed project impact as specified in this
Ordinance; if the water level bounce and period of inundation
created by the storms evaluated in (Section 4,(E) (4) (c) (1) (b)) of
this Ordinance exceeds the limit specified in the following table.
3) Corrective actions shall consist of runoff rate and volume controls
necessary to keep the water level bounce and period of inundation
within the limits specified in the following table.
5. The minimum design capacity of all drainage systems shall accommodate the
runoff from a 10-year storm event. All drainage systems and facilities shall be
designed to withstand the runoff from the critical one hundred 100-year event or
accumulative antecedent conditions without damage to the system or facility,
downstream areas or significant risk to public health, safety and welfare unless
waived for limited use, low maintenance road crossings.
Hydroperiod
Standard
Highly
Susceptible
Moderately
Susceptible
Slightly
Susceptible
Storm bounce Existing
Existing plus
0.5 feet
Existing plus 1
foot
Discharge Rate Existing Existing Existing or less
Inundation period for 1 & 2 year
precipitation event
Existing
Existing plus
1 day
Existing plus
2 days
Inundation period for 10 year
precipitation event or greater
Existing
Existing plus
7 days
Existing plus
14 days
Run-out control elevation (free
flowing)
No change No change
0 to 1 feet above
existing run out
Run-out control elevation
(landlocked)
Above delineated
wetland
Above delineated
wetland
Above delineated
wetland
6. Regional detention basins shall be utilized to manage peak flow rates and runoff
volumes, and meet water quality objectives when feasible. On-site detention
basins, volume control facilities, and permanent sedimentation and water quality
ponds will be utilized for land disturbing activities, the development or
redevelopment of land that creates greater than one acre of impervious surface
when regional basins are not in place or feasible, or would not otherwise met
requirements for the protection of downstream areas according to this Ordinance
that are located between the project and the regional basin.
The City may approve alternative BMPs instead of permanent sedimentation and
water quality ponds if it finds that the water quality performance of the proposed
alternative BMPs is equivalent to that of a permanent sedimentation and water
quality pond designed according to the criteria set forth for permanent
sedimentation and water quality ponds in this Ordinance below. Water quality
treatment facilities are designed to provide wet volume equivalent to the site runoff
from a 2.5-inch rainfall. In cases where a sites water quality treatment will be
provided by BMPs other than ponds, the requirement becomes at least 60 percent
removal of total phosphorus and 90 percent removal of total suspended solids on
an average annual basis. Accepted technical methodologies, such as the PondNET
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 117
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
model for phosphorus and the P-8 model for TSS, and/or scientifically valid field
studies must be used to evaluate the effectiveness of these practices.
7. The design flood events are the 100-year, 24-hour Type II rainfall event or 100-
year, 10-day snowmelt event. Design of flood storage, design of pond outlet and
overland conveyance capacities, determination of freeboard and other important
flood control parameters are based upon the flood event that produces the highest
water level.
8. Landlocked water basins may be provided with outlets if an outcome based
analysis and resource oriented management review regarding downstream impacts
is completed that demonstrates that:
a. A hydrologic regime is maintained that complies with this Ordinance;
b. Dead storage is provided to retain the fully developed future conditions
SHYM predicted water volumes, or the back to back 100-year critical
event water volume, above the highest anticipated groundwater elevation
to the extent possible while preventing damage to property adjacent to the
basin;
c. The outlet does not create adverse downstream flooding or water quality
conditions, or materially affect stability of downstream watercourses
according the criteria in this Ordinance;
d. Proposed development tributary to the land-locked basin has incorporated
runoff volume control practices to the extent practical;
e. There is a demonstrated need for an outlet to protect existing structures
and infrastructure; and
f. The outlet design is part of an approved comprehensive local water
management plan.
9. Detention basins shall be designed to provide:
a. An outlet structure to control the two year, 10-year and 100-year critical
storm events to runoff rates specified in (Section 8, (E) (2) and (3)) of this
Ordinance;
b. An identified overflow spillway and downstream route sufficiently
stabilized to convey a 100-year critical storm event;
c. Access for future maintenance; and
d. A normal water elevation above the OHW of adjacent waterbodies or
normal water level (NWL) where an OHW is not established.
10. Storm Water Management Criteria for Permanent Facilities.
a. An applicant shall install or construct, on or for the proposed land
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 118
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
disturbing or development activity, all storm water management facilities
necessary to manage increased runoff so that the two year, 10 year, and
100 year storm peak discharge rates existing before the proposed
development shall not be increased, and accelerated channel erosion will
not occur as a result of the proposed land disturbing or development
activity. An applicant may also make an in-kind or monetary contribution
to the development and maintenance of regional storm water management
facilities designed to serve multiple land disturbing and development
activities undertaken by one or more persons, including the applicant.
All storm water treatment basins, with the exception of commercial or
institutional private storm water treatment basins become City property
after project completion. The City will clean private storm water treatment
basins and charge/assess the owner. The City will require access rights as
part of the development process.
b. The applicant shall give consideration to reducing the need for storm water
management facilities by incorporating the use of natural topography and
land cover such as wetlands, ponds, natural swales, and depressions as
they exist before development to the degree that they can accommodate
the additional flow of water without compromising the integrity or quality
of the wetland or pond.
c. Permanent sedimentation and water quality ponds shall be designed to
provide:
1) Water quality features consistent with NURP criteria and best
management practices;
2) A permanent wet pool with dead storage of at least the runoff from
a 2.5-inch storm event or the water quality volume required by the
meeting NPDES General Construction Permit, whichever leads to
a higher level of water quality treatment..
3) Pond outlets shall be designed to prevent short circuiting of the
flow from pond inputs to the outlet;
4) An outlet skimmer to prevent migration of floatables and oils for
at least the 1-year storm event;
5) Access for future maintenance by the City;
6) A permanent pond surface area that is at least equal to two percent
of the impervious area draining to the pond or one percent of the
entire area draining to the pond, whichever amount is greater;
7) An average permanent pool depth of four to six feet and a
maximum depth no greater than six feet; and
8) A minimum protective shelf extending 10 feet into the permanent
pool with a slope of 10-to-one (10:1), beyond which slopes should
not exceed a four-to-one (4:1) ratio.
d. Any new residential, commercial, industrial or other habitable structures
shall be constructed with the following freeboard requirements:
1) All new structures must be constructed a minimum 2 feet above
the peak water surface elevation for the critical flood event and at
least one foot above the as-built emergency overflow elevation
from any area where surface water is impounded during a flood
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 119
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
event. The low structure elevation is defined as the lowest ground
elevation adjacent to the structure.
2) When a structure is located less than 50 feet horizontal from the
100-year calculated high water level, then the structures low floor
elevation must be at least two feet above the 100-year high water
level.
3) Under no circumstances should the low floor elevation be below
the planned normal water level of a stormwater basin or other
naturally occurring water body.
4) Land development within the official floodplain will be regulated
to ensure that floodplain capacity and flood elevations are not
adversely impacted by development and that new structures are
protected from damage.
5) Where structures are proposed below the overflow elevation for a
land-locked basin, the low structure elevation must be a minimum
of two feet above the peak water elevation as determined by the
critical back to back 100-year flood event, or five feet above a
critical single 100-year flood event.
e. All new development and redevelopment shall not increase runoff volume
discharged from the site on an average annual basis. To meet this policy, it
shall be sufficient to establish that the volumetric discharge for the 1.5-
year event is maintained at existing conditions. Concentrated infiltration is
precluded in locations where the hazardous materials are handled or in any
commercial and industrial land use within a well-head protection area.
Concentrated infiltration is not recommended when seasonal high water
table is within three feet of the ground surface. Diffuse infiltration and
volume management techniques such as reduced imperviousness,
impervious disconnection, runoff water recycling etc., are not constrained
in by water table elevation or by location in a well-head protection area.
11. The design must explicitly address the use of best management practices to limit
the loss of pervious area, and limit runoff volume increases from impervious areas
to the extent feasible considering site-specific conditions.
a. When using infiltration for volume control, infiltration volumes and
facility sizes shall be calculated using the appropriate hydrological soil
group classification and saturated infiltration rate from the table below,
and shall be capable of infiltrating the required volume within 72 hours.
Documented site-specific infiltration or hydraulic conductivity
measurements completed by a licensed soil scientist or engineer may be
used in place of the values in the following table.
Hydrologic Soils Type Infiltration Rate Soil Texture
A 0.30 inches/hour Sand, loamy sand, or
sand loam
B 0.15 inches/hour Silt loam or loam
C 0.07 inches/hour Sandy clay loam
1) Infiltration areas must be limited to the horizontal areas subject to
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 120
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
prolonged wetting.
2) Areas of permanent pools tend to lose infiltration capacity over
time and will not be accepted as an infiltration practice.
3) Before infiltrating runoff, pretreatment shall be required for
parking lot runoff and for runoff from new road construction that
will enter the infiltration system. The pretreatment shall be
designed to protect the infiltration system from clogging and to
protect groundwater quality. Pretreatment options may include,
but are not limited to, oil/grease separation, sedimentation,
biofiltration, filtration, swales or filter strips. To minimize
potential groundwater impacts, it is desirable to infiltrate the
cleanest runoff. To achieve this, a design should propose greater
infiltration of runoff from low pollutant sources such as roofs, and
less from higher pollution source areas such as parking lots.
4) Infiltration systems must be designed to bypass higher flows.
5) Infiltration areas must be fenced or otherwise protected from
disturbance before the land disturbing activity starts.
b. Constructed infiltration practices where runoff water is concentrated shall
not be used for volume control under the following conditions:
1) For runoff from fueling and vehicle maintenance areas,
2) On areas with less than 3 feet vertical separation from the bottom
of the infiltration system to the elevation of seasonal high
groundwater or top of bedrock,
3) For areas with runoff from industrial, commercial and institutional
parking lots and roads where there is less than 5 feet separation
from the bottom of the infiltration system to the elevation of the
seasonal high groundwater,
4) On areas with Type D soils.
c. Constructed infiltration practices are not allowed in the Wellhead
Protection Area shown on Map 2 of the Citys Wellhead Protection Plan
within 400 feet of a community water system or within 100 feet of a
private well.
1) In such cases other runoff volume control measured must be used.
d. Credits will be allowed toward the volume control requirement, and may
be used as corrective actions for downstream impacts if required under of
this Ordinance. To receive credit, applicants must request the credits, and
provide calculations and documentation showing that criteria are met. All
credit criteria can be found in the Scott County WMO Rules.
12. Watershed Management and Groundwater Management Plans
Storm water pollution prevention plans shall be consistent with adopted watershed
management plans and groundwater management plans prepared in accordance
with State law and as approved by the Minnesota Board of Water and Soil
Resources and the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 121
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
13. An assessment of the potential for adverse impacts downstream of site
improvements, and corrective actions in proportion to the proposed project input is
required. At a minimum an assessment must include:
a. Potential impacts to areas surrounding landlocked lakes or ponds, or lakes
or ponds with inadequate outlets.
b. Potential impacts to public or private structures or infrastructure located
near potential flood prone areas with corrective actions that mitigate in
proportion to the impact.
c. Potential impacts to downstream infrastructure, public and private
structures, and erosion along the drainage path and downstream public
waters, with corrective actions that mitigate in proportion to the impact.
d. Potential impacts to wetlands with exceptional vegetative diversity, with
corrective actions that mitigate in proportion to the impact.
The site developer must assess downstream impacts from each new development.
The assessed area is limited to a drainage area equal to 10 times the proposed
development area. If existing or potential problems are found, they need to be
mitigated in proportion to the proposed projects impacts. The Citys Surface
Water Management Plan outlines the downstream assessment procedure.
F. Plan Review Procedure.
1. Process.
Storm water pollution prevention plans meeting the requirements of this Ordinance
shall be submitted by the Zoning Administrator to the City Engineer and the
Planning Commission for review in accordance with the standards of this
Ordinance. The Planning Commission shall recommend approval, recommend
approval with conditions, or recommend denial of the storm water pollution
prevention plan to the City Council. Where additional control measures are
needed, they will be specified at the discretion of the City Engineer. Following
Planning Commission review, the storm water pollution prevention plan will be
submitted to the City Council at its next available meeting.
2. Duration.
Approval of a storm water pollution prevention plan submitted under the
provisions of this Section shall expire one year after the date of approval unless
construction has commenced in accordance with the plan. However, if prior to the
expiration of the approval, the applicant makes a written request to the Zoning
Administrator for an extension of time to commence construction setting forth the
reasons for the requested extension, the City Council may grant one extension of
not greater than one year. Receipt of any request for an extension shall be
acknowledged by the Zoning Administrator within 15 days. The Zoning
Administrator, after consulting with the City Engineer and the Public Works
Department, shall make a decision on the extension within 30 days of receipt. Any
plan may be revised in the same manner as originally approved.
3. Conditions.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 122
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
A storm water pollution prevention plan may be approved subject to compliance
with conditions reasonable and necessary to ensure that the requirements contained
in this Section are met. Such conditions may, among other matters, limit the size,
kind or character of the proposed development; require the construction of
structures, drainage facilities, storage basins, and other facilities; require
replacement of vegetation; establish required monitoring procedures; stage the
work over time; require alteration of the site design to insure buffering; and require
the conveyance to the City or other public entity of certain lands or interests
therein.
4. Inspections.
At a minimum, inspections to ensure compliance with of the storm water pollution
prevention plan shall be done weekly by the City Engineer or a designated City
employee, and after every storm or snow melt event large enough to result in
runoff from the site.
In all cases, the city inspectors will attempt to work with the applicant and/or
builder to maintain proper erosion and sediment control at all sites. In cases where
cooperation is withheld, construction stop work orders may be issued by the City,
until erosion and sediment control measures meet specifications.
The applicant shall allow the City and its authorized representatives, upon
presentation of credentials to:
a. Enter upon the permitted site for the purpose of obtaining information,
examination of records and conducting investigations or surveys;
b. Bring such equipment upon the site as is necessary to conduct such
surveys and investigations;
c. Examine and copy any books, papers, records or memoranda pertaining to
activities or records required to be kept under the terms and conditions of
this permitted site;
d. Inspect the storm water pollution control measures; and
e. Sample and monitor any items or activities pertaining to storm water
pollution control measures.
5. Financial Securities.
The total security amount in the projects development agreement with the City
shall also provide security for the performance of the work approved by the City in
the storm water pollution prevention plan and any storm water pollution prevention
plan related remedial work, if the development agreements security totals $3,000
per acre for the maximum acreage of soil that will be simultaneously exposed
during the projects construction. If this security is less than the $3,000 per acre
value, then it shall be increased to at least that amount.
The City may request a greater financial security, if the City considers that the
development site is especially prone to erosion, or the resource to be protected is
especially valuable. A rate schedule of security amounts shall be set annually by
the City as the amount the City deems necessary to cover potential liabilities to the
resources.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 123
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
a. The security or letter of credit must be in a form acceptable to the City and
from a bank or surety licensed to do business in Minnesota.
b. The security shall be in favor of the City and conditioned upon the
applicants performance of the authorized activity in compliance with the
permit and applicable laws, including these Ordinances, and the payment
when due of any fees or other charges authorized or required by the
permit, and these Ordinances.
c. The security shall be issued for a minimum term of one year. Security
with a shorter term may be deposited with the City provided it is replaced
at least 30 days before its expiration.
d. If at anytime during the course of the work, the secured amount falls below
50 percent of the required deposit, the applicant shall make another deposit
in the amount necessary to restore the deposit to the required amount
within 30 days. Otherwise the City may:
1) Withhold the scheduling of inspections and/or the issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy.
2) Revoke any permit issued by the City to the applicant for the site
in question and any other of the applicants sites within the Citys
jurisdiction.
3) When more than one-half (1/2) of the applicants maximum
exposed soil area has achieved final stabilization, the City can
reduce the total required amount of the financial security by onehalf
(1/2), if recommended by the City Engineer.
e. The City may act against the financial security if any of the conditions
listed below exist. The City shall use funds from this security to finance
any corrective or remedial work undertaken by the City or a contractor
under contract to the City and to reimburse the City for all direct costs
incurred in the process of remedial work including, but not limited to staff
time and attorneys fees. The applicant ceases land disturbing activities or
filling and abandons the site prior to completion to the grading plan
1) The applicant ceases land disturbing activities and/or filling and
abandons the site prior to completion to the grading plan.
2) The applicant fails to conform to any City approved grading plan
and/or the storm water pollution prevention plan as approved by
the City.
3) Constructed infiltration practices are not allowed in the Wellhead
Protection Area shown on Map 2 Wellhead Protection Areas of
the City of New Prague (attached to this Ordinance), as amended;
and within 400 feet of a community water system or within 100
feet of a private well.
4) The applicant fails to reimburse the City for corrective action.
5) The applicant defaults under the permit.
6) The applicant fails to replace any security at least 30 days before
its expiration.
f. If circumstances exist such that noncompliance with this Section poses an
immediate danger to public health, safety and welfare, as determined by
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 124
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
the City Engineer, the City may take emergency preventative action. The
City shall also take every reasonable action possible to contact and direct
the applicant to take any necessary action. Any cost to the City may be
recovered from the applicants financial security.
g. Any unspent amount of the financial security deposited with the City for
faithful performance of the storm water pollution prevention plan and any
remedial work must be released not more than one (1) year after the
completion of the installation of all such measures and establishment of
final stabilization.
h. Fees.
All applications for storm water pollution prevention plan approval shall
be accompanied by a processing and approval fee as specified by the City
Council through ordinance.
The fee shall cover the cost of the review and analysis of the proposed
activity, including services for engineering, legal, and other consultants.
The City may require a deposit to cover the cost of review at the time of
filing. The City will provide a statement of review charges. In all cases
the review fee shall be payable before a permit will be issued.
G. Approval Standards.
1. Standards Required.
No storm water pollution prevention plan that fails to meet the standards contained in this
Section shall be approved by the City Council.
2. Site Dewatering.
Water pumped from the site shall be treated by temporary sedimentation basins, grit
chambers, sand filters, upflow chambers, hydro-cyclones, swirl concentrators or other
appropriate controls as appropriate. Water may not be discharged in a manner that causes
erosion or flooding of the site or receiving channels or a wetland.
3. Waste and Material Disposal.
All waste and unused building materials, including but not limited to, garbage, cleaning
wastes, debris, wastewater, toxic materials or hazardous materials, shall be properly
disposed of off-site and not allowed to be carried by runoff into a receiving channel or
storm sewer system.
4. Entrances and Cleaning.
Each site shall have graveled roads, access drives, and parking areas of sufficient width and
length to prevent sediment from being tracked onto public or private roadways. Any
sediment reaching a public or private road shall be removed by street cleaning (not
flushing) before the end of each workday.
5. Drain Inlet Protection.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 125
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
All storm drain inlets shall be protected during construction until control measures are in
place with a straw bale, silt fence or equivalent barrier meeting accepted design criteria,
standards, and specifications contained in the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
publication entitled "Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas".
6. Site Erosion Control.
The following requirements apply only to construction activities that result in runoff
leaving the site.
a. Channeled runoff from adjacent areas passing through the site shall be
diverted around disturbed areas, if practical. Diverted runoff shall be
conveyed in a manner that will not erode the conveyance and receiving
channels.
b. All activities on the site shall be conducted in a logical sequence to
minimize the area of bare soil exposed at any one time.
c. Runoff from the entire disturbed area on the site shall be controlled by
meeting either Subsections 1 and 2 or 1 and3 below, or (a) and (b) or (a)
and (c) above.
1) All disturbed ground left inactive for14 or more days shall be
stabilized by seeding or sodding (only available prior to
September 15) or by mulching or covering or other equivalent
control measure.
2) For sites with more than 10 acres disturbed at one time, or if a
channel originates in the disturbed area, one or more temporary or
permanent sedimentation basins shall be constructed. Each
sedimentation basin shall have a surface area of at least one
percent of the area draining to the basin and at least three feet of
depth and constructed in accordance with accepted design
specifications. Sediment shall be removed to maintain a depth of
three feet. The basin discharge rate shall also be sufficiently low
as to not cause erosion along the discharge channel or the
receiving water.
3) For sites with less than 10 acres disturbed at one time, silt fences,
straw bales, or equivalent control measures shall be laced along all
sideslope and downslope sides of the site. If a channel or area of
concentrated runoff passes through the site, silt fences shall be
placed along the channel edges to reduce sediment reaching the
channel. The use of silt fences, straw bales, or equivalent control
measures must include a maintenance and inspection schedule.
7. Vegetated Buffer Protection.
At the minimum a vegetated buffer strip on each bank of a river or stream the width of
either the 100-year floodplain or 100 feet whichever is larger, shall be provided. If
possible such a buffer strip shall consist of predevelopment native vegetation. Buffer
width shall be increased at least two feet for every one percent of slope of the surrounding
land. Natural wetlands adjacent to rivers and streams are not counted as buffers, and
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 126
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
therefore their widths are not counted as part of the channels buffer strip. Such wetlands
rate their own vegetated buffer strip as stated in (Section 4, (E)) of this Section.
a. Detailed buffer design is usually site specific. Therefore the City Engineer
may require a larger buffer than the minimum.
b. For newly constructed buffer sites, the design criteria should follow
common principles and the example of nearby natural areas. The site
should be examined for existing buffer zones and mimic the slope
structure and vegetation as much as possible.
c. The applicant or designated representative shall maintain the buffer strip
for the first year. After that time period, the City, or a party designated by
the City, shall maintain the buffer strip.
d. Drain tiles will short-circuit the benefits of vegetated buffer strips.
Therefore drain tiles on the development site shall be identified and
rendered inoperable.
e. Buffer strips can be made into perpetual conservation easements.
f. Buffer strips shall be marked as such with permanent markers.
g. The City Engineer may allow buffer area averaging in cases where
averaging will provide additional protection to either the resource or
environmentally valuable adjacent upland habitat.
h. Water courses used solely for drainage, such as road ditches, are exempt
from these requirements..
8. Other Permits Required.
All sand, gravel or other mining operations taking place on the development site
shall have a Minnesota Pollution Control Agency National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System General Storm Water permit for industrial activities and all
required Minnesota Department of Natural Resource permits.
9. Easements.
Applicants shall establish, in a form acceptable to the City, temporary and
perpetual easements, or dedicated outlots, for ponding, flowage and drainage
purposes over hydrologic features such as waterbodies and stormwater basins. The
easements, or outlots, shall include the right of reasonable access for inspection,
monitoring, maintenance and enforcement purposes. If a storm water pollution
prevention plan involves direction of some or all runoff off of the site, it shall be
the responsibility of the applicant to obtain from adjacent property owners any
necessary easements or other property interests concerning flowage of water.
10. Covenants.
The City may require that the land be subjected to restrictive covenants or a
conservation easement, in a form acceptable to the City, to prevent the future
expansion of impervious surface and the loss of infiltration capacity.
H. WAIVERS.
1. The City may waive the volume control requirement for environmentally sensitive
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 127
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
developments. Developments will be considered environmentally sensitive when:
a. The total impervious surface footprint is less than 8 percent of the
development;
b. A minimum of 25 percent of the site is protected in natural conservation
areas that are protected with conservation easements (see Section 4 for
allowed and prohibited uses in conservation easements);
c. Buffers and wetlands are protected in accordance with this Ordinance;
d. Rooftop runoff is disconnected as noted in Chapter 52 of City Code;
e. Runoff rate control is provided in accordance with this Ordinance;
f. Stormwater runoff has been treated in accordance with this Ordinance;
g. Downstream impacts have been assessed and corrective actions have been
incorporated in accordance with this Ordinance;
h. Buffers are recorded as conservation easements on outlots (see Section 4
for allowed and prohibited uses in conservation easements); and
i. The maintenance and preservation of the disconnection(s) and
environmental features are made part of a recorded restrictive covenant.
2. The City may waive the on-site runoff rate and water quality control design criteria
in this Ordinance for those areas of the City where regional runoff rate and water
quality facilities have been implemented in conformance with the City's Surface
Water Management Plan (approved March 17, 2008).
3. Design for the 100-year actual storm event required pre this Ordinance may be
waived for limited use, low maintenance road crossings.
I. Maintenance.
All storm water management structures and facilities shall be maintained in perpetuity to
assure that the structures and facilities function as originally designed. The responsibility
for maintenance of the structures and facilities within the City shall be assumed by the
City. The permittee shall be responsible for proper operation and maintenance of all
erosion and sediment controls, and soil stabilization measures, in conformance with best
management practices, and in conformance with the maintenance requirements in the
NPDES General Construction Permit.
J. Exceptions.
No permit or storm water pollution prevention plan shall be required under this Ordinance
for the following land disturbing activities where the city has demonstrated that the
infrastructure has capacity:
1. Minor land disturbing activities such as home gardens, repairs and maintenance
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 128
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
work.
2. Construction, installation and maintenance of individual sewage treatment systems
where City sewer service is not available and other than those on steep slopes or
riparian lots within a Shoreland District or in a bluff impact zone.
3. Construction, installation and maintenance of public utility lines or individual
service connections unless the activity disturbs more than one acre.
4. Construction of any structure on an individual parcel in a subdivision with a storm
water pollution prevention plan approved by the City, so long as any land
disturbing activity complies with the approved plan.
5. Development or redevelopment of, or construction of a structure on, an individual
parcel with a land disturbing activity that does not cause off-site erosion,
sedimentation, flooding or other damage, and creates less than 1 acre of cumulative
impervious surface.
6. Installation of any fence, sign, telephone or electric poles, or other kinds of posts
or poles.
7. Emergency activity necessary to protect life or prevent substantial harm to persons
or property.
8. Redevelopment projects are exempt from rate and volume control provisions in
this Ordinance. Projects within the B1 zoning district are exempt from the volume
control provisions of this Ordinance. For the purposes of this Ordinance, if an
activity creates more than one acre of new or additional impervious surface, the
activity is considered new development and this exception does not apply to this
increased (new) impervious surface.
9. Development or redevelopment of land in incorporated areas shall be exempt from
runoff volume control provisions of this Ordinance where the City has
demonstrated the infrastructure has capacity for increased runoff volumes.
10. Minor wetland impacts that have received a certificate of exemption or no loss
determination by the City administering the Wetland Conservation Act, as
amended.
11. All maintenance, repair, resurfacing and reconditioning activities of existing road,
bridge and highway systems, which do not involve land disturbing activities
outside of the existing surfaced roadway.
12. Land disturbing activities associated with the construction of conservation
practices by the SWCD or the Natural Resources Conservation Services (NRCS)
provided that erosion prevention and sediment control practices are used in a
manner consistent with this Ordinance.
K. Other Controls.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 129
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this Section and the provisions of
other sections of the Zoning Ordinance, the more restrictive standard shall prevail.
8. Drainage Alterations
A. Policy
It is the policy of the City that surface water may be drained only in a manner that does not
unreasonably burden upstream or downstream land.
B. Regulations
No person or political subdivision shall artificially drain surface water, nor obstruct or
redirect the natural flow of runoff, so as to affect a drainage system established under
Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 103E, or harm the public health, safety and general welfare of
the City and County, without first obtaining a permit from the City.
C. Criteria
The applicant for a drainage alteration shall:
1. Describe the overall environmental impact of the proposed drainage alteration and
demonstrate that:
a. There is a reasonable necessity for such drainage alteration;
b. Reasonable care has been taken to avoid unnecessary injury to upstream
and downstream land;
c. The utility or benefit accruing to the land on which the drainage will be
altered reasonably outweighs the gravity of the harm resulting to the land
receiving the burden;
d. That downstream impacts have been controlled or mitigated according to
the requirements of this Ordinance;
e. The drainage alteration is being accomplished by reasonably improving
and aiding the normal and natural system of drainage according to its
reasonable carrying capacity, or in the absence of a practicable natural
drain, a reasonable and feasible artificial drainage system is being adopted.
2. Provide a hydraulic design which complies with (Section 8 and 4) of this
Ordinance, and if the alteration involves a landlocked basin, the alteration must
comply with the requirements of this Ordinance for outlets from landlocked basins.
3. Provide a stable channel and outfall.
4. Obtain a permit under from the City pursuant to this Ordinance if the drainage
alteration is part of a land disturbing activity or a development or redevelopment of
land.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 130
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
D. Exhibit
The City shall require the submittal of exhibits with an application necessary for review
and determination of compliance with this Ordinance.
E. EXCEPTIONS
1. No permit shall be required under this Ordinance for the alteration of drainage in
connection with the use of land for agricultural activities.
2. The City may waive the requirement of (Section 9, (3) (a) (4)) of this Ordinance
above if the applicant submits easements or other documentation in form
acceptable to the City evidencing the consent of the owner of any burdened land to
the proposed alteration. Such easements or other documentation shall be filed for
record and evidence thereof submitted to the City.
3. All drainage alterations not required by this Ordinance to obtain a permit shall
nevertheless be conducted in full compliance with these Ordinances.
735 Swimming Pools
1. Zoning and Building Requirements
A. Property irons must be located prior to installing a pool. The City does not provide a
survey service to locate the property irons. It is the responsibility of the landowner to
locate the property lines.
B. All swimming pools for which a permit is required and granted shall include permanent
fencing
C. Permanent fences shall be at minimum four feet in height and shall not exceed six feet in
height. The fence must completely enclose any in-ground or above-ground swimming
pools.
D. The bottom of the fence must not be more than four inches from a hard surface ground or
two inches from a soft surface ground.
E. Fences shall be constructed with a non-corrosive material that is not easily climbable by
small children.
F. The fence shall have self-closing and self-latching devices placed at a minimum of four
feet from the ground surface so that the device is inaccessible to all small children.
G. A fence is only required to be provided around the means of access on aboveground pools
which have a four foot or higher, vertical or outward inclined side walls.
H. Prior to filling the pool, the approved fence or an approved temporary fence must be
completely in place, inspected and approved by the City Building Official.
I. In all residential districts, swimming pools shall only be allowed in the rear or side yard
and shall be set back a minimum of six feet from all property lines.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 131
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
J. Swimming pools shall not be located in drainage and utility easements or required buffers.
K. Swimming pools erected on corner lots shall not be within the 30 foot building setback line
and shall not be constructed closer to the front property line than the primary structure.
The swimming pool shall adhere to the same right-of-way setbacks as the house.
L. All swimming pools shall be at minimum of 10 feet away from any principal structure,
building or frost footings.
M. The fencing requirements and standards stated in this Section are required even if a
swimming pool cover is used.
N. The drainage of discharged water from the pool must not drain across or onto any
adjoining property.
O. Above ground hot tubs or spas with a locking safety cover which complies with ASTM
Standard F 1346-91, provided the cover is locked at all times when the hot tub or spa is not
in use, shall be exempt from the requirements of this Section.
2. Required Inspections
The City shall inspect the pool during the following points of construction:
A. Pool Footing: Before pouring concrete, pool has been dug and forms have been erected.
B. Pool Fence or Temporary Fence  Prior to filling the pool.
C. Gas Line: Air test must be performed.
D. Final: Prior to filling the swimming pool and when the pool, pool enclosure (fence) and
any surrounding deck is completed.
3. Permit Checklist
Property irons shall be found or a Certificate of Survey shall be completed. The following
information must be submitted along with the building permit application. (Note: A Certificate of
Survey for the property may be on file at City Hall.)
A. Location and size of the pool and equipment
B. Setbacks of pool from the property lines and other structures
C. Location and height of the fence enclosure
D. Detail showing self-closing and self-latching devices for fencing
E. Complete plans and specification for the construction of the pool
736 Residential Erosion Control, Turf Establishment and Tree Requirements
1. Purpose
A. The purpose of this section is to establish performance standards for the installation of
residential erosion control, turf establishment and trees to preserve the appearance,
character, health, safety and welfare of the community. Specifically, this section will
provide appropriate ground cover vegetation establishment for controlling soil erosion.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 132
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
2. Requirements
A. These requirements will be used to review and evaluate site plans for residential homes and
accessory structures in the RL-70, RL-84, RL-90, RM, and RH Zoning Districts.
B. All developed, improved or built upon lots or parcels must include sod/seed which will
function as a soil retention cover.
C. An erosion control plan must be provided with all new construction residential home
permit applications which must indicate location of soil stockpiles, location of silt fence,
location of sod/seed and the location and species of the required tree.
D. Sodding/seeding must be completed after the site has been brought to finished grade with a
minimum of four inches of topsoil. The topsoil must be of a quality at least equal to the
quality prior to development and must also be free from heavy clay, course sand, stones,
plants, roots, sticks and other foreign materials.
E. No trees, shrubs or other landscaping other than sod/seed shall be allowed within any
drainage/utility easement or road right-of-way. The City or utility companies will remove
any obstructions placed in easements. The City is not responsible for any damage to
plantings placed within any drainage and utility easement or road right-of-way.
F. The planting of one tree per lot is required in the front yard. If the lot is a corner lot
fronting two streets, a tree shall be planted in each front yard.
G. When one or more healthy, significant tree(s) are present per dwelling unit in the front
yard, no tree is required to be planted. A significant tree shall be any healthy deciduous
tree that measures six inches in diameter 4.5 feet up from the ground or any healthy
coniferous tree that measures six feet in height.
H. Sod/seed and the minimum required tree must be guaranteed for 30 days from the time
planting has been completed which comprises the warranty period. All sod/seed and the
minimum tree must be alive, of good quality and disease free at the end of the warranty
period or must be replaced. Any replacement sod/seed or tree must be warranted for thirty
(30) days from the time of planting.
I. Lots shall have sod or seed installed to completely cover the portion of the lot where
required buffers, wetlands, trees and other landscaping do not exist.
J. Where slopes on a lot are greater than 4 to 1 (25%), seed and hydroseed are not allowed.
Seed and hydroseed will also not be allowed within drainage and utility easement areas
designed to carry surface water drainage. In such cases of slopes greater than 4 to 1 or
drainage and within utility easements designed to carry surface water, sod or an erosion
control blanket with seed must be used.
K. Portions of lots not sodded must be seeded or hydroseeded, and silt fence, a double row of
sod with staggered seams, or erosion control blanket with seed shall be installed around the
area to be seeded or hydroseeded until the new vegetation is established as determined by
the building official or his/her appointed representative. Acceptable methods of seeding
shall include utilizing a disc seeder, spike seeder, turf seeder, slit seeder or equivalent.
Also acceptable as a method of seeding is hydroseeding.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 133
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
L. Hydroseed mixture, if used, must contain a combination of seed, mulch with a minimum of
50 percent wood material, fertilizer and a tackifier. It must also be applied at a rate of
2,500 lbs. /acre.
M. Seed mixture must not contain in excess of 0.5 percent weed or 0.5 percent crop seed and
inert matter shall not be present in excess of 6.0 percent of the mixture by weight. The
grass seed species shall be appropriate for New Pragues climate zone. Temporary seed
mixtures will not be accepted in any case as counting towards turf establishment.
N. The sod/seed and tree requirements shall be completed before a final certificate of
occupancy will be issued. If the sod/seed is not established and occupancy is requested by
a builder, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued. The builder/owner is
required to complete the sod/seed and tree requirements within 60 days after the temporary
certificate of occupancy is issued.
O. Homes that are completed between October 15th and before May 15th shall have until July
1st to complete the sod/seed and tree requirements but will only be issued temporary
certificate of occupancy until that time. Final grading does not need to be done before a
temporary certificate of occupancy is issued, but erosion control must be maintained until a
final certificate of occupancy is issued.
3. Tree Size and Condition.
A. The required tree planting shall meet the following minimum nursery stock size standards:
1. A deciduous tree shall have a trunk a minimum of 1.5 inches in diameter as
measured six inches above ground level.
2. A coniferous tree shall be a minimum of six feet in height as measured from
ground level after the tree is planted.
4. Prohibited Trees
A. The following species of trees shall not be planted to comply with the required tree
planting requirement nor will they count as existing significant trees, but they may be
planted on a property in addition to the minimum requirement:
1. Box Elder
2. Silver Maple
3. Northern Catalpa
4. Mulberry
5. Cottonwood  (varieties with seeds only)
6. Willow
7. Poplars
8. Ginkgo (Female only)
9. Russian Olive
10. Siberian Elm
11. Ash (Excluding Mountain Ash)
5. Escrow
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 134
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
A. The City shall collect a cash escrow specifically for the sod/seed, erosion control and tree
requirement before any building permit is issued. The escrow amount shall be established
annually by the City Council and shall be refunded to the party who deposited the escrow
when all of the following are completed and approved by the City:
1. Final grade requirements are completed.
2. Required tree is installed and alive at the end of the 30 day warranty time
period.
3. Sod/seed is installed and alive at end of the 30 day warranty time period
and with sufficient coverage to control erosion.
4. If weeds are present at the end of the 30 day warranty time period,
documentation of an application of weed treatment shall be provided.
B. Failure to have completed and received City approval for the four items listed above within
the time period listed above, following written notice, will cause the City to enter the
property and complete such sod/seed and tree requirements. The City will draw upon the
escrow deposit for the cost of completion.
C. Fees for additional inspections beyond the initial 30 day warranty period shall be charged
at the rate established in the City Fee Schedule. If deemed necessary by the inspector the
City may hire a contractor to ensure established ground vegetation and draw upon the
escrow deposit for the cost of completion.
6. Required Inspections
A. The following inspections shall apply to this section:
1. Final grade requirements completed.
2. Required tree is installed.
3. Sod/seed inspection before Final Certificate of Occupancy is issued.
737 Apartments Located Above the First Floor
Apartments located above the first floor of a building used or zoned for business purposes shall meet the
following minimum requirements:
1. There must be two off-street parking spaces provided for each unit.
2. There must be security lighting that illuminates the parking area and entries to the units.
3. There must be an appropriate area for trash receptacles, and the designated area must meet the
requirements of Section 703 of the Zoning Ordinance governing Refuse.
738 Traffic Impact Studies
Traffic Impact Studies are used to evaluate the interaction between existing transportation infrastructure
and proposed land development projects. The basic premise is that land development generates new traffic
that will travel on the adjacent roadway systems and that the amount of traffic and the relative impact to the
system is predictable.
The need for a Traffic Impact Study for a proposed development will be determined based on the adopted
Traffic Impact Study Guidelines and Process. This document identifies trigger points at which a Traffic
Impact Study will be required, and if required, what steps must be included in the analysis. Proposed
development that will impact the surrounding transportation system below an unacceptable level of service
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 135
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
may be denied by the City or mitigation measures may be required which will improve the level of service
to an acceptable level.
739 Brewpubs
Brewpubs are a permitted use in the B-1, B-2 and B-3 Commercial Zoning Districts with the following
minimum requirements:
1. Brewpubs must be accessory to a Small Brewery.
2. Brewpubs are limited to the production of no more than 3,500 barrels annually.
3. The brewing process and equipment is not required to be located in the same building as the restaurant,
however it must be located on the same premises as the Small Brewery.
4. No exterior storage of brewery related items are allowed including but not limited to: brewing
equipment, product, raw materials or waste materials.
5. The Municipal Utility Department must review and approve facility plans to determine that appropriate
utilities are available to the premises and that wastewater generated will not be a detriment to the waste
water treatment plant. The Waste Water Department may require a sampling point on the premises for
processed water and regular sampling by a certified lab acceptable to the City to determine appropriate
treatment. Treatment must be undertaken by the owner of the premises when required by the Waste
Water Department.
6. Brewpubs must comply with all applicable provisions of the law and obtain all required licenses.
7. Brewpubs must meet the performance standards in Zoning Ordinance Section 719, Subdivision 4.
740 Small Breweries and Breweries
In every district where the use is conditional or permitted, the Small Brewery or Brewery:
1. Must comply with all applicable provisions of law and obtain all required licenses.
2. Must meet the performance standards in Zoning Ordinance Section 719, Subdivision 4.
3. The Municipal Utility Department must review and approve facility plans to determine that appropriate
utilities are available to the premises and that wastewater generated will not be a detriment to the waste
water treatment plant. The Waste Water Department may require a sampling point on the premises for
processed water and regular sampling by a certified lab acceptable to the City to determine appropriate
treatment. Treatment must be undertaken by the owner of the premises when required by the Waste
Water Department.
Small Breweries are a conditional use in the B-1, B-2 and B-3 Commercial Zoning Districts with the following
minimum requirements:
1. Small Breweries are limited to the production of no more than 5,000 barrels annually.
2. No exterior storage of brewery related items are allowed including but not limited to: brewing
equipment, product, raw materials or waste materials.
3. Every Small Brewery in a commercial zoning district must provide for consumption on the premises at
a Taproom that is open for retail consumption at least 10 hours a week.
Small Breweries and Breweries are a permitted use in the I-1 Light Industrial Zoning District and may have
a Taproom but may not have a restaurant (as that term is defined in the Zoning Ordinance and Minnesota
Statutes, Section 340A.101).
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 136
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
741 Distilleries and Micro-Distilleries
In every district where the use is permitted, the Distillery or Micro-Distillery:
1. Must comply with all applicable provisions of law and obtain all required licenses.
2. Must not be located next to or adjacent to low density residential.
3. The Municipal Utility Department must review and approve facility plans to determine that appropriate
utilities are available to the premises and that wastewater generated will not be a detriment to the waste
water treatment plant. The Waste Water Department may require a sampling point on the premises for
processed water and regular sampling by a certified lab acceptable to the City to determine appropriate
treatment. Treatment must be undertaken by the owner of the premises when required by the Waste Water
Department.
4. No exterior storage of distillation related items are allowed including but not limited to: equipment,
product, raw materials or waste materials.
742 Clinics
A. Shall follow all Minnesota Department of Health program rules specific to detoxification programs and
chemical dependency treatment programs, as applicable. A security guard must be on site during all
business hours.
B. Clinics in the B-1 Central Business District that have more than 50 patients per day are required to provide
for an off-street parking area that provides for a minimum number of parking spaces equal to the number
of employees on the largest shift.
743 Healthcare Facilities
A. Shall not have any emergency vehicle access adjacent to or located across the street from any
residential use.
B. Shall follow all Minnesota Department of Health program rules specific to detoxification programs and
chemical dependency treatment programs, if applicable. A security guard must be on site during all
business hours.
SECTION VIII: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
1. Violation of any provisions of this Ordinance shall be a misdemeanor.
2. In the event of a violation or a threatened violation of this Ordinance, the Council, or any member
thereof, in addition to other remedies, may institute appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent,
restrain, correct, or abate such violations or threatened violations and it is the duty of the Attorney
to institute such action.
3. Any taxpayer may institute mandamus proceedings in District Court to compel specific
performance by the proper official or officials of any duty required by this Ordinance.
City of New Prague Zoning Ordinance page 137
3/19/2018 (Effective 3/29/18)
SECTION IX: EFFECTUATION
EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall become effective upon passage by the City Council and its publication.
Passed and adopted this 7th day of September, 2010.
Published in the New Prague Times this 16th day of September, 2010.
_______________________
W.A. Bender, Mayor
ATTEST:
______________________________
Michael J. Johnson, City Administrator