NEW GERMANY, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
10. Rules of Construction; General Penalty
11. Corporate Standards
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
30. Officials and Organizations
31. Finance and Revenue; Taxation
32. City Policies
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
50. General Utilities
51. Sanitary Sewers
52. Water Regulations
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
70. Traffic and Parking
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
90. Animals
91. Fire Protection and Prevention
92. Public Nuisances
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
110. Alcoholic Beverages
111. Amusements and Recreation
112. Alarm Systems
113. Peddlers and Solicitors
1
2 New Germany - Table of Contents
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
130. General Offenses
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
150. Building Regulations; Construction
151. Streets, Sidewalks and Public Ways
152. Storm Water Management
153. Subdivisions
154. Zoning
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Table
I. Franchises and Agreements
II. Rezonings
III. Annexations and Boundary Extensions
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Minnesota Statutes
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
INDEX
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter
10. RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
11. CORPORATE STANDARDS
1
2 New Germany - General Provisions
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
10.01 Title of code
10.02 Rules of interpretation
10.03 Application to future ordinances
10.04 Captions
10.05 Definitions
10.06 Severability
10.07 Reference to other sections
10.08 Reference to offices
10.09 Errors and omissions
10.10 Official time
10.11 Reasonable time
10.12 Ordinances repealed
10.13 Ordinances unaffected
10.14 Effective date of ordinances
10.15 Repeal or modification of ordinance
10.16 Ordinances which amend or supplement code
10.17 Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
10.18 Copies of code
10.19 Adoption of statutes and rules and supplements by reference
10.20 Enforcement
10.98 Supplemental administrative penalties
10.99 General penalty and enforcement
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
(A) All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city, as revised, codified, rearranged,
renumbered and consolidated into component codes, titles, chapters and sections, shall be known and
designated as the “New Germany City Code”, for which designation “code of ordinances”, “codified
ordinances” or “code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter and section headings do not constitute any
part of the law as contained in the code.
3
4 New Germany - General Provisions
(B) All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to the components of the code unless
otherwise specified. Any component code may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the “traffic
code”. Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as
“§ 10.01”. Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and section numbers are
employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
(A) Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the same rules
of construction, definition and application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing
the interpretation of state law.
(B) Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all ordinances of the city shall be by the
following rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of
the context of the same ordinance.
(1) AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written “and/or”, whenever
the context requires.
(2) Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions or ordinance requires an act to be done
which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by
the performance of the act by an authorized agent or deputy.
(3) Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed
to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in
the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
(4) General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited
to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to ordinances hereafter
adopted which amend or supplement this code unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and section numbers are
employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
Rules of Construction; General Penalty 5
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
(A) General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary and usual sense.
However, technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be
understood according to their technical import.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CITY. The City of New Germany, Minnesota.
CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This city code, as modified by
amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or sections.
COUNTY. The County of Carver, Minnesota.
MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
MONTH. A calendar month.
OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an
oath and, in those cases, the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and
AFFIRMED. All terms shall mean a pledge taken by the person and administered by an individual
authorized by state law.
OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of the city unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
PERSON. Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a
penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as applied to any unincorporated entity, shall mean the
partners or members thereof and, as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
STATE. The State of Minnesota.
SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in the chapter
analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by
the subject matter of the heading. Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
6 New Germany - General Provisions
WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions that can be given effect
without the invalid provision or application.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that reference shall extend and
apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the
subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee
of the city exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any words; the omission of any
word or words necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words
to which no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or words supplied,
omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same
effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.10 OFFICIAL TIME.
The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws, shall be the official time within
the city for the transaction of all city business.
Rules of Construction; General Penalty 7
§ 10.11 REASONABLE TIME.
(A) In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable time or requires
reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time
which is necessary for a prompt performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
(B) The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall be computed by excluding
the first day and including the last. If the last day is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the provisions of a general nature
pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the
subjects treated by this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to subjects not
embraced in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by
necessary implication.
§ 10.14 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall take effect from and after
the due publication thereof, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
(A) Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or modified by a subsequent
ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until
the publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect to
it, unless otherwise expressly provided.
(B) No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted, created, given, secured or
accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released or discharged,
but may be prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force unless
it is otherwise expressly provided.
8 New Germany - General Provisions
(C) When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed,
the repeal shall not be construed to revive the former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is
expressly provided.
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
(A) If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or section of this code, the chapter
or section shall be specifically repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.
(B) Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new chapter or section shall
indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this code, the proper number of the chapter or section.
In addition to this indication, as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title shall
be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.17 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
(A) All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of this code shall be
prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws. This code does not affect any rights or
liabilities accrued, penalties incurred or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code.
(B) The liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or forfeitures shall
be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted.
(C) In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-way, contracts
entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or vacation of any highway, and the
election of corporate officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
§ 10.18 COPIES OF CODE.
The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the city’s Clerk-Treasurer for public
inspection. The Clerk-Treasurer shall provide a copy for sale for a reasonable charge.
§ 10.19 ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES AND SUPPLEMENTS BY REFERENCE.
(A) It is the intention of the City Council that all future amendments to any state or federal rules and
statutes adopted by reference in this code or referenced in this code are hereby adopted by reference or
referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this code was adopted, unless there is clear
intention expressed in the code to the contrary.
Rules of Construction; General Penalty 9
(B) It is the intention of the City Council that all future supplements are hereby adopted as if they
had been in existence at the time this code was enacted, unless there is clear intention expressed in the
code to the contrary.
§ 10.20 ENFORCEMENT.
(A) Any licensed peace officer of the city’s Police Department, the County Sheriff or any Deputy
Sheriff shall have the authority to enforce any provision of this code.
(B) As permitted by M.S. § 626.862, as it may be amended from time to time, the city’s Clerk-
Treasurer shall have the authority to administer and enforce this code. In addition, under that statutory
authority, certain individuals designated within the code or by the Clerk-Treasurer or City Council shall
have the authority to administer and enforce the provisions specified. All and any person or persons
designated may issue a citation in lieu of arrest or continued detention to enforce any provision of the
code.
(C) The city’s Clerk-Treasurer and any city official or employee designated by this code who has
the responsibility to perform a duty under this code may with the permission of a licensee of a business
or owner of any property or resident of a dwelling, or other person in control of any premises, inspect
or otherwise enter any property to enforce compliance with this code.
(D) If the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of a premises objects to the inspection
of or entrance to the property, the city’s Clerk-Treasurer, peace officer or any employee or official
charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this code may, upon a showing that probable cause
exists for the issuance of a valid search warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction, petition and
obtain a search warrant before conducting the inspection or otherwise entering the property. This warrant
shall be only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the people are being complied with and to enforce these provisions only, and no criminal
charges shall be made as a result of the warrant. No warrant shall be issued unless there be probable
cause to issue the warrant. Probable cause occurs if the search is reasonable. Probable cause does not
depend on specific knowledge of the condition of a particular property.
(E) Every licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of property within the city shall
permit at reasonable times inspections of or entrance to the property by the city’s Clerk-Treasurer or any
other authorized city officer or employee only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted
to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people are being complied with and to enforce these
provisions. Unreasonable refusal to permit the inspection of or entrance to the property shall be grounds
for termination of any and all permits, licenses or city service to the property. Mailed notice shall be
given to the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of the property, stating the grounds for
the termination, and the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of the property shall be
given an opportunity to appear before the city’s Clerk-Treasurer to object to the termination before it
occurs, subject to appeal of the Clerk-Treasurer’s decision to the City Council at a regularly scheduled
or special meeting.
10 New Germany - General Provisions
(F) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the city to enter private
property in urgent emergency situations where there is an imminent danger in order to protect the public
health, safety and welfare.
§ 10.98 SUPPLEMENTAL ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.
(A) In addition to those administrative penalties established in this code and the enforcement powers
granted in § 10.20 of this chapter, the City Council is authorized to create by resolution, adopted by a
majority of the members of the Council, supplemental administrative penalties. The resolution may not
proscribe administrative penalties for traffic offenses designated by M.S. § 169.999, as it may be
amended from time to time.
(B) These administrative penalty procedures in this section are intended to provide the public and
the city with an informal, cost effective and expeditious alternative to traditional criminal charges for
violations of certain provisions of this code. The procedures are intended to be voluntary on the part of
those who have been charged with those offenses.
(C) Administrative penalties for violations of various provisions of the code, other than those
penalties established in the code or in statutes that are adopted by reference, may be established from
time to time by resolution of a majority of the members of the City Council. In order to be effective, an
administrative penalty for a particular violation must be established before the violation occurred.
(D) In the discretion of the peace officer, City Clerk-Treasurer or other person giving notice of an
alleged violation of a provision of this code, in a written notice of an alleged violation, sent by first class
mail to the person who is alleged to have violated the code, the person giving notice may request the
payment of a voluntary administrative penalty for the violation directly to the city’s Clerk-Treasurer
within 14 days of the notice of the violation. In the sole discretion of the person giving the notice of the
alleged violation, the time for payment may be extended an additional 14 days, whether or not requested
by the person to whom the notice has been given. In addition to the administrative penalty, the person
giving notice may request in the notice to the alleged violator to adopt a compliance plan to correct the
situation resulting in the alleged violation and may provide that if the alleged violator corrects the
situation resulting in the alleged violation within the time specified in the notice, that the payment of the
administrative penalty will be waived.
(E) At any time before the payment of the administrative penalty is due, the person who has been
given notice of an alleged violation may request to appear before the City Council to contest the request
for payment of the penalty. After a hearing before the Council, the Council may determine to withdraw
the request for payment or to renew the request for payment. Because the payment of the administrative
penalty is voluntary, there shall be no appeal from the decision of the Council.
Rules of Construction; General Penalty 11
(F) At any time after the date the payment of the administrative penalty is due, if the administrative
penalty remains unpaid or the situation creating the alleged violation remains uncorrected, the city,
through its Attorney, may bring criminal charges in accordance with state law and this code. Likewise,
the city, in its discretion, may bring criminal charges in the first instance, rather than requesting the
payment of an administrative penalty, even if a penalty for the particular violation has been established
by Council resolution. If the administrative penalty is paid, or if any requested correction of the situation
resulting in the violation is completed, no criminal charges shall be initiated by the city for the alleged
violation.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT.
(A) Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this code for which another
penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty
which may be imposed for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including state statutes
specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than
$1,000, or both.
(B) Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this code, including state statutes
specifically adopted by reference, which is designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction,
be guilty of a petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which is a
petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
(C) Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to time, in either the case of a
misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall
be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
(D) The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any official duty imposed by this
code shall not subject the officer or employee to the penalty imposed for a violation.
(E) In addition to any penalties provided for in this section or in § 10.98 of this chapter, if any
person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any provision of this code, the Council or any city
official designated by it may institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or
abate the violation.
12 New Germany - General Provisions
CHAPTER 11: CORPORATE STANDARDS
Section
11.01 Name change of municipality
§ 11.01 NAME CHANGE OF MUNICIPALITY.
(A) Effective February 4, 1919, the name of the post office in the municipality having been
heretofore designated and being now fixed by the United States postal authorities as Motordale, the name
of this municipality is hereby changed from New Germany to Motordale, pursuant to the provisions of
Section 1273 of the General Statutes of 1913.
(B) Effective January 3, 1922, the name of the post office in the municipality having been
heretofore designated and being now fixed by the United States postal authorities as New Germany, the
name of this municipality is hereby changed from Motordale to New Germany, pursuant to the
provisions of Section 1273 of the General Statutes of 1913.
(Ord. 20, passed 2-4-1919; Ord. 22, passed 1-3-1922)
13
14 New Germany - General Provisions
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
Chapter
30. OFFICIALS AND ORGANIZATIONS
31. FINANCE AND REVENUE; TAXATION
32. CITY POLICIES
1
2 New Germany - Administration
CHAPTER 30: OFFICIALS AND ORGANIZATIONS
Section
General Provisions
30.01 Personnel policies adopted by reference
Officials and Officers
30.15 Clerk-Treasurer
Organizations
30.30 Fire Department
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 PERSONNEL POLICIES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
The city’s personnel policies, and any and all amendments thereto, are hereby adopted by reference
and incorporated herein as if set out in full. Copies of which are on file in the office of the City
Clerk-Treasurer and are available for public inspection and/or copying during regular office hours.
(Ord. 95, passed 7-1-2008)
OFFICIALS AND OFFICERS
§ 30.15 CLERK-TREASURER.
The offices of the City Clerk and City Treasurer shall be combined into a new office known as the
“City Clerk-Treasurer”. The duties set forth by statue, by ordinance or otherwise, for the City Clerk
and for the City Treasurer shall be performed by the City Clerk-Treasurer starting 7-1-2017.
(Ord. 107, passed 6-6-2017)
3
4 New Germany - Administration
ORGANIZATIONS
§ 30.30 FIRE DEPARTMENT.
(A) The City Council is concerned with safeguarding of life and property to a reasonable degree
from hazards of fire, explosion, hazardous materials, terrorism, medical and rescue. Pursuant to the
power and jurisdictions vested through state statutes and other applicable laws, ordinances and
regulations, the City Council does hereby adopt this section and the current Minnesota Fire Code for the
purpose of establishing reasonable regulations, administration and enforcement for the prevention,
control and extinguishment of fires, assist in medical and rescue calls as deemed necessary.
(B) It shall be lawful for the citizens of the city to organize and form a Fire Department in and for
the city, which Fire Department shall consist of one company with membership not exceeding 28 persons
in number to be formed by voluntary enlistment.
(C) The Department shall have power to adopt, amend and repeal any of the provisions of the city’s
Fire Department Constitution, standard operating procedures and the city’s Fire Relief Association
bylaws (which shall be an attachment to the ordinance codified herein) of the Fire Department; provided
that, the Constitution, bylaws and amendments thereto, before the same be force or effect, shall be
submitted to and approved by the City Council by resolution of the city.
(Ord. 75, passed - -2002)
CHAPTER 31: FINANCE AND REVENUE; TAXATION
Section
Urban Service and Rural Service Districts
31.01 Establishment of districts
31.02 Urban Service District
31.03 Rural Service District
31.04 Lands included within the Rural Service District
31.05 Transfer from Rural Service District to Urban Service District
31.06 Benefit ratio and tax rate
31.07 Annual review
31.08 Connection charges
31.09 Services provided
URBAN SERVICE AND RURAL SERVICE DISTRICTS
§ 31.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.
Pursuant to the authority granted by M.S. § 272.67, as it may be amended from time to time, the
city hereby divides the area within its municipal limits into an Urban Service District and a Rural Service
District, constituting separate taxing districts for the purpose of all municipal property taxes, except
those levied for the payment of bonds and judgments and interest thereon.
(Ord. 105, passed 7-1-2014)
§ 31.02 URBAN SERVICE DISTRICT.
The Urban Service District shall include all land within the boundaries of the city which are not
included in the Rural Service District established by this subchapter.
(Ord. 105, passed 7-1-2014)
5
6 New Germany - Administration
§ 31.03 RURAL SERVICE DISTRICT.
(A) The Rural Service District shall include only unplatted lands, which need not be contiguous to
one another, as, in the judgment of the City Council, at the time of the adoption of this subchapter are
rural in character, and are not developed for commercial, industrial or urban residential purposes, and
for these reasons are not benefitted to the same degree as other lands by municipal services financed by
general taxation.
(B) The City Council, by amendment to this subchapter in the future, may designate lands outside
the city, which, if annexed, shall be included within the Rural Service District.
(Ord. 105, passed 7-1-2014)
§ 31.04 LANDS INCLUDED WITHIN THE RURAL SERVICE DISTRICT.
The following lands are hereby designated to be included in the Rural Service District of the city:
PID No. 55-005-2211 (Eric G. Roepke Property).
(Ord. 105, passed 7-1-2014)
§ 31.05 TRANSFER FROM RURAL SERVICE DISTRICT TO URBAN SERVICE
DISTRICT.
(A) Whenever any parcel of land included in the Rural Service District is platted, in whole or in
part, or whenever application is made for a permit for construction of a commercial, industrial,
residential or agricultural building or improvement, except for the purpose of repairing or replacing a
pre-existing structure; or whenever the improvement or building is commenced without a permit; or
whenever, at the request of the owner, any parcel is provided additional municipal services, such as
sewer, water, streets and the like; the City Council shall make and enter an order by resolution
transferring the parcel or any part thereof from the Rural Service District to the Urban Service District.
(B) Grading of land is not considered as an improvement, providing the grading is limited to that
which is required to minimize storm water drainage problems and provided graded areas are placed into
agricultural use or reseeded within one year. Any new fill placed on the land shall be graded and seeded
within one year.
(Ord. 105, passed 7-1-2014)
§ 31.06 BENEFIT RATIO AND TAX RATE.
It is the judgment of the City Council that the approximate ratio that exists between the benefits
resulting from the tax supported municipal services to parcels of land of like market value, situated in
the Rural Service District and in the Urban Service District, respectively, is 19%. However, in no event
Finance and Revenue; Taxation 7
shall the tax rate for the Rural Service District be less than what the tax rate for the parcel would be if
taxed by the township in which the parcel is located. Any taxes levied for the payment of bonds and
judgments and interest thereon shall be in addition to the tax.
(Ord. 105, passed 7-1-2014; Ord. 106, passed 7-28-2014)
§ 31.07 ANNUAL REVIEW.
Once each year, the City Council shall review the status of all lands in the Rural Service District
to determine whether the lands continue to qualify for inclusion in the Rural Service District and shall
also review the tax ratio applicable to the lands as determined under § 31.06 of this chapter.
(Ord. 105, passed 7-1-2014)
§ 31.08 CONNECTION CHARGES.
At such time as a parcel of land is transferred from the Rural Service District to the Urban Service
District and/or a structure on the parcel is connected to the sewer and water system of the city, the owner
of the parcel shall pay to the city connection and availability charges of the city that are then in effect
at the time of the connection.
(Ord. 105, passed 7-1-2014)
§ 31.09 SERVICES PROVIDED.
Except for fire, police and planning services, the city will provide no other services to the lands in
the Rural Service District beyond those customarily provided by the township in which the lands are
located.
(Ord. 105, passed 7-1-2014)
8 New Germany - Administration
CHAPTER 32: CITY POLICIES
Section
32.01 County Hazard Mitigation Plan
§ 32.01 COUNTY HAZARD MITIGATION PLAN.
The County All-Hazard Mitigation Plan, and any and all amendments thereto, are hereby adopted
by reference and incorporated herein as if set out in full. A copy of this plan is on file in the office of
the City Clerk-Treasurer and is available for public inspection and/or copying during regular office
hours. The website of the County Mitigation Plan is https://www.co.carver.mn.us/departments/
county-sheriff/emergency-management-and-communication-services/ hazard-mitigation-plan.
(Res. 2015-03, passed 2-17-2015)
9
10 New Germany - Administration
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter
50. GENERAL UTILITIES
51. SANITARY SEWERS
52. WATER REGULATIONS
1
2 New Germany - Public Works
CHAPTER 50: GENERAL UTILITIES
Section
50.01 Garbage and recycling
50.02 Water and sewage rates
§ 50.01 GARBAGE AND RECYCLING.
Residents need to go with the city garbage hauler for garbage pickup. Recycling in the city is not
mandatory. Commercial is exempt.
§ 50.02 WATER AND SEWAGE RATES.
(A) Rents/payment schedule. The water system of the city was installed and in operation effective
6-1-1961 and the sewer system of the city was installed and in operation effective 1-1-1968. Rent for the
use of the city water and sewer systems shall be payable on a monthly basis on or before the fifteenth
day of each month.
(B) Rates and charges. The rate to be charged for water and sewer usage will be based on a base
fee and gallons used, which shall be set each year by the City Council per the city fee schedule, which
is adopted by resolution each year in January at its first Council meeting. Each single-family dwelling
shall be considered one ERU (equivalent residential unit) and each school, church or other public
building shall be considered one ERU; apartment buildings will be figured one ERU per apartment unit;
each single business establishment, professional or commercial shall be considered one ERU unless water
usage is to such an excess that the Council deems it necessary to consider evaluating the ERU per the
Service Availability Charge Procedure Manual, which is a document from the Metropolitan Council
Environmental Services. This document will be a tool for the city to determine what an ERU (an ERU
per this manual) is considered (a SAC or sewer availability charge) for users of water and sewer within
city limits. This method will determine a more fair and accurate way to be sure that all users of the city’s
water and sewer services are being charged on an equal basis.
(C) Accounts in names of property owners. Application for the use of the city water and sewer
service shall be made upon forms provided for that purpose by the Clerk-Treasurer’s office of the city.
All accounts shall be carried in the name of the fee owner of the premises who personally, or by his or
her authorized agent, shall apply for the service. The owner shall at all times be liable for payment of
the rent whether he or she is occupying the same or not.
3
4 New Germany - Public Works
(D) Separate connections and meters. Unless special permission is granted in writing by the City
Council, every premises served by the city water system shall have a separate and distinct service
connection, including a separate water meter. All service connections shall be made and installed
according to regulations established therefor; each meter should be set in a suitable place where the meter
can be installed and maintained by the city. The city has the right to change the design or method of
meters if it deems necessary. The city may also install an outside meter reader to make accessibility to
meter readings more available.
(E) Meter reading and inspection. City employees assigned for the purpose of meter reading shall
have free access at reasonable hours of the day to all parts of every building and premises connected with
city water systems for reading meters and inspections. The city may, at its option, use other methods of
meter reading, such as mailing requests to users for self-reading and returning the readings to the city
for billing. A fee may be charged to users for not returning a meter reading upon request.
(F) Non-metered water - estimated amount. If it is not possible to meter water used in certain
circumstances such as, but not limited to, temporary disconnected or defective meters or use of water
from city hydrants with permission of the city, the city’s Clerk-Treasurer may estimate the amount used
during that period using any reasonable method for determining the amount. But in no event shall the
charge be less than the minimum amount as established by resolution of the City Council.
(G) Turning on water after service has been disconnected. A service charge, which is established
by resolution of the City Council per the city fee schedule, shall be made for turning on and turning off
water where service has been either turned off for non-payment of water charge due to failure to repair
a leak or discontinuance for any other cause.
(H) Restricted hours of use of water supply; violation.
(1) Whenever the City Council shall determine a shortage of water threatens the city, it may,
by resolution, limit the times and hours during which water may be used from the city water supply
system for lawn and garden sprinkling, irrigation, car washing, air conditioning or other uses specified
therein. The resolution shall state the date upon which it shall become effective and shall be made public
through whatever means of communication the City Council deems appropriate and reasonable.
(2) Twenty-four hours after the resolution becomes effective, any water customer who shall
cause or permit water to be used in violation of the provisions of the resolution shall be deemed in
violation of this section and the resolution and will be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day the violation
continues, it shall be considered a separate and immediate discontinuance of water service without a
hearing.
(I) Repairs of leaks.
(1) It shall be the responsibility of the consumer or owner of the property to maintain the water
and sewer service line that commences from the connection at the curb of the street to the connection at
the house or building. In case of failure upon the part of any consumer or owner to repair any leak
occurring in his or her service line within 24 hours of written notice which has been given to the
General Utilities 5
consumer or owner of the premises, the water will be shut off and will not be turned on until repairs are
made and the sum as established by resolution of the City Council has been paid.
(2) When the waste of water is great or when damage is likely to result in a leak, the water will
be turned off if the repair is not commenced immediately upon the giving of the notice.
(J) Consent and regulations. Every person applying for water and sewer service and every owner
of property for which application is made shall be deemed by the application to consent to all rules,
regulations and rates contained in the ordinances of the city and to all modifications thereof and all new
rates, regulations or rules duly adopted.
(K) Taking water without authority. It is hereby declared a misdemeanor for any person, firm or
corporation to take any service described herein without proper authority therefor. The city may charge
for water per the city fee schedule.
(L) Deficiency in supply of water and shutting off water for emergency or repair. The city shall not
be liable for any deficiency or failure in the supply of water to consumers, whether occasioned by
shutting off the water for the purpose of making repairs, connections or from any other cause
whatsoever. In case of fire, or alarm of fire or other emergency, water may be shut off to ensure a
supply for firefighting or in making repairs or construction of new water works; in such events, water
may be shut off at any time and kept off as long as necessary.
(M) Dates payable and penalties and certification to County Auditor.
(1) Bills are due when rendered and may be paid without penalty up to and including the
fifteenth day of the month in which they are due.
(2) The amount of penalty for non-payment of water and sewer bills within the time limits shall
be 10% of the amount of the bill.
(3) By November 1 of each year, the Clerk-Treasurer shall make a complete list of all water
and sewer bills remaining delinquent, and shall notify each delinquent customer. This list will be
presented to the Council for adoption as part of an assessment roll of delinquent account status, which
will be certified to the County Auditor for collection with real estate taxes against the property served.
(4) The Clerk-Treasurer shall prepare and present to the City Council on or before December
1 of each year an assessment roll of all delinquent accounts providing for assessment of delinquent
accounts against the respective properties serviced. Upon adoption by the City Council, the Clerk-
Treasurer shall certify the assessment roll to the County Auditor to be extended on the property tax lists
of the county for collection in the same manner as provided by law for municipal taxes.
(N) Discontinuance of service.
(1) The city reserves the right to discontinue water services without notice when the same is
necessary to the repair of either the water or sewer system or any part thereof, or for the non-payment
6 New Germany - Public Works
of the bills. The city also reserves the right to place unpaid water and sewer charges on the tax rolls as
provided by state statutes. In addition to all other methods of collection delinquent accounts including
legal action, the city shall have the right to shut off the water service to any delinquent customer when
satisfactory arrangements for payment have not been made. The action shall be taken only after following
the procedure set forth in division (O) below.
(2) Whenever water service to any premises has been disconnected, service shall not be
restored, except upon the payment of all delinquent amounts due, plus any penalties, interest and
reconnection charges.
(O) Notice and hearing.
(1) The water shall not be shut off until notice and opportunity for a hearing have first been
given the occupant of the premises involved. The notice shall be personally served when possible, or
notice shall be served by first class mail and any other means available as approved by City Council. The
notice shall state the amount delinquent and any penalty and interest due and that if payment is not made
before the date stated in the notice, but not less than ten days after the date on which the notice is given,
the water supply to the premises will be shut off.
(2) The notice shall also state that the occupant may, before such date, demand a hearing in
writing delivered to the city’s Clerk-Treasurer on the matter. If a hearing is requested, the water supply
will not be shut off until after the hearing is held. If the owner or customer requests a hearing before the
date specified, the hearing shall be held on the matter by the City Council within at least ten days after
the date on which the request is made. If, as a result of the hearing, the City Council finds that the
amount claimed to be owed is actually due and unpaid, and that there is not legal reason why the water
supply of the delinquent owner or customer may not be shut off in accordance with this section, the city
may then shut off the water supply.
(P) Funds and allocation. Funds received from the collection of the rates and charges herein before
provided shall be deposited as received with the city’s Clerk-Treasurer, who shall keep the same in a
separate fund designed “Water Revenue Funds” and “Sewer Revenue Funds”. Moneys in the funds shall
be used for the payment of the cost and expense of operation, maintenance repair and management of
the water and sewer systems. Any surplus in the funds over and above the requirements hereinbefore
mentioned may be used for enlargements of and replacements to the system and parts thereof or
transferred to the city’s General Fund.
(Ord. 79, passed 1-15-2003)
CHAPTER 51: SANITARY SEWERS
Section
51.01 Definitions
51.02 Prohibited wastes
51.03 Admission of industrial wastes
51.04 Use of public sewers required
51.05 Public sewage disposal
51.06 Building sewers and connections
51.07 Protection from damage
51.08 Powers and authority of inspectors
51.09 Rates and charges
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
APPROVING AUTHORITY. The City Council of the City of New Germany, or its duly authorized
agent or representative.
BOD. The quantity of oxygen expressed in parts per million by weight, utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five days at a temperature of 20°C.
The laboratory determinations shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard
Methods.
BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives
the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it
to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of
disposal.
CITY. The City of New Germany, Minnesota, or any authorized person acting in its behalf.
CITY ENGINEER. The person or consulting engineering firm employed by the City Council to
provide engineering services for the city.
7
8 New Germany - Public Works
INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct from domestic
sanitary sewage.
INSPECTOR. The person or persons duly authorized by the city to inspect and approve the
installation of building sewers and their connection to the public sewer system.
MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or
ground water.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COST. Annual expenditures made by the city in the operation
and maintenance of its sewage treatment facilities, consisting of and limited to the sums spent for each
and all of the following purposes for the 12-month period prior to computing the industrial service
charge:
(1) Wages and salaries of operating, maintenance and supervisory personnel, together with
premiums paid on the wages and salaries for state worker’s compensation coverage;
(2) Actual sums paid for electricity for light and power used for sewage collection and
treatment facilities;
(3) Actual sums paid for chemicals, fuel and other operating supplies;
(4) Actual sums paid for repairs to and maintenance of sewage treatment facilities and the
equipment associated therewith;
(5) Actual sums paid as premiums for hazard insurance carried on sewage works; and
(6) Actual sums paid as premiums for insurance providing coverage against liability imposed
by law for the injury to persons and/or property (including death) of any person or persons resulting
from the use and maintenance of the sewerage works.
PARTS PER MILLION. A weight-weight ratio; the parts-per-million value multiplied by the factor
8.345 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.
PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group.
PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and is
controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm and ground waters are not
intentionally admitted.
Sanitary Sewers 9
SEWAGE. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings,
institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may
be present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT FACILITIES. Any city-owned facility, devices and structures used for
receiving and treating sewage from the city sanitary sewer system, including sewage pumping station,
force main, stabilization ponds and appurtenances.
SEWAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.
SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
STANDARD METHODS. The examination and analytical procedure set forth in the latest edition,
at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage, as prepared,
approved and published by the American Public Health Association.
SUPERINTENDENT. The city’s Utility Superintendent.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float of the surface of, or are in suspension in water,
sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative
determination of suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard
Methods.
WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
(Ord. 42, passed 6-27-1972)
§ 51.02 PROHIBITED WASTES.
(A) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, ground
water, subsurface water, roof runoff, yard drainage, yard fountain, pond overflow, unpolluted industrial
or commercial process water, any type or form of clean water or any substance other than sanitary
sewage into the sanitary collection system of the city.
(B) No roof drain, sump pump, foundation drain, drain tile, swimming pool discharge or surface
water drainage shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system and no building shall hereafter be
constructed, nor shall any existing buildings be hereafter altered, in a manner that the roof drainage,
foundation drain, drain tile or any other source of the discharge or drainage other than sanitary sewer
shall connect with the sanitary sewer system. Building drain and building sewer piping shall be
maintained so as to prevent the infiltration of a water of substance other than sanitary sewage into the
sanitary collection system of the city.
10 New Germany - Public Works
(C) Any person, firm or corporation having a roof drain, sump pump, foundation drain, drain tile,
swimming pool discharge, cistern overflow pipe or surface drain now connected and/or discharging into
the sanitary sewer system shall be disconnected and/or removed. Any disconnects or openings in the
sanitary sewer shall be closed or repaired in an effective, workmanlike manner as described in division
(D) below and as approved by the City Engineer.
(D) All sump pumps shall have a discharge pipe installed to the outside wall of the building with
one-inch inside minimum diameter. The pipe attachment must be a permanent fitting such as PVC pipe
with glued fittings. The discharge shall extend at least three feet outside of the foundation wall and must
be directed toward the front yard or rear yard area of the property. All foundation drains, drain tiles and
other non-compliant connections to the city sanitary sewer shall be disconnected from the city’s
collection system, and the disconnection, wye, opening, protruding tap or other method of connection
shall be plugged or bulk-headed in a permanent fashion, so as to maintain the continuity of the city’s
collection piping and as approved by the City Engineer.
(E) Every person owning improved real estate that discharges into the city’s sanitary sewer system
shall allow an employee or agent of the city the right of entry to inspect the interior of the buildings or
structures to confirm that there is no sump pump, foundation drain, drain tile or other prohibited
discharge into the sanitary sewer system. Any person refusing to allow his or her property to be
inspected shall immediately become subject to the surcharge hereinafter provided for, and will continue
to be considered non-compliant until such a time as right of entry is granted and the absence of
prohibited connections and/or discharge is certified by an authorized employee or agent of the city.
(F) The owner of record of any property found to violate this section shall be notified by the city
in writing by certified mail. Violations found not to comply with this section shall be brought into
compliance within 30 days of the notice of violation. No extensions or waivers shall be given. At such
time that a non-compliant connection has been disconnected and the necessary steps taken to make the
necessary changes to comply with this section, the changes shall be certified by an authorized employee
or agent of the city. Following certification, any surcharge shall be discontinued on the next sewer
billing.
(G) If the violation(s) is not brought into compliance within 30 days of the notice of violation, a
surcharge of $100 per month is hereby imposed and shall be added to every sewer billing mailed to
property owners who are not in compliance with this section. The city shall continue to impose a
monthly surcharge to that property until such a time as the violation(s) has been brought into compliance
and certified by the city as required by this section. The imposition of the surcharge shall in no way limit
the right of the city to seek an injunction in district court ordering the property owner to correct the
violation(s) to the sanitary sewer system or from pursuing any other legal remedies available. If the
violation(s) is not brought into compliance within 60 days of the notice of violation(s), then the city shall
provide a second notice, via certified mail, informing the property owner that water service provided
by the city will be disconnected. If the violation(s) is not brought into compliance within 90 days of the
notice of violation(s), then the city shall discontinue water service to that property until such time as the
violation(s) has been brought into compliance and certified by the city as required by this section.
Sanitary Sewers 11
(H) Certification of violation(s) brought into compliance shall be completed by an authorized city
employee or agent. Certification may not be made by any person who is not an approved agent of the
city.
(I) Prior to change of ownership of any building(s) within the city, the seller should have the
building(s) certified for compliance with this section prior to the closing of the sale or transfer. It is the
responsibility of the seller or seller’s agent to notify the city of a proposed change of ownership. Any
building(s) that has not been certified as compliant shall be assumed to be non-compliant with this
section, if a property is found to be non-compliant after a property is transferred, the city shall enforce
this section according to the provisions in divisions (F) and (G) above.
(J) Upon verified compliance with this section, the city reserves the right to inspect the property
annually to verify continued compliance.
(Ord. 42, passed 6-27-1972; Ord. 101A, passed 12-19-2017) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.03 ADMISSION OF INDUSTRIAL WASTES.
(A) Treatment of industrial wastes. The economy and desirability of the combined treatment of
industrial wastes and sanitary sewage is recognized. However, not all types and quantities of industrial
wastes can be so treated. Hence, it shall be the established policy of the city to admit those types and
quantities of industrial wastes that are not harmful or damaging to the structures, process or operation
of the sewage works or are not specifically prohibited by this chapter. It is also recognized the cost of
which must be born by the industries, which require the additional facilities for their wastes and,
therefore, receives its benefits. The types and quantities of industrial waste which may be admitted into
the public sewage system of the city without pretreatment shall be established by the City Engineer and
approved by the City Council.
(B) Approval required for industrial wastes. In order to control the admission of industrial wastes,
the discharge into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having:
(1) A five-day, 20°C BOD greater than 400 mg/l;
(2) A suspended solids content greater than 350 mg/l;
(3) A chloride demand greater than 15 mg/l;
(4) An average daily flow greater than 10% of the average daily sewage flow at the sewage
treatment works;
(5) Any toxic substance; or
(6) Any wastes, which are considered by the City Engineer to offer possibilities of harm to
structures, processes or operation of the plant, shall be subject to the review and approval of the City
Council.
12 New Germany - Public Works
(C) Survey data required. Any users of the sewage system who will be discharging industrial wastes
to the public sewer shall fill in and file with the City Engineer, within 30 days, a questionnaire which
shall furnish pertinent data, inclusive of quantity of flow and an analysts of the water discharged to the
sewage treatment plant. Similarly, any person desiring to make a new connection to the sewage system
for the purpose of discharging industrial wastes to be the public sewers shall fill in and file with the City
Engineer an industrial waste questionnaire which shall furnish pertinent or predicted data inclusive of
quantity of flow and an analysis of the industrial waste to be discharged into the sewer system.
(D) Sampling and analysis. Samples shall be a composite sample collected over a three-day period
of operation to as to be a truly representative sample of the actual quality of the wastes. Samples, for
analysis, must be collected by the Engineer or his or her representative. An analysis shall be made by
a qualified sanitary engineer using the laboratory methods for the examination of industrial waste, as set
forth in the latest edition of Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Sewage, as published by
the American Public Health Services.
(E) Extension of time. When, due to the size or complexity of the waste disposal problem of an
industry, it can be shown that it is impractical to meet the schedule imposed under division (C) above,
a request for an extension of time may be presented to the city.
(F) Control manholes. Any establishment discharging industrial wastes into the sewage system shall
construct and maintain, at his or her expense, a suitable control manhole, or manholes downstream from
any treatment storage, or other approved works, to facilitate observation, measurement and sampling of
all wastes, including domestic sewage from the establishment. The control manhole or manholes shall
be constructed at suitable and satisfactory locations and built in a manner approved by the
Superintendent. The control manhole shall be accessible to the Superintendent or his or her
representatives at all times for sampling.
(G) Pretreatment. When required in the opinion of the City Council, the user of the city sewer
system shall provide, at his, her or its expense, the preliminary treatment or handling as may be
necessary to modify the objectionable characteristics or constituents to come within the limits set forth
in division (B) above.
(Ord. 42, passed 6-27-1972) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.04 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary
manner upon public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city
any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste which ordinarily would be
regarded as sewage or industrial wastes.
(B) It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the city, any sanitary sewage, industrial waste or other polluted waters, except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
Sanitary Sewers 13
(C) Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy
vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facilities intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(D) The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment,
recreation or other purposes situated with the city and abutting any street, alley or right-of-way in which
there is not located or may, in the future, be located a public sewer of the city, is hereby required at his
or her expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect the facilities directly with the
proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after date of
official notice to do so; provided that, the public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line.
(Ord. 42, passed 6-27-1972) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.05 PUBLIC SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
(A) Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of § 51.04(D) of this
chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with all
requirements of the state’s Pollution Control Agency, the Metropolitan Sewer Board and the city’s
Health Officer.
(B) At such times as the public sewer becomes available to a property served by a sewage disposal
system as provided in § 51.04(D) of this chapter, a direct connection shall be made within 90 days to
the public sewer in compliance with this chapter and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private
sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned.
(C) The owner shall operate and maintain the private disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all
times, at no expense to the city.
(D) No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional
requirements that may be imposed by the city’s Health Officer.
(Ord. 42, passed 6-27-1972) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.06 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
(A) No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter
or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the
city’s Clerk-Treasurer. Before a permit may be issued for excavation for plumbing in any public street,
way or alley, the person applying for the permit shall have executed unto the city and deposit with the
city’s Clerk-Treasurer a corporate bond in the sum of $25,000 conditioned that he or she will perform
faithfully all work with due care and skill and in accordance with laws, rules and regulations established
under the authority of any ordinances of the city pertaining to plumbing. This bond shall state that the
person will indemnify and save harmless the city and the owner of the premises against all damages,
costs, expenses, outlays and claims of every nature and kind arising out of unskillful ness or negligence
on his or her part in connection with plumbing or excavating for plumbing as prescribed in this chapter.
The bond shall remain in force and must be executed for a period of one year; except that, on the
14 New Germany - Public Works
expiration, it shall remain in force as to all penalties, claims and demands that may have accrued
hereunder prior to the expiration. Copies of insurance shall be filed with the city’s Clerk-Treasurer;
coverage shall conform to current requirements for construction contracts of the city.
(B) There shall be a building sewer permit and the owner or his or her agent shall make application
on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the City Engineer.
(C) All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be
borne by the owner. The owner or the person installing the building sewer for the owner should
indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may direct or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation.
(D) A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where
one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be
constructed to the rear building through a adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer
from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building
sewer. Other exceptions will be allowed only by special permission granted by the City Council.
(E) Old building sewer or portions thereof may be used in connection with new buildings only when
they are found on examination and test by the Superintendent to meet all requirements of this chapter.
(F) The building sewer shall be constructed of either vitrified clay sewer pipe or fittings meeting
the current A.S.T.M. specifications for standard or extra strength clay sewer pipe or extra heavy cast
iron soil pipe meeting the current A.S.T.M. specifications or the Department of Commerce’s commercial
standards for extra heavy cast soil pipe and fittings. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building
sewer shall be as allowed in the Minnesota Building Code; except that, vitrified clay pipe may be
accepted if laid on a suitable improved bed or cradle as approved by the inspector. Other sewer materials
may be used if approved by resolution of the City Council.
(G) All joints and connections shall be made gas-tight and water-tight. Vitrified clay sewer pipe
joints shall be in conformance with the Minnesota Plumbing Code. Before joining the pipe in the trench,
the bell and spigot surfaces shall be wiped free of dirt or other foreign matter. The spigot end shall be
positioned into the bell end of the pipe previously laid and shall then be shoved home to assure a tight
fit. Joints for cast iron soil pipe shall be rubber ring or equal in conformance with the Minnesota
Plumbing Code. PVC sewer pipe shall be solvent weld joint in accordance with the manufacturer’s
instructions.
(H) The size and slope of the building sewers shall be subject to the approval of the Superintendent,
but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope of the four-inch pipe shall not be
less than one-eighth inch per foot. A slope of one-fourth inch per foot shall be used, wherever practical.
(I) Whenever possible, the building sever shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the
basement floor. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. All excavations required
for the installation of a building sewer should be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the
Sanitary Sewers 15
inspector. Pipe laying and backfill shall be in conformance with the Minnesota Plumbing Code; except
that, no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected by the Superintendent or his or her
representative.
(J) No septic tank discharge will be allowed into the sanitary sewer system. Existing septic tanks
may be left in place if the septic tank is first pumped clean and then filled with compacted granular
material. The building sewer may be laid across an existing septic tank if the truck is pumped and filled
as outlined above and then if the building sewer is constructed of cast iron pipe across the septic tank.
No joints will be allowed on the portion of pipe spanning the septic tank.
(K) (1) In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public
sewer, sanitary sewage carried by the drains shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged
to the building sewer.
(2) No water-operated sewage injector shall be used.
(L) The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the “Y” branch
designated for that property, if the branch is available at a suitable location. Any connection not made
at the designated “Y” branch in the main sewer shall be made only as directed by the Superintendent.
(M) The applicant for the building sewer shall notify the Superintendent when the building sewer
is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of the Superintendent or his or her representative.
(N) All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and
lights so as to protect from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in
the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
(Ord. 42, passed 6-27-1972) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.07 PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover,
deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage
works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of
disorderly conduct.
(Ord. 42, passed 6-27-1972) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.08 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
The Superintendent, inspector and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 42, passed 6-27-1972)
16 New Germany - Public Works
§ 51.09 RATES AND CHARGES.
(A) (1) Any person or owner discharging industrial wastes, which exhibit none of the
characteristics of waste prohibited in § 51.02 of this chapter, other than excessive BOD or suspended
solids, shall be charged on the following basis for sewer service.
(a) Operation and maintenance charges. As its proportionate share of the expenses
incurred by the city in the operation and maintenance of the city sewage treatment facilities and the city
sanitary sewer system, the person shall pay to the city a monthly sum equal to the total of the two sums
computed by the application of the following formulas and sampling procedures established herein:
1. The person’s total annual pounds of BOD divided by the total annual pounds of
BOD at the city sewage treatment facilities; the result so obtained to be multiplied by the operation and
maintenance cost of the sewage treatment facilities, plus the operation and maintenance cost of the
sanitary sewer system, and the result so obtained multiplied by one-twenty-fourth; and
2. The person’s total annual gallons of sewage divided by the total annual gallons of
sewage at the city sewage treatment facilities, the rest so obtained to be multiplied by the operation and
maintenance cost of the city sewage treatment facilities, plus the operation and maintenance cost of the
city sewage treatment facilities, plus the operation and maintenance cost of the sanitary sewer system and
the result so obtained multiplied by one-twenty-fourth.
(b) Industrial sewer hook-up charges. The industrial hook-up charge shall be a capital
contribution towards the sum that the city has invested in the waste treatment facilities. The person has
the option of paying the hook-up charge at the time it is assessed or to allow the charge to be paid in
installments with interest on the unpaid balance with the property taxes as provided in division (A)(2)(d)
below. The industrial hook-up charge shall be derived by the application of the following formula: the
person’s total annual gallons of sewage divided by the total annual gallons of sewage at the city sewage
treatment facilities: the result so obtained to be multiplied by $124,000. The ANNUAL GALLONS OF
SEWAGE FOR THE PERSON shall mean the first full year’s operation following the year after which
the hook-up to the sewer system is made. One hundred twenty-four thousand dollars represents the total
of the city’s investment to date in the sewage treatment facilities. The design of the present sewage
treatment facilities was governed by the hydraulic load; therefore, the industrial hook-up charge is based
on the quantity of sewage only.
(c) Participation in future construction costs. The annual rate of capital costs amortization
for all improvements necessary to increase the degree of treatment of the sewage at the city sewage
treatment facilities, where such improvements are required to meet standards of effluent quality and
purity established by the state’s Pollution Control Agency, will be apportioned as established herein and
extend for a period not to exceed the amortization period of the improvements.
(2) (a) For sewer services and the availability thereof, any person connection to or benefitting
from the public sewer agrees to pay the rates and charges established therefor from the time to time by
Council resolution. The user charges for service to be paid by any person connecting premises to the
Sanitary Sewers 17
public sewer shall be based upon the existing water user charges. The exact method of determining user
charges shall be established by Council resolution. In addition to all other charges, each permit to
connect shall be accompanied by a special connection fee equal to a lateral assessment of $11 per front
foot for the sewers in the abutting street or right-of-way, plus a residential equivalent connection charge
in the amount of $350 for each residential dwelling unit, or equivalent, to be connected before
12-31-1972.
(b) After this date, the residential equivalent connection charge will be $400. The special
connection fee shall be reduced by the amount of any special assessments against the premises at the time
of construction of sewers in abutting streets and rights-of-way. All such special connection fees shall be
paid into the Bond Redemption Fund for payment of principal and interest on bonds outstanding, into
the General Fund of the city to reimburse advances made to the sanitary sewer system by the city.
(c) In respect to property which shall be connected with the city sewer system for the
discharge and disposal of any waste unusual in either character of amount, then, in addition to all
applicable charges hereunder, the City Council reserves the right to impose the supplemental sewage rate
charge as the City Council shall determine is reasonable and warranted on the basis of all relevant
factors.
(d) The City Council may, by its resolution, provide that any sewer connection as provided
by division (A)(2)(a) above, be transmitted to the County Auditor to be payable in not more than 15
annual installments of principal, plus 7% annual interest on the unpaid balance from year to year; and,
to provide further that, all connection charges and interest collected by the County Treasurer therefrom
shall be paid over to the city’s Clerk-Treasurer in the same manner as other municipal taxes.
(e) Any application for connection permit shall state whether the subject premises has paid
an assessment and, if so, the amount so assessed and the legal description of the premises as originally
assessed.
(f) The charges established pursuant to this chapter shall be a lien on the real estate
benefitted thereby and against which same is established, and shall be of equal rank with the liens and
taxes levied under the general laws of the state, and shall become due and payable as fixed by the
resolution establishing the charges. The charges may also at the option of the city be enforced against
the owner, lessee or occupant of the property benefitted by the connection service, or availability of
service or against all of them in a civil action without the waiver of other remedies.
(B) Statements for sewer rental charges for the preceding quarterly period shall be mailed to each
customer at such dates as prescribed by the Clerk-Treasurer on or before the fifteenth of the month
following date of bill.
(C) Any amounts due hereunder for sewage charges may be collected in an action brought for that
purpose in the name of the city; or the Clerk-Treasurer may certify to the County Auditor and amounts
for sewer charges, including penalty, together with the legal description of the premises served and the
18 New Germany - Public Works
County Auditor shall thereupon enter the amount with the tax levy on the premises collectible with the
taxes for the next ensuing year.
(Ord. 42, passed 6-27-1972)
CHAPTER 52: WATER REGULATIONS
Section
Water Usage in a Critical Water Deficiency
52.01 Purpose
52.02 Definitions
52.03 Application
52.04 Declaration of critical water deficiency
52.05 Mandatory emergency water conservation measures
52.06 Variances
52.07 Violation
52.08 Enforcement
§ 52.01 PURPOSE.
This subchapter establishes water conservation restrictions and the plan will be in effect at any time
the Governor declares by executive order a critical water deficiency, pursuant to M.S. § 103G.291, as
it may be amended from time to time.
§ 52.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
CLERK-TREASURER. The person assigned duties pursuant to M.S. § 412.151, as it may be
amended from time to time.
DEPARTMENT. The City Water Department.
EMERGENCY. The declaration of a critical water deficiency by the Governor.
IRRIGATION. The watering of shrubs, trees, sod, seeded areas, gardens, lawns, or any other
outdoor vegetation, except outdoor vegetation utilized for agricultural purposes.
19
20 New Germany - Public Works
NOTIFICATION TO PUBLIC. Notification through local media, including interviews and issuance
of news releases.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLIER. The city or other entity that owns, manages, or operates a public
water supply, as defined in M.S. § 144.382, subd. 4, as it may be amended from time to time.
RECLAIMED WATER. Water collected from rooftops, paved surfaces, or other collection devices
and all water utilized more than once before re-entering the natural water cycle.
WATER RECIRCULATION SYSTEM. Any system which enables a user to reuse water at least
once prior to returning the water to the natural water cycle.
§ 52.03 APPLICATION.
(A) This subchapter applies to all customers of public water suppliers who own or control water use
on any premises.
(B) No person shall make, cause, use, or permit the use of water received from a public water
supply for residential, commercial, industrial, governmental, or any other purpose in any manner
contrary to any provision in this subchapter.
(C) Mandatory emergency conservation measures shall be implemented based upon the declaration
of a critical water emergency by the Governor.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.04 DECLARATION OF CRITICAL WATER DEFICIENCY.
Upon the declaration of a critical water deficiency by the Governor, the public water supplier shall
immediately post notice of the emergency declaration at the usual meeting place of the City Council, or
the official city bulletin board. The city shall provide notification to the public as quickly as possible or
through established water supply plans emergency response plans or procedures.
§ 52.05 MANDATORY EMERGENCY WATER CONSERVATION MEASURES.
Upon declaration of a water emergency and notification to the public, the following mandatory
restrictions upon nonessential water use shall be enforced:
(A) Outdoor irrigation of yards, gardens, golf courses, parklands, and other non-agricultural land,
except for those areas irrigated with reclaimed water, is prohibited.
Water Regulations 21
(B) Washing or spraying of sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios, or other
paved areas with water from any pressurized source, including garden hoses, except to alleviate
immediate health or safety hazards, is prohibited.
(C) The outdoor use of any water-based play apparatus connected to a pressurized source is
prohibited.
(D) Restaurants and other food service establishments are prohibited from serving water to their
customers, unless water is specifically requested by the customer.
(E) Operation of outdoor misting systems used to cool public areas is prohibited.
(F) The filling of swimming pools, fountains, spas or other exterior water features is prohibited.
(G) The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, and other types of mobile equipment is prohibited,
except at facilities equipped with wash water recirculation systems, and for vehicles requiring frequent
washing to protect public health, safety, and welfare.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.06 VARIANCES.
The City Clerk-Treasurer or their designee, is authorized to grant variances to this subchapter where
strict application of its provisions would result in serious hardship to a customer. A variance may be
granted only for reasons involving health or safety. An applicant may appeal the denial of a variance
within five days of the decision by submitting a written appeal to the City Clerk-Treasurer. The City
Council shall hear the appeal at the next City Council meeting. The decision of the City Council is final.
§ 52.07 VIOLATION.
(A) Violations shall be determined and cited by the City Clerk-Treasurer or his/her designee. A
violator may appeal the citation within five days of its issuance by submitting a written appeal to the city.
The City Council shall hear the appeal at the next City Council meeting. The decision of the City
Council is final. Violators may be granted an administrative waiver if evidence is provided that
equipment failure was the cause of the violation. A letter from a qualified vendor or equipment invoice
will be required to show proof of equipment failure.
(B) Upon discovery of a first violation, the violator shall be issued, either personally or by mail,
a warning letter that sets forth the violation and which shall describe the remedy and fines for future
violations.
22 New Germany - Public Works
(C) Upon subsequent violations at the same location, the violator shall be issued, either personally
or by mail, a citation that sets forth the violation and shall describe the remedy. Fines shall be added to
the monthly water bill of the owner or current occupant of the premises where the violation occurred.
The imposition of the fine shall in no way limit the right of the city to pursue other legal remedies.
§ 52.08 ENFORCEMENT.
The City Clerk-Treasurer or his/her designee is authorized to designate city employees or law
enforcement personnel to enforce the provisions of this subchapter.
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter
70. TRAFFIC AND PARKING
1
2 New Germany - Traffic Code
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Section
Traffic Rules
70.01 Highway Traffic Regulation Act adopted
70.02 Exhibition driving
Parking Regulations
70.15 Overtime parking; parking of commercial vehicles
70.16 No parking zones and limited parking zones
70.17 Abandoning vehicles on public streets and alleyways
70.18 Vehicle sales
70.19 Restrictions during snow removal; winter months
70.20 Disposing illegally parked vehicles
TRAFFIC RULES
§ 70.01 HIGHWAY TRAFFIC REGULATION ACT ADOPTED.
The provisions of M.S. Ch. 168, as it may be amended from time to time, the provisions of M.S.
Ch. 169, commonly known as “Highway Traffic Regulation Act”, as it may be amended from time to
time, and the provisions of M.S. Ch. 171, as it may be amended from time to time, and all acts
supplemental thereto, together with all the provisions hereinafter contained are hereby adopted as the
“traffic code” of and for the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in the city
or to use the streets of the city in any manner contrary to that described in M.S. Ch. 168, Ch. 169 and
Ch. 171, as they may be amended from time to time, and the provisions herein contained.
(Ord. 45, passed 3-5-1974) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.02 EXHIBITION DRIVING.
Any person, firm or corporation driving and/or operating a vehicle within the limits of the city in
a manner: that creates or causes unnecessary engine noise or tire squeal, skid of slide upon acceleration
3
4 New Germany - Traffic Code
or stopping; that simulates a temporary race; or that causes the vehicle to unnecessarily turn abruptly
or away shall be guilty of exhibition driving.
(Ord. 45, passed 3-5-1974) Penalty, see § 10.99
PARKING REGULATIONS
§ 70.15 OVERTIME PARKING; PARKING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
No person shall park or leave any motor vehicle, non-motor vehicle or trailer whether attended or
unattended, upon any public street, public alleyway or public lot for a period of time longer than 24
consecutive hours. No trucks licensed at a gross vehicle weight above 15,000 pounds, and requiring
DOT certification, or truck-trailers shall be parked on any public street or public alleyway between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. No person shall park or leave any motor vehicle or trailer unless it
is in the process of being loaded or unloaded so as to block any public street or public alleyway at any
time.
(Ord. 85-A, passed 5-16-2017) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.16 NO PARKING ZONES AND LIMITED PARKING ZONES.
The City Council may also, from time to time, designate certain streets and alleys or portions
thereof, as “no parking” zones or as “limited parking” zones for a period of time. These zones would
be properly marked to reflect their parking character.
(Ord. 85-A, passed 5-16-2017)
§ 70.17 ABANDONING VEHICLES ON PUBLIC STREETS AND ALLEYWAYS.
It is unlawful for any person to abandon a motor vehicle in the right-of-way of public streets and
public alleyways within the corporate limits of the city. No person shall park or leave any motor vehicle
in a wrecked, junked, partially dismantled or inoperative condition in a right-of-way of any street or
alley; provided that, a reasonable time, not to exceed 24 hours from the time of disability is permitted
for the removal of or servicing of a disabled vehicle in an emergency caused by an accident or sudden
breakdown of the vehicle. Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to remove an abandoned, wrecked,
junked, partially dismantled or inoperative vehicle or to house the vehicle and abate the nuisance shall
be guilty of a penal offense.
(Ord. 85-A, passed 5-16-2017) Penalty, see § 10.99
Traffic and Parking 5
§ 70.18 VEHICLE SALES.
No vehicle for sale by owner or his or her agent shall be parked or left on the street or alleyway for
the purpose of displaying the vehicle with the intent to sell it.
(Ord. 85-A, passed 5-16-2017) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.19 RESTRICTIONS DURING SNOW REMOVAL; WINTER MONTHS.
(A) During the winter months of each year, no motor vehicle shall be parked on either side of any
street or alleyway within the city limits following a snowfall of one inch or more or otherwise interfere
with snow removal operations. After the snow removal is complete, parking can again be resumed upon
those streets and alleyways that have been cleaned of snow.
(B) No parking will be allowed on any public street or alleyway within the city limits from
November 1 through March 31 from 2:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. The winter parking rule is in effect when
snow on the ground exceeds one inch.
(Ord. 85-A, passed 5-16-2017) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.20 DISPOSING ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES.
If any persons shall violate the terms and provisions of this subchapter, authorized persons shall be
designated by motion of the City Council, upon discovery of a violation, the Council may direct the
vehicle to be removed from the place where it was found and be placed in any public or private garage
within the city or as designated by the City Council; the vehicle shall not be released or delivered to the
owner thereof until the cost of above removal has been satisfied; this may include removal, storage and
towing charges, these fees shall be paid to the city’s Clerk-Treasurer. In the event that the owner of the
vehicle refuses to pay the abovementioned fees within ten days subsequent to the removal thereof,
another authorized person, as designated by the motion of the City Council, shall forthwith cause the
vehicle to be sold at public auction to the highest bidder for cash. Before the sale, a posted notice, ten
days prior, shall be posted giving notice of the sale and a copy of sale notice will be mailed to the owner
thereof by certified mail, if owner address can be ascertained, no less than five days prior to the sale.
The notice shall state the time and place of the sale, the accrued costs of removal, storage and any other
related costs and that the sale is made pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter. At the time of the
sale and, if sold, the city’s Clerk-Treasurer or other legally designated official is hereby authorized and
directed to make, execute an deliver to the purchaser a certificate of sale or the vehicle and shall apply
the proceeds of the sale to the costs and expenses of the sale, then to the payment of the storage and
removal costs and the residue thereof shall be forwarded to the owner, if the owner’s name and address
can be ascertained. In the event that owner’s name and address cannot be ascertained, the same shall be
paid to the city’s Clerk-Treasurer to be held by the Clerk-Treasurer pending demand by the owner.
(Ord. 85-A, passed 5-16-2017)
6 New Germany - Traffic Code
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
90. ANIMALS
91. FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION
92. PUBLIC NUISANCES
1
2 New Germany - General Regulations
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
90.01 Definitions
90.02 Dogs and cats; running at large; vaccinations
90.03 Impounding animals
90.04 Kennels
90.05 Nuisances; dangers to health and safety
90.06 Seizure of animals
90.07 Diseased animals
90.08 Dangerous animals
90.09 Basic care
90.10 Pound
90.11 Interference with animal control officers
90.12 Livestock
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
AT LARGE. Off the premises of the owner and not under the custody and control of the owner or
other person, either by leash, cord, chain or otherwise restrained or confined.
CAT. Both the male and female of the felidae species, commonly accepted as domesticated
household pets.
DOG. Both the male and female of the canine species, commonly accepted as domesticated
household pets, and other domesticated animals of a dog kind.
DOMESTIC ANIMALS. Those animals commonly accepted as domesticated household pets. Unless
otherwise defined, DOMESTIC ANIMALS shall include dogs, cats, caged birds, gerbils, hamsters,
guinea pigs, domesticated rabbits, fish, non-poisonous, non-venomous and non-constricting reptiles or
amphibians and other similar animals.
FARM ANIMALS. Those animals commonly associated with a farm or performing work in an
agricultural setting. Unless otherwise defined, FARM ANIMALS shall include members of the equestrian
3
4 New Germany - General Regulations
family (donkeys, horses, mules), bovine family (buffalo, cows, bulls), sheep, poultry (guinea hens,
chickens, turkeys), fowl (ducks, geese), swine (including Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs), goats, llamas,
bees and other animals associated with a farm, ranch or stable.
NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS. Those animals commonly considered to be naturally wild and not
naturally trained or domesticated, or which are commonly considered to be inherently dangerous to the
health, safety and welfare of people. Unless otherwise defined, NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS shall
include:
(1) Any member of the large cat family (family felidae) including lions, tigers, cougars,
bobcats, leopards and jaguars, but excluding commonly accepted domesticated house cats;
(2) Any naturally wild member of the canine family (family canidae) including wolves, foxes,
coyotes, dingoes, and jackals, but excluding commonly accepted domesticated dogs;
(3) Any crossbreeds, such as the crossbreed between a wolf and a dog, unless the crossbreed
is commonly accepted as a domesticated house pet;
(4) Any member or relative of the rodent family, including any skunk (whether or not
de-scented), raccoon, squirrel or ferret, but excluding those members otherwise defined or commonly
accepted as domesticated pets;
(5) Any poisonous, venomous, constricting or inherently dangerous member of the reptile or
amphibian families including rattlesnakes, boa constrictors, pit vipers, crocodiles and alligators; and
(6) Any other animal which is not explicitly listed above, but which can be reasonably defined
by the terms of the sections, including, but not limited to, bears, deer, monkeys and game fish.
OWNER. Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning, keeping or harboring
an animal.
(Ord. 102, passed 1-3-2012)
§ 90.02 DOGS AND CATS; RUNNING AT LARGE; VACCINATIONS.
(A) Running at large prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the dog or cat of any person who owns,
harbors or keeps a dog or cat to run at large (off the premises of the owner and not under the custody
and control of the owner or other person, either by leash, cord, chain or otherwise restrained or
confined). A person who owns, harbors or keeps a dog or cat that runs at large shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. Dogs or cats on a leash and accompanied by a responsible person or accompanied by and
under the control and direction of a responsible person, so as to be effectively restrained by command
as by leash, shall be permitted in streets or on public land unless the city has posted an area with signs
reading “Dogs or Cats Prohibited”.
Animals 5
(B) Vaccination.
(1) All dogs and cats kept, harbored, maintained or transported within the city shall be
vaccinated at least once every three years by a licensed veterinarian for:
(a) Rabies, with a live modified vaccine; and
(b) Distemper.
(2) A certificate of vaccination must be kept on which is stated the date of vaccination, owner’s
name and address, the animal’s name (if applicable), sex, description and weight, the type of vaccine
and the veterinarian’s signature. Upon demand made by the city’s Clerk-Treasurer or the animal control
authority, the owner shall present for examination the required certificate(s) of vaccination for the
animal(s). In cases where certificates are not presented, the owner or keeper of the animal(s) shall have
seven days in which to present the certificate(s) to the city’s Clerk-Treasurer or animal control authority.
Failure to do so shall be deemed a violation of this section.
(Ord. 102, passed 1-3-2012) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.03 IMPOUNDING ANIMALS.
(A) Running at large. Any animal running at large is hereby declared a public nuisance. Any animal
control authority may impound any animal found running at large and shall give notice of the
impounding to the owner of the animal, if known. In case the owner is unknown, the animal control
authority shall post notice at the city office that if the animal is not claimed within the time specified in
division (C) below, it will be sold or otherwise disposed of.
(B) Biting animal. Any animal that has not been inoculated by a live modified rabies vaccine and
which has bitten any person, wherein the skin has been punctured or the services of a doctor are
required, shall be confined to a pound for a period of not less than ten days, at the expense of the owner.
The animal may be released at the end of the time if healthy and free from symptoms of rabies and by
payment of all costs by the owner. If, however, the animal has been inoculated with a live modified
rabies vaccine and the owner has proof of the vaccination by a certificate from a licensed veterinarian,
the owner may confine the animal to the owner’s property.
(C) Reclaiming. All animals conveyed to the pound shall be kept, with humane treatment and
sufficient food and water for their comfort, at least seven regular business days, including if the animal
is dangerous; in which case, it shall also be kept for seven regular business days and, except if, the
animal is a cruelly-treated animal in which case it shall be kept for ten regular business days, unless
sooner reclaimed by their owners or keepers as provided by this section. In case the owner or keeper
shall desire to reclaim the animal from the pound, the following shall be required, unless otherwise
provided for in this code or established from time to time by resolution of the City Council:
(1) Payment of maintenance costs, as provided at the pound, per day or any part of day while
animal is in the pound; and
6 New Germany - General Regulations
(2) With the required valid certificate of vaccination for rabies and distemper shots.
(D) Unclaimed animals. At the expiration of the times established in division (C) below, if the
animal has not been reclaimed in accordance with the provisions of this section, the animal control
authority appointed to enforce this section may let any person claim the animal by complying with all
provisions in this section or the animal control authority may sell the animal to the University of
Minnesota, or cause the animal to be destroyed in a proper and humane manner and shall properly
dispose of the remains thereof. Any money collected under this section shall be payable to the city’s
Clerk-Treasurer.
(Ord. 102, passed 1-3-2012)
§ 90.04 KENNELS.
(A) Definition of “kennel”. The keeping of four or more dogs on the same premises, whether owned
by the same person or not and for whatever purpose kept, shall constitute a KENNEL; except that, a
fresh litter of pups may be kept for a period of three months before that keeping shall be deemed to be
a KENNEL.
(B) Kennel as a nuisance. Because the keeping of four or more dogs on the same premises is subject
to great abuse, causing discomfort to persons in the area by way of smell, noise, hazard and general
aesthetic depreciation, the keeping of four or more dogs on the premises is hereby declared to be a
nuisance and no person shall keep or maintain a kennel within the city.
(Ord. 102, passed 1-3-2012) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.05 NUISANCES; DANGERS TO HEALTH AND SAFETY.
(A) (1) Habitual barking. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor a dog which
habitually barks or cries. HABITUAL BARKING, YELPING OR CRYING shall be defined as barking
for repeated intervals of at least three minutes with less than one minute of interruption, or repeated
intervals of barking for a period of 30 minutes or more with no more than five minutes of interruption
between barking intervals. The barking must also be audible off of the owner’s or caretaker’s premises.
(2) Damage to property. It shall be unlawful for any person’s animal to damage any lawn,
garden or other property, whether or not the owner has knowledge of the damage.
(3) Cleaning up litter. The owner of any animal or person having custody or control of any
animal shall be responsible for cleaning up any feces of the animal and disposing of the feces in a
sanitary manner, whether on his or her own property, on the property of others or on public property.
(4) Other. Any animal kept contrary to this section is subject to impoundment.
(B) If, in the reasonable belief of any person or animal control authority, an animal presents an
immediate danger to the health and safety of any person, the animal is threatening imminent harm to any
Animals 7
person or the animal is in the process of attacking any person, the person or animal control authority may
destroy the animal in a proper and humane manner. Otherwise, the person or animal control authority
may apprehend the animal and deliver it to the pound for confinement. If the animal is destroyed, the
owner or keeper of the animal destroyed shall be liable to the city for the cost of maintaining and
disposing of the animal, plus the costs of any veterinarian examination. If the animal is found not to be
a danger to the health and safety of the city, it may be released to the owner or keeper.
(Ord. 102, passed 1-3-2012) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.06 SEIZURE OF ANIMALS.
Any animal control authority may enter upon private property and seize any animal; provided that,
the following exist:
(A) There is an identified complainant other than the animal control authority making a
contemporaneous complaint about the animal;
(B) The animal control authority reasonably believes that the animal meets either the barking dog
criteria, the criteria for cruelty or the criteria for an at large animal;
(C) The animal control authority can demonstrate that there has been at least one previous complaint
of a barking dog, inhumane treatment of the animal or that the animal was at large at this address on a
prior date;
(D) The animal control authority has made a reasonable attempt to contact the owner of the animal
and the property to be entered and those attempts have either failed or have been ignored;
(E) The seizure will not involve the forced entry into a private residence;
(F) Written notice of the seizure is left in a conspicuous place if personal contact with the animal’s
owner or keeper is not possible.
(Ord. 102, passed 1-3-2012)
§ 90.07 DISEASED ANIMALS.
(A) Running at large. No person shall keep or allow to be kept on his or her premises, or on
premises occupied by them, nor permit to run at large in the city, any animal that is diseased so as to
be a danger to the health and safety of the city, and a warrant to search for and seize the animal is not
required.
(B) Confinement. Any animal reasonably suspected of being diseased and presenting a threat to the
health and safety of the public may be apprehended and confined in the pound by any person or animal
control authority. The animal control authority shall have a qualified veterinarian examine the animal.
If the animal is found to be diseased in a manner so as to be a danger to the health and safety of the city,
8 New Germany - General Regulations
the animal control authority shall cause the animal to be painlessly killed and shall properly dispose of
the remains. The owner or keeper of the animal killed under this section shall be liable to the city for
the cost of maintaining and disposing of the animal, plus the costs of any veterinarian examinations.
(C) Release. If the animal, upon examination, is not found to be diseased the animal shall be
released to the owner or keeper free of charge.
(Ord. 102, passed 1-3-2012) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.08 DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
This section hereby adopts County Ord. 69-2010, adopting Ch. 92, Dangerous and Potentially
Dangerous Dog Ordinance, and amending the county’s fee schedule in its entirety.
(Ord. 102, passed 1-3-2012)
§ 90.09 BASIC CARE.
(A) All animals shall receive from their owners or keepers kind treatment, housing in the winter and
sufficient food and water for their comfort.
(B) Any person not treating his or her pet in a humane manner will be subject to penalties.
(Ord. 102, passed 1-3-2012) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.10 POUND.
Every year, the Council shall designate an official pound to which animals found in violation of this
chapter shall be taken for safe treatment and, if necessary, for destruction.
(Ord. 102, passed 1-3-2012)
§ 90.11 INTERFERENCE WITH ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICERS.
No person shall in any manner molest, hinder or interfere with any person authorized by the City
Council to capture dogs, cats or other animals and convey them to the pound while engaged in that
operation; nor shall any unauthorized person break open the pound, or attempt to do so, or take or
attempt to take from any agent any animal taken up by him or her in compliance with this chapter, or
in any other manner to interfere with or hinder the animal control authority in the discharge of his or her
duties under this chapter.
(Ord. 102, passed 1-3-2012) Penalty, see § 10.99
Animals 9
§ 90.12 LIVESTOCK.
The owning, keeping, breeding, raising, maintaining, selling or buying of livestock in the city is
prohibited in all areas, except within the Agricultural (A) District.
(Ord. 76, passed 10-16-2002) Penalty, see § 10.99
10 New Germany - General Regulations
CHAPTER 91: FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION
Section
91.01 Fire limits
91.02 Unsafe buildings; removal or repair
91.03 Inspections
91.04 Electrical installations
91.05 Administrative fee
§ 91.01 FIRE LIMITS.
The following shall be and is hereby declared to be the fire limits area: Block 4; Block 5; Block 6;
and Block 7.
(Ord. 37, passed 3-20-1961)
§ 91.02 UNSAFE BUILDINGS; REMOVAL OR REPAIR.
A building or structure or part thereof declared structurally unsafe or hazardous by a duly
constituted authority may be restored to safe condition; provided that, if the damage or cost of restoration
and re-construction is in excess of 50% of the value of the building or structure, the building or
structure, if re-constructed or restored, shall be made to conform to the requirements for building and
structures contained in this chapter.
(Ord. 37, passed 3-20-1961) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.03 INSPECTIONS.
(A) It shall be the duty of the State Building Inspector to inspect or cause to be inspected, not less
than four times a year, all buildings and premises, except the interiors of private dwellings, for the
purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire.
(B) Whenever the inspector shall find in any building or upon any premises or other place,
combustible or explosive matter or dangerous accumulation of rubbish, or any highly flammable
materials, and so situated as to endanger property, he or she shall order the same to be removed or
remedied.
(Ord. 37, passed 3-20-1961)
11
12 New Germany - General Regulations
§ 91.04 ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS.
All electrical wiring, apparatus or appliances for furnishing light, heat or power shall be in strict
conformity with the statutes of the state and with approved methods of construction for safety to life and
property. The regulations in the Minnesota Electrical Code shall be prima facie evidence of the approved
methods.
(Ord. 37, passed 3-20-1961) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.05 ADMINISTRATIVE FEE.
An administrative fee with an annual review and adjustments shall apply to any person, who shall
violate a provision of this chapter or fail to comply therewith, shall severally for each and every violation
and non-compliance forfeits and pay a penalty not to exceed the sum of $25. The violation shall be
remedied within a reasonable time and each ten days that the violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offence.
(Ord. 37, passed 3-20-1961)
CHAPTER 92: PUBLIC NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
92.01 Public nuisance defined
92.02 Public nuisances affecting health
92.03 Public nuisances affecting peace, safety and aesthetics
92.04 Abatement
92.05 Recovery of costs
Abandoned, Disabled or Unlicensed Vehicles
92.20 Intent, nuisance and prohibitions
92.21 City authorized to impound
92.22 Impound facility
92.23 Notice
92.24 Right to reclaim
92.25 Disposal of unclaimed motor vehicle by public sale
Noise
92.35 Definitions
92.36 Noise prohibited
92.37 Receiving land use standards
92.38 Enforcement duties
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 PUBLIC NUISANCE DEFINED.
Whoever, by their act or failure to perform a legal duty, intentionally does any of the following is
guilty of maintaining a public nuisance, which is a misdemeanor:
(A) Maintains or allows a condition which unreasonably annoys, injures or endangers the safety,
health, comfort or rest of any considerable number of members of the public; or
13
14 New Germany - General Regulations
(B) Interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous for passage, any public highway or right-of-way;
and/or
(C) Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law or this chapter to be a public nuisance and
for which no sentence is specifically provided.
(Ord. 91, passed 6-19-2007) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.02 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.
(A) The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health:
(1) Allowing, keeping, maintaining, causing, suffering or permitting any type of waste,
including garbage, refuse, rubbish, decayed animal or vegetable matter, animal carcasses, rotting
lumber, barrels, cans, bottles, tubes, buckets, detached tires or other artificial containers or any other
material, including discarded or unused machinery and appliances in which flies, mosquitoes, insects,
rats or other vermin may breed, or which is a fire, health or safety hazard;
(2) Accumulations of manure, refuse or other debris or garbage; garbage cans or bags which
are not rodent-free or fly-tight or which are so maintained as to constitute a health hazard or to emit foul
and disagreeable odors;
(3) A pond or pool of foul or stagnant water;
(4) The pollution of any public well, stream or other body of water through the discharge of
sewage, industrial waste or other pollutants;
(5) Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, cinders or other airborne pollutants, so as to
bring discomfort to persons coming in contact with the pollutants;
(6) Grass and/or weeds which have grown upon any property to a height of six or more inches.
Overgrown, uncontrolled vegetation, shrubs, trees and vines that are conducive to the accumulation of
refuse, debris or the harborage of vermin;
(7) Conditions which, in the opinion of the enforcement officer and as consistent with public
health practices, are conducive to the harborage or breeding of vermin;
(8) Any truck, railroad car or other vehicle standing on or along any street, highway, railroad
track or other property within the city, carrying or containing any refuse, noxious substance or hazardous
waste;
(9) A building or structure within the city infested with rats or other vermin;
(10) No burying of garbage, trash or waste of any kind in the ground at any location other than
a legally designated disposal area;
Public Nuisances 15
(11) No burning of garbage, trash or waste; and
(12) Building materials may be kept outside of an enclosed structure for a maximum of 30 days
following the expiration of a building permit for which the material has been acquired.
(B) For the purpose of this section, JUNK is defined as any material or substance which does not
serve, nor is it intended to serve any useful purpose or the purpose for which it was originally intended;
(Ord. 91, passed 6-19-2007) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.03 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE, SAFETY AND AESTHETICS.
The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and safety and aesthetics:
(A) All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks 24 hours after the snow or other
precipitation causing the condition has ceased to fall;
(B) All unnecessary noises and annoying vibrations which unreasonably annoy or disturbs the peace
of any considerable number of members of the public;
(C) Obstructions and excavations effecting the ordinary public use of streets, alleys, sidewalks or
public grounds, except under such conditions as are permitted by code or other applicable law;
(D) Satellite dishes, radio aerials or television antennas erected or maintained in a dangerous
manner;
(E) All hanging signs, awnings and other similar structures overhanging streets and sidewalks, or
so situated so as to endanger public safety, or not constructed and maintained in a safe manner;
(F) The allowing of rain water, ice or snow to fall from any building or structure upon any street
or sidewalk or to flow across any sidewalk thus causing an unsafe condition;
(G) All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place or so situated or operated on private
property as to attract the public;
(H) Waste water cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets or other public properties;
(I) In agricultural or residential districts, storage in the open of discarded or disused machinery,
tires, household appliances or other material, in a manner conducive to the harboring of rats, mice,
snakes or vermin, or the rank growth of vegetation amount the items so accumulated, or in a manner
creating fire, health or safety hazards;
(J) Any well, hole or similar excavation which is left uncovered or in such other condition as to
constitute a hazard to any child or other person coming on the premises where it is located;
16 New Germany - General Regulations
(K) Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or a public street drain, gutter or
ditch with trash or other materials;
(L) The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk or other public property of any glass, tacks,
nails, bottles or other substance, which may injure any person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire
when passing over the substance;
(M) The depositing of garbage or refuse on a public right-of-way or on adjacent private property;
(N) Junk equipment shall include any equipment, such as farm equipment and other machinery, all
terrain vehicles, snowmobiles, motorcycles, lawnmowers, snow blowers and all other machinery or
equipment empowered by a motor and shall include any part of machinery or equipment which is stored
in the open, which is not currently licensed for use on highways in the state or is not required to be
license or is either unusable or inoperable for any reason, or anything that is being retained on the
property for salvageable parts;
(O) Exterior of structures and any accessory structure shall be maintained in a workmanlike state
of maintenance and repair. Every exterior wall shall be free from holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards
or timbers, falling or loose stucco or substantial amounts of peeling paint. All doors and windows shall
be maintained in good repair, fit reasonably well within their frames and be free of open breaks or holes;
(P) Interior area of structures shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, free of
accumulations of garbage, refuse, infestations of noxious insects, rodents and other pests. All plumbing
systems shall be properly installed, connected and maintained in good working order and must be kept
free of obstructions, leaks and defects. The storage of excessive or unreasonable amounts of hazardous,
flammable liquids shall be prohibited in areas not zoned for such use;
(Q) Storage of boats, campers, trailers and other recreational related items will not be allowed to
stand in one area for more than six months, they must be currently licensed and must be parked on
crushed rock, cement or blacktop pad;
(R) In any area of the city, the existence of a structure which because of fire, wind, natural disaster
or physical deterioration is no longer suitable as a dwelling, not useful for any other purpose for which
it was intended; and
(S) In any area of the city, the existence of a vacant structure or building is kept securely locked,
windows kept glazed or neatly boarded up or otherwise protected to prevent entrance by vandals,
children or other persons.
(Ord. 91, passed 6-19-2007) Penalty, see § 10.99
Public Nuisances 17
§ 92.04 ABATEMENT.
(A) In all cases of nuisances, the City Clerk-Treasurer, or his or her designee, shall cause a written
notice to be served upon the person or entity that maintains, operates or permits a nuisance. The notice
shall be substantially as follows:
NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE
City of New Germany to .
You are hereby notified that the nuisance maintained, operated or permitted to exist by you located
at
and consisting of
must be abated by the (removal)(destruction)(discontinuance) of the same and that if you do not
comply with this notice, you are directed to appear before the undersigned at the New Germany City
Hall on , 20 , at o’clock a.m./p.m. to show cause why the
same should not be abated. If you fail to appear, the undersigned will take the necessary steps to
abate the nuisance. The costs of abatement incurred by the city shall be assessed against you, and a
lien may be imposted on the property to secure the payment, in addition to any other remedies
available to the city.
Dated this day of , 20 .
Title of Signer
A copy of the foregoing notice was served on on the day of
, 20 .
By (describe manner or service) .
Name of Server
(B) If the person or entity cannot be found, then a copy of the notice may be served by delivery to
any member of the family or upon an office or agent of the entity over 18 years of age and found on the
premises described in the notice or at the residence of the person named therein and, if service cannot
be had in such manner, then by posting a copy in some conspicuous place on the premises or entity at
the last known address.
(C) At the same time and place specified in the notice, the City Clerk-Treasurer, or his or her
designee, shall hear the matter. The person or entity so complained of shall have the right to appear in
person or by counsel. At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Clerk-Treasurer, or his or her designee,
may vacate the notice or may declare the condition to be a nuisance and order it abated summarily.
(D) In all cases where the City Clerk-Treasurer, or his or her designee, shall have determined, after
hearing or notice of hearing and default, that any nuisance shall be abated, he or she shall issue an order
18 New Germany - General Regulations
requiring the abatement of the nuisance within a time named in the order, and shall serve the order of
abatement upon the person or entity who maintains, operates or permits the nuisance. In the event the
nuisance is not abated by the party within the time provided in the order, the City Clerk-Treasurer, or
his or her designee, shall cause the nuisance to be abated.
(E) Any person aggrieved by an order of abatement may appeal the order to the City Council. An
appeal shall be taken within ten days from the date of service of the order of abatement by filing with
the City Clerk-Treasurer a notice of appeal which shall specify the grounds of appeal. The matter shall
be placed on the City Council’s next regularly scheduled meeting for a public hearing. An appeal stays
all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from.
(F) The City Council may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or may modify, the order of
abatement and may issue an order, requirement, decision or determination as is consistent with city
ordinances.
(G) Any person or entity who fails to remove and abate any nuisance after proper notice, the
opportunity to be heard, and final order shall be liable to the city for all expense incurred in the removal
and abatement of the nuisance. The city shall have the right to recover all costs and a lien may be
imposed upon the property to secure payment of the costs. The procedure for establishing the lien shall
be in accordance with M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time.
(H) (1) In cases of emergency, where delay in abatement required to complete the notice and
procedure requirements set forth in divisions (B) and (C) above will permit a continuing nuisance to
unreasonably endanger public health, safety or welfare, the City Council may order summary
enforcement and abate the nuisance.
(2) To proceed with summary enforcement, the officer charged with enforcement shall
determine that a public nuisance exists or is being maintained on premises in the city and that delay in
abatement of the nuisance will unreasonably endanger public health, safety or welfare. The enforcement
officer shall notify in writing the occupant or owner of the premises of the nature of the nuisance and
of the city’s intention to seek summary enforcement and the time and place of the Council meeting to
consider the question of summary enforcement. The City Council shall determine whether or not the
condition identified in the notice to the owner or occupant is a nuisance, whether public health, safety
or welfare will be unreasonably endangered by delay in abatement required to complete the procedure
set forth in divisions (B) through (G) above, and may order that the nuisance be immediately terminated
or abated.
(3) If the nuisance is not immediately terminated or abated, the City Council may order
summary enforcement and abate the nuisance.
(I) Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city, without notice or other process, from immediately
abating any condition which poses an imminent and serious hazard to human life or safety.
(Ord. 91, passed 6-19-2007)
Public Nuisances 19
§ 92.05 RECOVERY OF COSTS.
(A) Personal liability. The owner of premises on which the city has abated a nuisance shall be
personally liable to the city for the cost of the abatement, including administrative costs. When the
abatement is complete and the cost is determined, the City Clerk-Treasurer or other official designated
by the Council shall prepare a bill and mail it to the owner. The amount shall be due immediately and
payable at the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer.
(B) Assessment. If the public nuisance is a health or safety hazard on private property, the
accumulation of snow and ice on public sidewalks, the growth of weeds on private property or outside
the traveled portion of streets, or unsound or insect-infested trees, any unpaid charges for the cost of
eliminating the nuisance may be collected by the city as a special assessment.
(Ord. 91, passed 6-19-2007)
ABANDONED, DISABLED OR UNLICENSED VEHICLES
§ 92.20 INTENT, NUISANCES AND PROHIBITIONS.
(A) Legislative intent. The unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped or junked automobiles not
in good and safe operating condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements, equipment, junk
or personal property of any kind which is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was
manufactured is hereby declared to be a nuisance and dangerous to the public health and safety. The
unsheltered storage of these property items throughout the city tend to impede traffic in the streets,
interfere with the enjoyment of and reduce the value of private property, invite plundering, create fire
hazards and other safety and health hazards to children as well as adults, interfere with the comfort and
well-being of the public and create, extend and aggravate urban blight. As such, the City Council
determines that, in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, such conditions must be
regulated, abated or prohibited.
(B) Nuisance on private property. The unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped or junked
automobiles not in good and safe operating condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements,
equipment, junk or personal property of any kind which is no longer safely usable for the purposes for
which it was manufactured is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(1) Nothing is this section shall restrict the activities of duly established junk or salvage yards.
This section does not apply to vehicles or property in an enclosed building, on the premises of a business
enterprise operated in a lawful manner when necessary to the operation of the business enterprise or in
a storage or depository maintained in a lawful location and manner by the city.
20 New Germany - General Regulations
(2) For purposes of this section, JUNK shall mean worn out or discarded material of little or
no value including, but not limited to, household appliances or parts thereof, tools, discarded building
materials, tin cans, broken glass, broken furniture, mattresses, box springs, boxes, crates, cardboard,
pallets, tires or any other unsightly debris the accumulation of which has an adverse effect upon
neighborhood or city property value, health, safety or general welfare.
(C) Abandoned motor vehicles.
(1) No person shall place, park, permit to remain, store or leave upon an open space area of
any premises located anywhere in the city any motor vehicle unless it conforms with all of the following
requirements:
(a) The vehicle must have affixed to it a valid current motor vehicle license;
(b) The vehicle must not lack essential parts rendering it inoperable;
(c) The vehicle must not be in a rusted, wrecked, partially dismantled or junked condition;
and
(d) The vehicle must be parked on a surface consisting of crushed rock, cement or
blacktop.
(2) If a motor vehicle fails to meet any of the above requirements, the owner or possessor of
the motor vehicle shall be responsible to remove the motor vehicle to a duly licensed junk yard or other
authorized place of deposit or storage within ten working days of a demand by the city.
(3) For purposes of this section, MOTOR VEHICLE” means every vehicle which is
self-propelled.
(Ord. 91, passed 6-19-2007) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.21 CITY AUTHORIZED TO IMPOUND.
If notice is given by the city pursuant to § 92.20(C)(1)(d) of this chapter, and the vehicle has not
been removed in the required ten-day period, then the city may proceed to impound the vehicle under
this chapter and to dispose of it according to the procedures in §§ 92.22 through 92.25 of this chapter.
(Ord. 91, passed 6-19-2007)
§ 92.22 IMPOUND FACILITY.
The City Council shall designate a storage facility as the impound facility. The place shall be
reasonably safe from theft and vandalization. The city may contract with any individual or corporation
Public Nuisances 21
for the use of such a facility as the designated facility. All costs of removal to and storage at the
designated facility shall be the responsibility of the registered owner of the motor vehicle impounded.
(Ord. 91, passed 6-19-2007)
§ 92.23 NOTICE.
(A) When a motor vehicle is impounded under this chapter, as an abandoned, junk or unauthorized
vehicle, the city shall give notice of the taking within five days. The notice shall:
(1) Set forth the date and place of the taking, the year, make, model and serial number of the
vehicle, if easily obtained, and the place where the vehicle is being held; and
(2) Inform the owner and any lien holders of an abandoned, junk or unauthorized vehicle of
their right to reclaim the vehicle and contents. The notice shall also state that failure to exercise that right
shall be deemed as a waiver by them of all rights, title and interest in the vehicle and a consent to the
sale of the vehicle at a public auction pursuant to this section.
(B) The notice for abandoned, junk or unauthorized vehicles shall be sent by mail to the registered
owner, if any, and to all readily identifiable lien holders of record. If it is impossible to determine with
reasonable certainty the identity and address of the registered owner and all lien holders, the notice shall
be published once in the official newspaper. Published notices may be grouped together for convenience
and economy.
(Ord. 91, passed 6-19-2007)
§ 92.24 RIGHT TO RECLAIM.
(A) The owner or any lien holder of an abandoned, junk or unauthorized vehicle shall have the right
to reclaim the vehicle upon payment of towing and storage charges resulting from taking the vehicle into
custody within 20 days after the day of the notice.
(B) Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair any lien of a garage keeper under the laws
of the state, or the right of a lien holder to foreclose. For the purposes of this section, GARAGE
KEEPER is an operator of a parking place or establishment, an operator of a motor vehicle storage
facility or an operator of an establishment for the servicing, repair or maintenance of motor vehicles.
(Ord. 91, passed 6-19-2007)
§ 92.25 DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED MOTOR VEHICLE BY PUBLIC SALE.
(A) An abandoned, junk or unauthorized motor vehicle and contents taken into custody and not
reclaimed under § 92.24 of this chapter shall be sold to the highest bidder at public auction or sale,
22 New Germany - General Regulations
following the expiration of the reclamation period for the vehicle. The purchaser shall be given a receipt
in a form prescribed by the Register of Motor Vehicles, which shall be sufficient title to dispose of the
vehicle. The receipt shall also entitle the purchase to register the vehicle and received a certificate of
title, free and clear of al liens and claims of ownership.
(B) From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned, junk or unauthorized motor vehicle, the city
shall reimburse itself for the cost of towing, preserving and storing the vehicle and all administrative
notice and publication costs incurred pursuant to this section. Any remainder from the sale shall be held
for the owner of the vehicle or entitled lien holder for 90 days and then shall be deposited in the General
Fund of the city.
(C) When no bid bas been received for an abandoned, junk or unauthorized vehicle, the city may
dispose of it in compliance with state law.
(D) (1) The city may contract with a qualified person for the collection, storage, incineration,
volume reduction, transportation or other services necessary to prepare abandoned, junk or unauthorized
vehicles and other scrap metal for recycling or other methods of disposal.
(2) Where the city enters into a contract with a person duly licensed by the state’s Pollution
control Agency, the Agency shall review the contract to determine whether it conforms to the Agency’s
plan for solid waste disposal. A contract that does so conform may be approved by the Agency.
(3) Where the city enters into a contract with a person duly authorized by the state’s Pollution
Control agency, the Agency shall review the contract to determine whether it conforms to the Agency’s
plan for solid waste disposal for the purpose of obtaining reimbursement.
(3) (a) If the city utilizes its own equipment and personnel for disposal of the abandoned, junk
or unauthorized vehicles, it shall be entitled to reimbursement for the cost thereof along with its other
costs, as herein provided.
(b) However, the city may dispose of no more than five vehicles using its own resources
without advertising for or receiving bids for the disposal in any 120-day period.
(E) (1) No employee of the city who is a member of the administrative staff, department head, a
member of the Council or an advisor serving the city in a professional capacity, may be a purchaser of
a vehicle under this section. Other city employees may be purchasers, if they are not directly involved
in the sale, if they are the highest bidder, and if at least one week’s published or posted notice of sale
has been given.
(2) It is unlawful for any person to be a purchaser of a vehicle under this section if the purchase
if prohibited by the terms of this section.
(Ord. 91, passed 6-19-2007) Penalty, see § 10.99
Public Nuisances 23
NOISE
§ 92.35 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
L10 LEVEL. The noise level, expressed in decibels (dBA), which is exceeded 10% of the time
within a one-hour period, as measured by test procedures using a sound level meter having
characteristics as specified in the latest standards, S1.4, of the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI).
L50 LEVEL. The noise level, expressed in decibels (dBA), which is exceeded 50% of the time
within a one-hour period, as measured by test procedures using a sound level meter having
characteristics as specified in the latest standards, S1.4, of the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI).
(Ord. 95, passed 8-6-2008)
§ 92.36 NOISE PROHIBITED.
(A) General prohibition. No person shall make or cause to be made any distinctly and loudly audible
noise or vibrations that unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health,
peace, safety, or welfare of any person or precludes their enjoyment of property or affects their
property’s value. This general prohibition is not limited by the specific restriction of the following
divisions of this section.
(B) Radios, televisions, phonographs, paging systems and the like. No person shall use, operate,
or permit the use of any radio receiving set, television set, musical instrument, phonograph, paging
system, machine or other device for the production or reproduction of sound in a distinct and loudly
audible manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of any person nearby. Operation of any such
set, instrument, phonograph, machine or other device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
in such a manner as to be plainly audible at the property line of the structure or building in which it is
located, in the hallway or apartment adjacent, or at a distance of 50 feet if the source is located outside
a structure or building shall be evidence of violation of this section.
(C) Participation in noisy parties or gatherings. No person shall participate in any party or other
gathering of people giving rise to noise, disturbing the peace, quiet, or repose of another person. If a
police officer determines that such a gathering is creating a noise disturbance, the police officer may
order all persons present, other than the owner or tenant of the premises where the disturbance is
occurring, to leave immediately. No person shall refuse to leave after being ordered by the police officer
to do so. Every owner or tenant of such premises who has knowledge of the disturbance shall make a
reasonable effort to see that the disturbance is stopped.
(Ord. 95, passed 8-6-2008) Penalty, see § 10.99
24 New Germany - General Regulations
§ 92.37 RECEIVING LAND USE STANDARDS.
(A) No person shall operate, cause, or permit to be operated any source of noise in such a manner
as to create a noise level, which exceeds those limits set in Table 1 for the receiving land use category
specified when measured at or within the property line of the receiving land use district. The sound level
within any particular zoning district shall be the responsibility of the person who owns, operates, or
contributes to the sound level, regardless of the zoning district in question.
Table 1: Sound Levels by Receiving Land Use Districts
Day (7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m.) Night (10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m.)
Land Use Districts L10 L50 L10 L50
Residential 65 60 55 50
Commercial 70 65 70 65
Industrial 80 75 80 75
(B) The noise limits of the most restrictive district shall apply at the determination of land use by
its zoned designation.
(Ord. 95, passed 8-6-2008) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.38 ENFORCEMENT DUTIES.
The County Sheriff, by contract with the city, shall enforce this subchapter.
(Ord. 95, passed 8-6-2008)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter
110. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
111. AMUSEMENTS AND RECREATION
112. ALARM SYSTEMS
113. PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
1
2 New Germany - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 110: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
110.01 Adoption of state law by reference
110.02 Definitions
110.03 Nudity on premises of licensed establishments prohibited
110.04 Pyrotechnics prohibited
110.05 Purchase and consumption restrictions; exceptions
110.06 Minors on premises
110.07 Enforcement
License Requirements and Conditions
110.20 Term and expiration of license
110.21 On-sale licenses
110.22 Off-sale licenses
110.23 Clubs
110.24 License fees; pro rata
110.25 License applications, investigations, hearings and premises
110.26 Renewal applications
110.27 Transfer of license
110.28 Hours and days of sales
110.29 Outdoor areas, patios and decks
110.30 Conditions of license
110.31 License suspension or revocation
110.32 Persons ineligible for license
110.33 License restrictions
110.34 Dram shop liability financial responsibility
110.35 Approval of security
110.36 Consumption and display permits
110.99 Penalty
3
4 New Germany - Business Regulations
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.
(A) The provisions of M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, with reference to
the definition of terms, conditions of operation, restrictions on consumption, provisions relating to sales,
hours of sale and all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution and consumption of alcoholic
beverages, including intoxicating liquor, 3.2% malt liquor and wine, are hereby adopted by reference
and are made apart of this chapter as if set out in full. It is the intention of the City Council that all future
amendments to M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by
reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this chapter is adopted.
(B) The Council is authorized by the provisions of M.S. § 340A.509, as it may be amended from
time to time, to impose, and has imposed in this chapter, additional restrictions on the sale and
possession of alcoholic beverages within its limits beyond those contained in M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may
be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 83, passed 12-17-2003)
§ 110.02 DEFINITIONS.
In addition to or as a supplement to the definitions contained in M.S. § 340A.101, as it may be
amended from time to time, for the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
3.2 PERCENT MALT LIQUOR. Malt liquor containing not less than 0.5% alcohol by volume, nor
more than 3.2% alcohol by weight.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Any beverage containing more than 0.5% alcohol by volume and
includes the term LIQUOR, as used in this chapter.
CLUB. An incorporated organization organized under the laws of the state for civic, fraternal, social
or business purposes, for intellectual improvement, for the promotion of sports or for a congressionally
chartered veterans’ organization, which:
(1) Has more than 30 members;
(2) Has owned or rented a building or space in a building for more than one year that is suitable
and adequate for the accommodation of its members; and
(3) Is directed by a board of directors, executive committee or other similar body chosen by
the members at a meeting held for that purpose. No member, officer, agent or employee shall receive
Alcoholic Beverages 5
any profit from the distribution or sale of beverages to the members of the club, or then-guests, beyond
a reasonable salary or wages fixed and voted each year by the governing body.
EXCLUSIVE LIQUOR STORE. An establishment used exclusively for the sale of those items
authorized by M.S. § 340A.412, subd. 14, as it may be amended from time to time.
HOTEL. An establishment where food and lodging are regularly furnished to transients and which
has a dining room serving the general public at tables and having facilities for seating at least 30 guests
at one time and a minimum of ten guest rooms.
INTOXICATING LIQUOR. Ethyl alcohol, distilled, fermented, spirituous, vinous and malt
beverages containing more than 3.2% of alcohol by weight.
LIQUOR. Except as the context may otherwise require, without modification by the words
“intoxicating” or “3.2 percent malt”, includes intoxicating liquor, 3.2% malt liquor, malt liquor and
wine.
MALT LIQUOR. Any beer, ale or other beverage made from malt by fermentation and containing
not less than 0.05% alcohol by volume.
OFF-SALE. The sale of alcoholic beverages in original packages for consumption off the licensed
premises only.
ON-SALE. The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the licensed premises only.
OUTDOOR AREA. Any area that is not bounded by the walls, doorways and closeable windows
covering 100% of the combined surface area of the vertical planes constituting the perimeter of the area.
A wall does not include any retractable divider, garage door or other physical barrier, whether temporary
or permanent.
PREMISES or LICENSED PREMISES. The compact and contiguous space specified in the license
granted.
RESTAURANT. A catering facility, other than a hotel, under the control of a single proprietorship
or manager, having facilities for seating at least 30 guests at one time, where meals are regularly
prepared on the premises, where waitress/waiter table service is provided, where a customer orders food
from printed menus and where the main food course is served and consumed while seated at a single
location and which has a license from the state to serve food. An establishment which serves only
prepackaged food that receives heat treatment and is served in the package or frozen pizza that is heated
and served shall not be considered to be a RESTAURANT for purposes of this chapter.
WINE. The product made from the normal alcoholic fermentation of grapes, including still wine,
sparkling and carbonated wine, wine made from condensed grape must, wine made from other
6 New Germany - Business Regulations
agricultural products than sound, ripe grapes, imitation wine, compounds sold as wine, vermouth, cider,
perry and sake, in each instance containing not less than 0.5%, nor more than 24% alcohol by volume
for non-industrial use. WINE does not include distilled spirits.
(Ord. 83, passed 12-17-2003; Ord. 96, passed 11-18-2008)
§ 110.03 NUDITY ON PREMISES OF LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED.
(A) The City Council finds that it is in the best interests of the public health, safety and general
welfare of the people of the city that nudity is prohibited, as provided in this section, on the premises
of any establishment licensed under this chapter. This is to protect and assist the owners, operators and
employees of the establishment, as well as patrons and the public in general, from harm stemming from
the physical immediacy and combination of alcohol, nudity and sex. The Council especially intends to
prevent any subliminal endorsement of sexual harassment or activities likely to lead to the possibility of
various criminal conduct, including prostitution, sexual assault and disorderly conduct. The Council also
finds that the prohibition of nudity on the premises of any establishment licensed under this chapter, as
set forth in this section reflects the prevailing community standards of the city.
(B) It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person or persons on the licensed premises
when the person does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breast and genitals covered with a nontransparent
material. It is unlawful for any person to be on the licensed premises when the person does
not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts and genitals covered with a non-transparent material.
(Ord. 83, passed 12-17-2003) Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.04 PYROTECHNICS PROHIBITED.
It is unlawful for any licensee or any other person to permit, allow or use pyrotechnics, fireworks,
flares or signals of any kind in or on the licensed premises.
(Ord. 83, passed 12-17-2003) Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.05 PURCHASE AND CONSUMPTION RESTRICTIONS; EXCEPTIONS.
(A) Liquor in unlicensed places.
(1) Except as provided in division (C) below, no person, business establishment or club shall
display, mix, sell, serve or prepare liquor, directly or indirectly, for consumption in any public place
or place of business unless the person, business establishment or club, has a license to sell liquor on-sale
from the city or a permit from the Commissioner of Public Safety under the provisions of M.S.
§ 340A.414, as it may be amended from time to time, has been approved by the Council. No person
shall consume liquor in any unlicensed place.
Alcoholic Beverages 7
(2) Subject to the approval of the state’s Commissioner of Public Safety, temporary on-sale
licenses shall be issued only to clubs or charitable, religious or other non-profit organizations in
existence for at least three years. A temporary license authorizes the on-sale of intoxicating liquor in
connection with a social event within the city sponsored by the licensee and subject to restrictions
imposed by state law.
(3) No on-sale or off-sale license shall be effective or valid beyond the licensed premises. No
alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served or consumed outside of the licensed premises as described in
the application for a license and as approved by the city.
(B) Consumption in public places; possession of opened containers in certain areas prohibited.
(1) Except where and when the consumption and display of liquor is lawfully permitted, no
person shall consume liquor in a public park, on any public street, sidewalk, parking lot or alley, or in
any public place other than on the premises of an establishment licensed under this chapter or any
municipal liquor dispensary, if one exists in the city.
(2) Except where the consumption and display of liquor is lawfully permitted, no person shall
have in his or her possession while within a motor vehicle or while upon any public highway, street,
alley, sidewalk, parking lot or in any park within the city any bottle, can or other receptacle containing
liquor which has been opened, or the seal of which has been broken, or the contents of which has been
partially removed.
(C) Exception to public consumption prohibition of beer, wine and liquor.
(1) It shall not be illegal for a person of legal age to have in his or her possession or to
consume liquor within a public park or in a public building in the city if the item was purchased from
a bona fide club or organization which has received a temporary on-sale license from the city and the
possession or consumption is at the location and on the date and during the hours provided for the sale
of the item as required by the license.
(2) It shall not be illegal for a person of legal age to have in his or her possession or to
consume liquor in a public park or building when the item is offered free of charge to the consumer as
part of an organized social event and under the following conditions.
(a) The liquor offered or provided cannot be sold at any cost; all items must be offered
or provided free of charge (tip jars or passing of the hat for items is strictly prohibited).
(b) The person or party offering or providing the liquor agrees to defend and indemnify
the city for any claims that arise as a result of the event.
(c) The person or party offering or providing the liquor agrees to hold the city harmless.
8 New Germany - Business Regulations
(d) The person or party offering or providing the liquor has obtained a permit for the event
from the city.
(Ord. 83, passed 12-17-2003; Ord. 96, passed 11-18-2008) Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.06 MINORS ON PREMISES.
(A) No person under the age of 18 years shall be employed in any rooms constituting the place in
which intoxicating liquors or 3.2% malt liquor are sold at retail on sale; except that, persons under the
age of 18 may be employed as musicians or to perform the duties of a bus person or dishwashing services
in places defined as a restaurant, hotel, motel or other multi-purpose building serving food in rooms in
which intoxicating liquors or 3.2% malt liquor are sold at retail on sale.
(B) No person under the age of 21 years may enter a licensed establishment, except to work,
consume meals on premises that qualify as a restaurant, or attend social functions that are held in a
portion of the premises where liquor is not sold.
(Ord. 83, passed 12-17-2003) Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.07 ENFORCEMENT.
It shall be the duty of all law enforcement officers of the city to enforce the provisions of this
chapter, to search premises and seize evidence of law violation and preserve the same as evidence against
any person alleged to be violating this chapter and to prepare the necessary processes and papers
therefor.
(Ord. 83, passed 12-17-2003)
LICENSE REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS
§ 110.20 TERM AND EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
(A) Each license shall be issued for a maximum period of one year. All licenses, except temporary
licenses, shall expire on December 31, of each year unless another date is provided by ordinance.
(B) All licenses shall expire on the same date. Temporary licenses expire according to their terms.
(C) Consumption and display permits issued by the Commissioner of Public Safety, and the
accompanying city consent to the permit, shall expire on March 31 of each year.
(Ord. 83, passed 12-17-2003)
Alcoholic Beverages 9
§ 110.21 ON-SALE LICENSES.
(A) The City Council is authorized to issue the following “on-sale” licenses and permits:
(1) 3.2 percent malt liquor license, pursuant to M.S. § 340A.403, subd. 1, and M.S.
§ 340A.411, as they may be amended from time to time, which may be issued only to restaurants, hotels
and clubs, as defined in this chapter;
(2) Temporary 3.2% malt liquor license, pursuant to M.S. § 340A.403, subd. 2, as it may be
amended from time to time, which may be issued only to clubs, charitable, religious or non-profit
organizations;
(3) Intoxicating liquor license, pursuant to M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 1, as it may be amended
from time to time, which may be issued only to hotels and restaurants as defined in this chapter;
(4) Exclusive liquor store intoxicating liquor license pursuant to M.S. § 340A.412, subd. 14,
as it may be amended from time to time;
(5) Temporary intoxicating liquor license, pursuant to M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 10, as it may
be amended from time to time, with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety, which may be
issued only in connection with a social event sponsored by a club, charitable, religious or other nonprofit
corporation which has existed for at least three years. No license shall be for longer than four
consecutive days and the city shall issue no more than 12 days worth of temporary licenses to any one
organization in one calendar year. The license may authorize on-sales on premises other than the
premises the licensee owns or permanently occupies. The license may provide that the licensee may
contract for intoxicating liquor catering services with the holder of a full year on-sale intoxicating liquor
license issued by the city;
(6) Wine license, pursuant to M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to
time, which may be issued only to restaurants having facilities for seating at least 30 guests at one time,
and shall permit only the sale of wine not exceeding 14% alcohol by volume, for consumption on the
licensed premises only, in conjunction with the sale of food;
(7) Sunday intoxicating liquor license, pursuant to M.S. § 340A.504, subd. 3, as it may be
amended from time to time, which may be issued only to a licensee which has been issued an intoxicating
liquor license;
(8) Approval of the issuance of a consumption and display permit by the Commissioner of
Public Safety pursuant to the requirements and provisions of M.S. § 340A.414, as it may be amended
from time to time. A one-day permit may be issued pursuant to M.S. § 340A.414, subd. 9, as it may be
amended from time to time, not to exceed ten permits in any one year;
(9) Bed and breakfast wine license, pursuant to M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 5(c), as it may be
amended from time to time; and
10 New Germany - Business Regulations
(10) Combination on-sale/off-sale license pursuant to M.S. § 340A.406, as it may be amended
from time to time.
(B) The City Council may issue a maximum of three on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses under this
chapter. The availability of these licenses for issuance in no way shall be deemed to require or commit
the City Council to issue any or all of the licenses. The City Council may from time to time by ordinance
or resolution establish the maximum number of other on-sale licenses authorized by this chapter and as
may be limited by M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 83, passed 12-17-2003)
§ 110.22 OFF-SALE LICENSES.
The City Council is authorized to issue the following off-sale licenses:
(A) 3.2% malt liquor license pursuant to M.S. § 340A.403, subd. 1, as it may be amended from
time to time; and
(B) Intoxicating liquor license pursuant to M.S. § 340A.405, subd. 1, or M.S. § 340A.412, subd.
6, as they may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 83, passed 12-17-2003)
§ 110.23 CLUBS.
Clubs shall not sell 3.2% malt liquor, except to members and to bona fide guests in the company
of members.
(Ord. 83, passed 12-17-2003) Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.24 LICENSE FEES; PRO RATA.
(A) No license or other fee established by the city for a liquor license shall exceed any limit
established by M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time.
(B) The Council may establish from time to time by ordinance or resolution the fee for any of the
liquor licenses it is authorized to issue. No liquor license fee shall be increased without providing mailed
notice of the hearing on the proposed increase to all affected licenses at least 30 days before the hearing.
(C) The fee for all licenses, except temporary licenses, granted after the commencement of the
license year shall be prorated on a quarterly basis.
Alcoholic Beverages 11
(D) All license fees shall be paid in full at the time the application is filed with the city. The license
fee is non-refundable even if the application is denied. A refund of a pro rata share of an annual license
fee may occur only if authorized by M.S. § 340A.408, subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 83, passed 12-17-2003)
§ 110.25 LICENSE APPLICATIONS, INVESTIGATIONS, HEARINGS AND PREMISES.
(A) (1) At the time of an original application for a liquor license, the applicant shall pay a minimum
investigation fee in an amount to be determined from time to time by resolution of the City Council for
each person listed on the application form, which shall include all natural persons, partners, managers,
corporate officers and corporate shareowners. This fee shall be paid when an application is filed with
the city, and it shall not be subject to refund. If the expenses of any investigation are extraordinary and
exceed the minimum investigation fee, the applicant shall pay all reasonable additional expenses incurred
by the city for the investigation. Failure to pay the additional expenses within a five-day period shall be
cause for the city to discontinue processing of the application. At any time, an additional investigation
is required due to a change in ownership or control of a partnership, corporation or other organization
a licensee shall pay a minimum investigation fee in an amount to be determined from time to time by
resolution of the City Council.
(2) All applications shall be processed by the City Administrator or City Clerk-Treasurer for
verification and investigation of the facts set forth therein. The Chief of Police or Sheriff shall investigate
the background of all persons listed in the application form or the city may hire other parties to make
the investigations as it may deem appropriate. Jointly or separately, they shall submit a written report
to the City Council on the results of their investigation. The city shall conduct a preliminary background
and financial investigation of the applicant. The application in such case shall be made on a form
prescribed by the state and with such additional information as the City Council may require. If the City
Council deems it in the public interest to have an investigation made on a particular application for
renewal of a license, it shall so determine. In any case, if the Council determines that a comprehensive
background and financial investigation of the applicant is necessary, it may conduct the investigation
itself or contract with the state or others for the investigation. No license shall be issued, transferred or
renewed if the results show to the satisfaction of the Council that issuance would not be in the public
interest. If an investigation outside the state is required, the applicant shall be charged the cost, not to
exceed actual costs incurred, which shall be paid by the applicant after deducting any initial investigation
fee already paid. The fee shall be payable by the applicant whether or not the license is granted.
(3) The City Council shall investigate all facts set out in the application for any alcoholic
beverage license and not investigated in the preliminary background and financial investigation conducted
pursuant to divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) above. Upon receipt of the report of the preliminary background
and financial investigation in regard to an initial application, the City Council shall instruct the Clerk-
Treasurer to cause to be published in the official newspaper of the city, at least ten days in advance, a
notice of hearing to be held by the City Council on the application for the intoxicating liquor, 3.2% malt
liquor or wine license, setting forth the date, time and place when the hearing will be held, the name of
the applicant, the premises where the business is to be conducted, the nature of the business and such
12 New Germany - Business Regulations
other information as the Council may direct. At the hearing, an opportunity shall be given to any person
to be heard for or against the granting of a license. A license shall not be approved before the next
regular meeting of the City Council. After the hearing under this section, the City Council may, in its
discretion, require further investigation and/or hearing before issuance or denial of a license. After the
investigation and hearing, the Council shall, in its discretion, grant or refuse the application. No on-sale
wine license shall become effective until it, together with the security furnished by the applicant, has
been approved by the state’s Commissioner of Public Safety.
(4) If a license is approved, the City Council may withhold its issuance until the applicant has
qualified in all respects for the license. If the premises to be licensed is not complete at the time of
approval, the Council may approve the license, but withhold its issuance until the premises have been
completed in accordance with all representations made by the applicant. In such a case, the Council may
rescind its action approving the license if the applicant has not proceeded with reasonable dispatch to
complete the subject premises, but the action may only be taken following ten days’ notice to the
applicant.
(5) The issuance of any license hereunder is and shall remain at the sole and absolute discretion
of the City Council. No applicant has a right to a license under this chapter.
(6) All licenses shall be and are issued subject to conformance with all provisions of this
chapter and all other applicable regulations, ordinances, laws and statutes.
(7) Each license issued hereunder shall be issued to the applicant only. Each such license shall
be issued only for the premises described in the application and shall not be effective beyond the compact
and contiguous space described therein.
(8) No transfer of a license shall be permitted from place to place or from person to person
without complying with all requirements of an original application, including the payment of all fees
therefor.
(B) (1) An application form for licenses required by this chapter shall be prepared by the city’s
Clerk-Treasurer. In addition to any information which may be required by the state’s Liquor Control
Commissioner, the form shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:
(a) Name of the applicant;
(b) Applicant’s age;
(c) Representations as to applicant’s character (with such references as the Council may
require);
(d) Applicant’s citizenship;
Alcoholic Beverages 13
(e) The type of license the applicant is seeking;
(f) The business in connection with which the proposed license will operate and its
location;
(g) Whether the applicant is a natural person, partnership, corporation or other form of
organization;
(h) If the applicant is a natural person the requested personal information about the
applicant and his or her background;
(i) If the applicant is a partnership the names and addresses of all partners and the
requested personal information about each partner and his or her background. The financial interest of
each partner shall be disclosed, and a managing partner shall be designated. A true copy of the
partnership agreement shall be submitted with the original application form;
(j) If the applicant is a corporation or other organization the names and addresses of all
officers and the proposed manager, and the requested personal information about each and his or her
background. The names, addresses and financial interest shall be disclosed for all corporate shareowners
who, together with direct relatives, have a controlling interest of the assets of the corporation, and the
requested personal information shall be furnished about each person and his or her background. True
copies of the articles of incorporation and corporate bylaws shall be submitted with the original
application form;
(k) The amount of assets which the applicant has in the business premises, fixtures, stock
and operating capital shall be disclosed, together with proof of the source of the assets;
(l) The names and addresses of all persons, other than those listed above, who have any
financial interest in the business, premises, fixtures, stock or operating capital, together with the amount
and nature of the interest and the terms for payment or other reimbursement thereof. This shall include,
but not be limited to, all lessors, mortgagors, lenders, lien holders, trustors and persons who have
co-signed notes or otherwise loaned, pledged or extended security to the applicant for any indebtedness;
(m) The address and legal description of the premise to be licensed and plans of the site and
all buildings thereon, showing all appropriate dimensions;
(n) If the applicant is a natural person the application form shall be executed by that
person. If the applicant is a partnership the application form shall be executed by the managing partner
and, if the applicant is a corporation or other organization, the application form shall be executed by a
corporate or organization officer;
(o) How long applicant has been in that business;
(p) How long applicant has been in that business at that place; and
14 New Germany - Business Regulations
(q) Such other information as the Council may require from time to time.
(2) Every application for any license to sell alcoholic beverages shall also include a copy of
each summons received by the applicant under M.S. § 340A.802, as it may be amended from time to
time, during the preceding year.
(3) In addition to containing the information prescribed in this section, the application for any
license to sell alcoholic beverages shall be in the form prescribed by the state’s Bureau of Criminal
Apprehension and shall be verified and filed with the Clerk-Treasurer. No person shall make a false
statement in an application.
(Ord. 83, passed 12-17-2003) Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.26 RENEWAL APPLICATIONS.
(A) Applications for the renewal of an existing alcoholic beverage license shall be made at least 60
days prior to the date of the expiration of the license, and shall be made in such form as the City Council
may approve. If, in the judgment of the City Council, good and sufficient cause is shown by an applicant
for his or her failure to file for a renewal within the time provided, the City Council may, if the other
applicable provisions of this chapter are complied with, grant the application.
(B) At the earliest practical time after application is made for renewal of an on-sale license by a
restaurant or hotel, and in any event prior to the time that the application is approved by the City
Council, the applicant shall file with the Clerk-Treasurer a statement made by a certified public
accountant that shows the total gross sales and the total food sales of the restaurant or hotel for the year
immediately preceding the date of filing of the renewal application. The requirement in this division (B)
shall not apply to renewal applications for wine licenses or 3.2% malt liquor licenses.
(C) The Council shall make an investigation of the facts set out in the application and a review of
the past operation of the licensee as it may determine appropriate and may call a public hearing and take
such other steps as allowed by law before the issuance of a renewal license.
(Ord. 83, passed 12-17-2003)
§ 110.27 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
No license issued under this chapter may be transferred without the approval of the City Council.
Any transfer of stock of a corporate licensee is deemed to be a transfer of the license and a transfer of
stock without prior Council approval is a ground for revocation of the license. An application to transfer
a license shall be treated the same as an application for a new license and all of the provisions of this
chapter applying to applications for a license shall apply.
(Ord. 83, passed 12-17-2003) Penalty, see § 110.99
Alcoholic Beverages 15
§ 110.28 HOURS AND DAYS OF SALE.
(A) The hours of operation and days of sale shall be those set by M.S. § 340A.504, as it may be
amended from time to time.
(B) No person shall consume nor shall any on-sale licensee permit any consumption of intoxicating
liquor or 3.2% malt liquor in an on-sale licensed premises more than 30 minutes after the time when a
sale can legally occur.
(C) No on-sale licensee shall permit any glass, bottle or other container containing intoxicating
liquor or 3.2% malt liquor to remain upon any table, bar, stool or other place where customers are
served, more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur.
(D) No person, other than the licensee and any employee, shall remain on the on-sale licensed
premises more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur.
(E) Any violation of any condition of this section may be grounds for revocation or suspension of
the license.
(Ord. 83, passed 12-17-2003) Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.29 OUTDOOR AREAS, PATIOS AND DECKS.
Consumption of alcohol in outdoor areas, patios or decks (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the
“outdoor area”) is allowed under this section, but subject to the following conditions.
(A) (1) The applicant for a liquor license or for renewal of a license shall include in the application
a request that the license allow the consumption of alcohol in an outdoor area or on a patio or deck in
compliance with this section.
(2) Alcohol shall not be sold or served in the outdoor area unless a special event permit has
been obtained as provided in division (O) below.
(B) The outdoor area shall be immediately adjacent to the rear of the building or structure
comprising the remainder of the licensed premises and shall be no closer than ten feet from any adjacent
residential property.
(C) The application shall contain the street address and a scaled drawing or diagram of the location
of the premises to be licensed including the outdoor area, patio or deck and describing the proposed
fencing and lighting as required herein.
(D) The outdoor area shall have a permanent surface of concrete, asphalt, wood or other fabricated
construction material.
16 New Germany - Business Regulations
(E) (1) Any portion of an outdoor area at grade or less than six feet above grade shall be enclosed
by an opaque fence at least six feet high (with an emergency exit) so as to require all persons using the
outdoor area to enter and exit the area through the building or structure comprising the remainder of the
licensed premises. A fence permit as provided by § 154.084 of this code of ordinances.
(2) The fence shall be a non-permanent barrier or temporary in nature to demarcate the limits
of the outside area. The fencing shall be of a material that can be readily removed and shall not require
permanent attachment to the ground such as concrete footings or similar type of structural attachment.
No permanent fencing shall be allowed. The exact type and kind of fencing proposed shall be subject to
Council approval prior to issuance of the license.
(F) (1) Any exterior stairway or ramp access to an outdoor area must be gated so as to require all
persons using the outdoor area to enter and exit the area through the building or structure comprising
the remainder of the licensed premises.
(2) However, if the configuration of the licensed premises is such that the fenced outdoor area
constitutes the main entrance used by customers for access to the building or structure, the Council, upon
written request by the licensee, may allow access to the main building through the outdoor area under
such conditions as the Council may determine appropriate.
(G) If any portion of the outdoor area lies within 200 feet of a residential district, the outdoor area
shall be screened in a manner approved by the City Council so as to prevent viewing of the outdoor area
from the residential district and to dampen noise and/or deflect noise away from the residential district.
(H) Exterior lighting for the outdoor area shall promote public safety and be designed and installed
so that the globe is recessed and enclosed on all sides, except the bottom and no light is cast directly at
any other property.
(I) The outdoor area and surrounding landscaping shall be designed to compliment the building or
structure comprising the remainder of the licensed premises structure.
(J) The outdoor area shall comply with all applicable laws, zoning district regulations and building
codes, including, but not limited to, those relating to handicap accessibility.
(K) The licensee’s dram shop liability carrier shall have acknowledged, in writing, that the outdoor
area is covered by dram shop insurance.
(L) The outdoor area shall meet all such other requirements as the City Council finds necessary or
desirable to protect nearby properties and the public.
(M) Additional requirements applicable to licensed outdoor areas:
Alcoholic Beverages 17
(1) An employee must be assigned to supervise the outdoor area at all times if alcohol is
allowed to be sold or served in the outdoor area pursuant to a special events permit as provided by
division (O) below;
(2) Any activity that would disturb the peace of the surrounding area is prohibited in or on the
outdoor area, patio or deck. This includes the prohibition against the use of any device designed to
produce, reproduce or amplify sound, including, but not limited to, loud speakers, amplifiers,
microphones, radios, televisions or musical instruments; and
(3) The licensee or his or her employees shall:
(a) Remove any person from the outdoor premises that becomes unruly or noisy;
(b) Maintain at least one waste receptacle in the outdoor area;
(c) Maintain at least one fire safe cigarette disposal receptacle in the outdoor area;
(d) Pick up trash and litter generated by the operation of the outdoor area within a
reasonable distance from the outdoor area; and
(e) Provide and maintain a fire extinguisher in the outdoor area.
(N) The licensee may allow smoking on or in the outdoor area, patio or deck; provided that, such
smoking is in full compliance with the state’s Freedom to Breath Act of 2007, being M.S. §§ 144.411
et seq., as they may be amended from time to time.
(O) The City Council may waive any of the conditions imposed under this section for special events
upon written request submitted by the licensee at least 14 days prior to the special event as may be
deemed appropriate and reasonable by the City Council. A special events permit shall be obtained from
and provided by the city for the event.
(Ord. 96, passed 11-18-2008) Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.30 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
The failure of a licensee to meet any one of the conditions of the license specified below shall result
in a suspension of the license until the condition is met.
(A) (1) Within 90 days after employment, every person selling or serving liquor in an establishment
which has an on-sale license shall receive training regarding the selling or serving of liquor to customers.
(2) The training shall be provided by an organization approved by the Council.
(3) Proof of training shall be provided by the licensee.
18 New Germany - Business Regulations
(B) Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of the place of business and the conditions of
sobriety and order in it. The act of any employee on the licensed premises is deemed the act of the
licensee as well, and the licensee shall be liable to all penalties provided by this chapter and the law
equally with the employee.
(C) Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health officer, city employee or any other person
designated by the Council to conduct compliance checks and to otherwise enter, inspect and search the
premises of the licensee during business hours and after business hours during the time when customers
remain on the premises without a warrant.
(D) No on-sale establishment shall display liquor to the public during hours when the sale of liquor
is prohibited.
(E) Compliance with financial responsibility requirements of state law and of this chapter is a
continuing condition of any license.
(Ord. 83, passed 12-17-2003) Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.31 LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
(A) The Council shall either suspend for a period not to exceed 60 days or revoke any liquor license
upon finding that the licensee has failed to comply with any applicable statute, regulation or provision
of this chapter relating to liquor. Except in cases of lapse of proof of financial responsibility, no
suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a
hearing pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act, M.S. §§ 14.57 to 14.69, as they may be amended
from time to time. The Council may act as the hearing body under that act or it may contract with the
office of Hearing Examiners for a hearing officer.
(B) The following are the minimum periods of suspension or revocation which shall be imposed by
the Council for violations of the provisions of this chapter or M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended
from time to time or any rules promulgated under that chapter as they may be amended from time to
time.
(1) For commission of a felony related to the licensed activity, sale of alcoholic beverages
while the license is under suspension, sale of intoxicating liquor where the only license is for 3.2% malt
liquor, or violation of § 110.03 of this chapter, the license shall be revoked.
(2) The license shall be suspended by the Council after a finding under division (B)(1) above
that the licensee has failed to comply with any applicable statute, rule or provision of this chapter for at
least the minimum periods as follows:
(a) For the first violation within any three-year period, at least one-day suspension in
addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed;
Alcoholic Beverages 19
(b) For a second violation within any three-year period, at least three consecutive days
suspension in addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed;
(c) For the third violation within any three-year period, at least seven consecutive days
suspension in addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed; and
(d) For a fourth violation within any three-year period, the license shall be revoked.
(3) The Council shall select the day or days during which the license will be suspended.
(C) Lapse of required proof of financial responsibility shall effect an immediate suspension of any
license issued pursuant to this chapter or state law without further action of the Council. Notice of
cancellation or lapse of a current liquor liability policy shall also constitute notice to the licensee of the
impending suspension of the license. The holder of a license who has received notice of lapse of required
insurance or of suspension or revocation of a license may request a hearing thereon and, if a request is
made in writing to the Clerk-Treasurer, a hearing before the Council shall be granted within ten days.
Any suspension under this division (C) shall continue until the Council determines that the financial
responsibility requirements of state law and this chapter have again been met.
(D) The provisions of § 110.99(B) of this chapter pertaining to administrative penalty may be
imposed in addition to or in lieu of suspension or revocation under this chapter.
(Ord. 83, passed 12-17-2003; Ord. 99, passed 8-2-2011)
§ 110.32 PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.
The provisions of this section shall govern an applicant’s initial and continued eligibility for a license
pursuant to this chapter, and no license shall be issued to:
(A) A natural person:
(1) Who is not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien and not a resident of the state.
If the applicant is a corporation, all shareholders shall be residents of the state;
(2) Who is under 21 years of age;
(3) Who has had an intoxicating liquor or malt liquor license revoked within five years of the
license application, or to any person who at the time of the violation owns a controlling interest of the
capital stock of a corporation licensee, as a partner or otherwise, in the premises or in the business
conducted thereon, or to a corporation, partnership, association, enterprise, business or firm in which
any such person is in any manner interested;
(4) Who is not of good moral character and repute;
20 New Germany - Business Regulations
(5) Who has a direct or indirect interest in a manufacturer, brewer or wholesaler of intoxicating
liquor, or who is employed by a manufacturer or wholesaler of intoxicating liquor;
(6) Who has a direct or indirect financial interest in any other establishment within the city that
has a license issued under this chapter. The word INTEREST, as used in this provision, shall mean a
controlling interest of any such establishment;
(7) Who has been convicted of a felony in the past ten years; and
(8) Who within the past five years has been convicted of a violation of any law, statute or
ordinance regarding the manufacture, sale, distribution or possession for sale or distribution of
intoxicating liquor.
(B) A partnership, which has a partner ineligible for a license under above natural person section;
(C) A corporation or other organization, which has an officer, shareowner or manager ineligible
for a license under the above natural person section. The term SHAREOWNER, as used in this
provision, shall mean any person who, together with direct relatives, who has a controlling interest of
the assets of the corporation;
(D) A restaurant located on property owned by a person ineligible for a license under the above
natural person section;
(E) A restaurant located on property upon which taxes, special assessments or other financial claims
of the city are delinquent and unpaid;
(F) A restaurant, as defined herein, which does not have a minimum market valuation totaling an
amount set from time to time by the City Council on the city fee schedule. The calculation shall be
estimated on a per seat basis, as computed by the City Assessor; and
(G) A foreign corporation.
(Ord. 83, passed 12-17-2003; Ord. 86, passed 2-15-2005)
§ 110.33 LICENSE RESTRICTIONS.
The following provisions shall govern the initial issuance of a license and the continued validity of
a license issued pursuant to this chapter.
(A) Each license shall be issued only to the applicant and for the premises described in the
application.
Alcoholic Beverages 21
(B) The licensee shall at all times comply with all provisions of this chapter and with all other
applicable laws, statutes and ordinances regarding the manufacture, sale, distribution or possession for
sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages, as the same shall be in effect at the time the license is issued
and as the same shall exist from time to time thereafter.
(C) All business, liability insurance and financial records of the licensee, including all financial
reports and tax returns, shall be available for inspection by the city at all reasonable times.
(D) The business of a licensee who has been issued an intoxicating liquor license, except for which
an exclusive liquor store license has been issued shall be conducted in a manner that at least 25% of the
gross sales of the business for any license year shall be for the serving of food. The business of a
restaurant which is part of a greater operation, such as a hotel or motel, shall be conducted in such a
manner that at least 25% of the gross sales of the total operation attributable to the serving of food and
intoxicating liquor for any license year shall be for the serving of food. The licensee shall be required
to make annual reports showing the percentage of gross sales attributable to food service.
(E) All sates of intoxicating liquor shall be made in areas designed primarily for the service of food,
and no such sale shall be made in any area where the purchase of food is not available, except for those
premises for which an exclusive liquor store license has been issued.
(F) No alcoholic beverage license shall be issued or renewed for operation on any premises on
which taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid.
(G) No license shall be granted within 500 feet of any school or church. The distance is to be
measured from the closest side of the church to the closest side of the structure on the premises within
which liquor is to be sold.
(H) No license shall be issued to any person or for any place or any business ineligible under state
law.
(Ord. 83, passed 12-17-2003) Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.34 DRAM SHOP LIABILITY FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
No alcoholic beverage license may be issued, maintained or renewed unless the applicant
demonstrates proof of financial responsibility as required in M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended
from time to time, with regard to liability under M.S. § 340A.801, as it may be amended from time to
time. The proof shall be filed with the city and Commissioner of Public Safety. Applicants for licenses
to whom the requirement for proof of financial responsibility applies include applicants as required in
M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time. Any liability insurance policy filed as proof
of financial responsibility under this section shall conform to M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended
from time to time.
(Ord. 83, passed 12-17-2003)
22 New Germany - Business Regulations
§ 110.35 APPROVAL OF SECURITY.
The security offered under this chapter shall be approved by the City Council and, when applicable,
by the state’s Commissioner of Public Safety. Liability insurance policies required by this chapter, but
not by state law shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney. Operation of a licensed business
without having on file with the city at all times effective security as required in this chapter is a cause
for suspension or revocation of the license.
(Ord. 83, passed 12-17-2003)
§ 110.36 CONSUMPTION AND DISPLAY PERMITS.
(A) No business establishment or club which does not hold an on-sale intoxicating liquor license
may directly or indirectly allow the consumption and display of alcoholic beverages or knowingly serve
any liquid for the purpose of mixing with intoxicating liquor without first having obtained a permit from
the Commissioner of Public Safety.
(B) The presence of intoxicating liquor on the premises of the business establishment or club shall
be prima facie evidence of possession of intoxicating liquor for the purpose of sale. The serving any
liquid knowing that it is for the purpose of mixing with intoxicating liquor shall be prima facie evidence
that intoxicating liquor is being permitted to be consumed or displayed contrary to this chapter.
(C) A permit for the consumption and display of intoxicating liquor to be issued by the state’s
Commissioner of Public Safety, pursuant to M.S. § 340A.414, as it may be amended from time to time,
shall be subject to prior approval by the City Council. Application to the city for approval of the permit
shall be on the form prescribed by the state. The Council may call a public hearing on the application
and grant or refuse approval of the permit.
(Ord. 83, passed 12-17-2003) Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be punished as provided in § 10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(B) (1) Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be
amended from time to time, or any rules promulgated under that chapter, as they may be amended from
time to time, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided by law.
(2) The Council shall imposed a civil penalty of up to $2,000 for each violation of M.S. Ch.
340A, as it may be amended from time to time, and of this chapter. Conviction of a violation in a court
of law is not required in order for the Council to impose the civil penalty. A hearing under the
Alcoholic Beverages 23
Administrative Procedures Act, M.S. §§ 14.57 to 14.69, as they may be amended from time to time, is
not required before the penalty is imposed, but the Council shall hold a hearing on the proposed violation
and the proposed penalty and hear any person who wishes to speak. Non-payment of the penalty is
grounds for suspension or revocation of the license. The following is the minimum schedule of
presumptive civil penalties which must be imposed in addition to any suspension unless the license is
revoked:
(a) For the first violation within any three-year period: $500;
(b) For the second violation within any three-year period: $750; and
(c) For the third and subsequent violations within any three-year period: $1,000.
(3) The term VIOLATION, as used in this division (B), includes any and all violations of the
provisions of this section, or of M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, or any rules
promulgated under that chapter, as they may be amended from time to time. The number of violations
shall be determined on the basis of the history of violations for the preceding three-year period.
Revocation shall occur within 60 days following a violation for which revocation is imposed.
(4) The purpose of this division (B) is to establish a standard by which the Council determines
penalties for violations of this division (B), and shall apply to all premises licensed under this chapter.
These penalties are presumed to be appropriate for every case; however, the Council may deviate in an
individual case where the Council finds that there exist substantial reasons making it more appropriate
to deviate, such as, but not limited to, a licensee’s efforts in combination with the state or city to prevent
the sale of alcohol to minors. When deviating from these standards, the Council will provide written
findings that support the penalties selected.
(C) A violation of § 110.03 of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable as provided by law and is
justification for revocation or suspension of any alcoholic beverages license issued under this chapter or
the imposition of a civil penalty under the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 83, passed 12-17-2003; Ord. 99, passed 8-2-2011)
24 New Germany - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 111: AMUSEMENTS AND RECREATION
Section
111.01 Amusement machines
111.02 Games of skill
§ 111.01 AMUSEMENT MACHINES.
(A) For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
AMUSEMENT MACHINE. Any machine or device intended for use by the public as a source
of amusement, recreation or musical selection, and which requires for its operation the payment of a fee
by the user which is inserted directly into the device or machine. However, cigarette, candy, gum, soft
drink and similar vending machines are not to be considered as AMUSEMENT MACHINES within the
meaning of this section.
OPERATOR. The person or persons who keeps or allows the amusement machines to be kept
on premises owned by him or her or under his or her control.
OWNER. Any person or persons who owns and places amusement machines by whatever
arrangement on the operator’s premises.
(B) It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any amusement machine, as herein defined,
to allow any amusement machine to be maintained or operated within the corporate limits of the city,
unless the owner or operator has first obtained a license thereof as hereinafter provided.
(C) Any person or person desiring to maintain or operate an amusement machine within the
corporate limits of the city shall make application for a license therefor as herein provided to the city’s
Clerk-Treasurer and shall pay therefor the sum of $15 per year for each amusement machine. After
referring the license application to the City Council for approval, the city’s Clerk-Treasurer shall issue
the license, which license shall run for one year at a time with the first year to commence on 7-1-1979.
The sum of $40 per amusement machine shall be paid to the city’s Clerk-Treasurer at the time of the
25
26 New Germany - Business Regulations
application. In the event that the application shall be refused by the City Council, the fee or fees paid
by the applicant shall be refunded to him or her.
(D) Each amusement machine licensed in accordance with this section shall have affixed thereto a
license tag furnished by the city evidencing compliance with the terms and conditions of this section.
(Ord. 52, passed 6-5-1979) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.02 GAMES OF SKILL.
(A) The term A GAME OF SKILL, as used herein, shall include any devise played by manipulating
special equipment and propelling a ball or balls across a board or field into respective positions whereby
a score is established, or the use of a rifle, revolver or any gun, the object of which is to secure a special
number or numbers or high total score in any manner whatsoever which may be played by the public
generally at a price paid either directly or indirectly for the privilege, whether a present is offered for
the game or not. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as permitting the operation of any game,
devise constituting a lottery or gambling device and prohibited under the state law.
(B) (1) No person, firm or corporation shall operate of keep for operation any game of skill without
having applied for and received a license therefor from the City Council, signed by the Clerk-Treasurer
thereof, as herein provided.
(2) Application for the license shall be made to the city’s Clerk-Treasurer upon a form to be
supplied by the city and shall describe the games of skill and the premises upon which the same are to
be kept and give the name of the applicant. The license fee for each game of skill shall be $5 per month,
or any part of a month and a fee for one month shall accompany the application for a license.
(3) Upon the license being granted, the fee therefor shall be payable thereafter in advance on
the first day of each month subsequent to the issuance of a license, and the license, when issued, shall
remain in force so long as the license fee is paid as required on the first of each month, the license is
void without further proceedings. A license is required for each game of skill.
(C) The City Council hereby reserves the right to cancel forthwith any license granted hereunder
for any cause.
(D) Every license granted hereunder shall be kept posted in a conscious place on or near the game
so licensed and shall identify the same by number or description.
(E) (1) No person shall use any device licensed under this section as a gambling device.
(2) No minors under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to play any such devices.
(Ord. 29, passed 2-4-1947) Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 112: ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
112.01 Title
112.02 Purpose and scope
112.03 Definitions
112.04 Compliance required
112.05 User fees
112.06 Enforcement
§ 112.01 TITLE.
This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the “Alarm Users Ordinance”, except as herein
referred to as “this chapter”.
(Ord. 54, passed 8-31-1982)
§ 112.02 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public safety services which serve the city from misuse
and to provide for the maximum possible service to alarm users. This chapter provides regulation for
the use of burglary, robbery, fire and medical alarms and establishes a system of administration and an
alarms user’s fee.
(Ord. 54, passed 8-31-1982)
§ 112.03 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ALARM SYSTEM. Any equipment or device which emits an audible, visual or electronic signal,
upon the detection of a potential burglary, robbery, fire, medical emergency, trespass or property
27
28 New Germany - Business Regulations
intrusion. The term ALARM SYSTEM does not include anti-theft or tampering alarms installed in any
motor vehicle.
ALARM USER. Any person in control of any building, structure, facility or tract of land wherein
or whereon an alarm system is used or maintained within the city.
FALSE ALARMS. An alarm signal eliciting a response by public safety personnel when a situation
requiring a response does not exist, and which is caused by the activation of the alarm system through
mechanical failure, alarm malfunction, improper installation or the inadvertence of the owner or lessee
of the alarm system or of his or her employees or agents. FALSE ALARMS do not include alarms caused
by climatic conditions such as tornadoes, thunderstorms, utility line mishaps, violent conditions of nature
or any other conditions which are clearly beyond the control of the alarm manufacturer, installer or
alarm user.
PERSON. Any human being, any corporation, partnership, firm, association or other organization,
any receiver, trustee, assignee, agent or other legal representative of any of the foregoing, or any other
legal entity.
PUBLIC SAFETY COMMUNICATIONS CENTER. The central facility used to receive emergency
requests for public safety services and general information from the public to be dispatched to public
safety personnel.
PUBLIC SAFETY PERSONNEL. All personnel employed by any law enforcement agency, and any
firefighting personnel and any ambulance personnel.
SHERIFF. The Carver County Sheriff or his or her designee.
(Ord. 54, passed 8-31-1982)
§ 112.04 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
(A) Compliance. No person shall locate, install, construct, alter, repair, use or maintain any alarm
system within the city, except in full compliance with this chapter and the standards adopted herein.
(B) Audible alarms. All audible alarms shall meet the following requirements.
(1) Every person maintaining an alarm system with an audible alarm signal shall post a notice
containing the name and telephone number of a person to be notified to render repairs or service to the
alarm system during any hour of the day or night upon activation of the alarm system. The notice shall
be posted at the main entrance to the premises or near the alarm in a position as to be legible from the
ground level adjacent to the building.
(2) Alarm systems with audible alarm signals that sound like police or fire sirens are
prohibited.
Alarm Systems 29
(3) All alarm systems with audible alarm signals, except for fire alarms, shall have an
automatic shut-off, which will silence the audible alarm signal within a period not to exceed 15 minutes.
(C) Registration.
(1) All persons using or maintaining any alarm system within the city shall register the alarm
system with the Sheriff, utilizing registration forms to be furnished by the Sheriff, no later than the later
of the following dates:
(a) The sixtieth day after the effective date of this chapter; or
(b) The thirtieth day after the installation of the alarm system.
(2) Any alteration or modification of any previously registered alarm system shall be registered
with the Sheriff, utilizing registration forms to be furnished by the Sheriff, within 30 days of the
commencement of the alteration or modification.
(D) In-house annunciation panel. Financial institutions having an alarm system with a robbery signal
feature shall have an on-premises annunciator panel providing specific annunciation of the sensors at a
private monitoring location on the premises. When, in the judgment of the Sheriff, no on-premises
monitoring location is feasible, the requirements of this section may be waived by the Sheriff. All alarm
systems installed in financial institutions after the effective date of this chapter shall have annunciator
panels when installed. All alarm systems currently used by financial institutions shall have the
annunciator panels install within one year from the effective date of this chapter.
(E) Multiple function alarm systems. Alarm systems that have more than one alarm signal function
(burglary, fire and the like) must report specifically which of the functions has been violated, when
reporting to the Public Safety Communication Center for the purpose of dispatching public safety
personnel to the site of the alarm system.
(F) Communication center. No alarm system shall connect directly to the Public Safety
Communications Center, except financial institutions and/or public buildings. All other alarms must
report to the Public Safety Communications Center in some other manner. No automatic telephone
dialing device shall be allowed to dial direct or be programed so that it dials directly into the Public
Safety Communications Center.
(Ord. 54, passed 8-31-1982) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.05 USER FEES.
(A) User fee imposed.
(1) An alarm user fee is hereby imposed upon any alarm user from whose alarm system
emanates more than three false alarms within any 12 consecutive month period.
30 New Germany - Business Regulations
(2) The fees payable under this section are as follows:
Number of False Alarms Per 12
Consecutive Month Period
Alarm User Fee
1st, 2nd or 3rd No charge
4th $50
5th $100
6th $150
7th $200
8th $250
Each additional false alarm in excess of 8 $300
(B) Exemptions.
(1) Public buildings. All federal, state, county and/or municipal buildings and all public schools
shall be exempt from the alarm user’s fee.
(2) New alarm systems. All newly installed alarm systems are hereby granted a 30-day
probationary period, commencing on the date of first operational use thereof, during which period false
alarms will not be counted for the purpose of computing the amount of any alarm user fee imposed by
this chapter.
(3) Alterations to existing alarm systems. All alarm systems which are altered by the addition
to any new alarm feature are hereby granted a 15-day probationary period, commencing on the date of
first operational use of the new feature, during which period false alarms will not be counted for the
purpose of computing the amount of any alarm user fee imposed by this chapter.
(C) Payment of alarm user fees. Subsequent to any false alarm, the Sheriff shall notify the affected
alarm user in writing of the date of the false alarm, the apparent reason therefor and the alarm user fee
imposed pursuant to this chapter. It shall be the duty of each alarm user to pay all alarm user fees
imposed by this chapter to the Sheriff within 30 days of the date of mailing of the Sheriff’s fee statement
specifying the amount of the alarm user fees. For the purpose of mailing the Sheriff’s fee statement under
this section, the statement shall be mailed to the affected alarm user at his, her or its address shown on
the registration form required by § 112.04(C) of this chapter. One-half of all alarm user fees collected
by the Sheriff shall be remitted to the city to defray its administrative and prosecution costs incurred in
connection with the enforcement of this chapter. The other half of the alarm user fees shall be retained
by the Sheriff to defray his or her administrative costs incurred in enforcing this chapter.
(Ord. 54, passed 8-31-1982)
Alarm Systems 31
§ 112.06 ENFORCEMENT.
(A) User to respond. If, in the judgment of public safety personnel at the scene of an alarm, it is
determined that the alarm user should appear at the location of any alarm for the purpose of admitting
public safety personnel to the subject premises to investigate any alarm system signal, or for the purposes
of deactivating any alarm system signal, or for the purpose of identifying third parties found on the
subject premises during the investigation of any alarm system signal, the alarm user shall appear
immediately if so requested by the Sheriff.
(B) Remedial action by user. If an alarm user has had more than three false alarms in a 12-month
period, the alarm user, upon the written request of the Sheriff, shall be required to submit, in written
form, a description of any steps being taken to remedy any problems with false alarms emanating from
the alarm user’s location.
(C) Administrative rules/regulations. The Sheriff shall promulgate such rules/regulations as
necessary for the implementation and/or administration of this chapter.
(Ord. 54, passed 8-31-1982)
32 New Germany - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 113: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
113.01 Definitions
113.02 Exceptions to definitions
113.03 Licensing; exemptions
113.04 License ineligibility
113.05 License suspension and revocation
113.06 License transferability
113.07 Registration
113.08 Prohibited activities
113.09 Exclusion by placard
113.10 Effectiveness
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms shall be given their
commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
PEDDLER. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-tostreet,
or any other type of place-to-place movement, for the purpose of offering for sale, displaying or
exposing for sale, selling or attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the goods, wares,
products, merchandise or other personal property that the person is carrying or otherwise transporting.
The term PEDDLER shall mean the same as the term “hawker.”
PERSON. Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation, partnership or association.
As applied to groups, organizations, corporations, partnerships and associations, the term shall include
each member, officer, partner, associate, agent or employee.
REGULAR BUSINESS DAY. Any day during which the city hall is normally open for the purpose
of conducting public business. Holidays defined by state law shall not be counted as regular business
days.
SOLICITOR. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business, streetto-
street, or any other type of place-to-place movement, for the purpose of obtaining or attempting to
obtain orders for goods, wares, products, merchandise, other personal property or services of which he
33
34 New Germany - Business Regulations
or she may be carrying or transporting samples, or that may be described in a catalog or by other means,
and for which delivery or performance shall occur at a later time. The absence of samples or catalogs
shall not remove a person from the scope of this provision if the actual purpose of the person’s activity
is to obtain or attempt to obtain orders as discussed above. The term shall mean the same as the term
“canvasser.”
TRANSIENT MERCHANT. A person who temporarily sets up business out of a vehicle, trailer,
boxcar, tent, other portable shelter, or empty store front for the purpose of exposing or displaying for
sale, selling or attempting to sell, and delivering, goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personal
property and who does not remain or intend to remain in any one location for more than 14 consecutive
days.
§ 113.02 EXCEPTIONS TO DEFINITIONS.
(A) For the purpose of the requirements of this chapter, the terms PEDDLER, SOLICITOR, and
TRANSIENT MERCHANT shall not apply to any person selling or attempting to sell at wholesale any
goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personal property to a retailer of the items being sold by
the wholesaler. The terms also shall not apply to any person who makes initial contacts with other
people for the purpose of establishing or trying to establish a regular customer delivery route for the
delivery of perishable food and dairy products such as baked goods and milk, nor shall they apply to any
person making deliveries of perishable food and dairy products to the customers on his or her established
regular delivery route.
(B) In addition, persons conducting the type of sales commonly known as garage sales, rummage
sales, or estate sales, as well as those persons participating in an organized multi-person bazaar or flea
market, shall be exempt from the definitions of PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, and TRANSIENT
MERCHANTS, as shall be anyone conducting an auction as a properly licensed auctioneer, or any
officer of the court conducting a court-ordered sale. Exemption from the definitions for the scope of this
chapter shall not excuse any person from complying with any other applicable statutory provision or
local ordinance.
(C) Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to prohibit or restrict door-to-door advocacy.
Persons engaging in door-to-door advocacy shall not be required to register as solicitors under § 113.07.
The term DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCACY includes door-to-door canvassing and pamphleteering as
vehicles for the dissemination of religious, political and other ideas.
§ 113.03 LICENSING; EXEMPTIONS.
(A) County license required. No person shall conduct business as a peddler, solicitor or transient
merchant within the city limits without first having obtained the appropriate license from the county as
required by M.S. Ch. 329, as it may be amended from time to time, if the county issues a license for the
activity.
Peddlers and Solicitors 35
(B) City license required. Pursuant to M.S. § 437.02, as it may be amended from time to time,
except as otherwise provided for by this chapter, no person shall conduct business as either a peddler
or a transient merchant without first having obtained a license from the city. Solicitors need not be
licensed, but are still required to register pursuant to § 113.07.
(C) Application. Application for a city license to conduct business as a peddler or transient
merchant shall be made at least 14 regular business days before the applicant desires to begin conducting
business operations in the city. Application for a license shall be made on a form approved by the City
Council and available from the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer. All applications shall be signed by
the applicant. All applications shall include the following information:
(1) Applicant’s full legal name.
(2) All other names under which the applicant conducts business or to which applicant officially
answers.
(3) A physical description of the applicant (hair color, eye color, height, weight, distinguishing
marks and features, and the like).
(4) Full address of applicant’s permanent residence.
(5) Telephone number of applicant’s permanent residence.
(6) Full legal name of any and all business operations owned, managed or operated by
applicant, or for which the applicant is an employee or agent.
(7) Full address of applicant's regular place of business (if any).
(8) Any and all business related telephone numbers of the applicant, including cellular phones
and facsimile (fax) machines.
(9) The type of business for which the applicant is applying for a license.
(10) Whether the applicant is applying for an annual or daily license.
(11) The dates during which the applicant intends to conduct business, and if the applicant is
applying for a daily license, the number of days he or she will be conducting business in the city, with
a maximum 14 consecutive days.
(12) Any and all addresses and telephone numbers where the applicant can be reached while
conducting business within the city, including the location where a transient merchant intends to set up
business.
36 New Germany - Business Regulations
(13) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted within the last five years
of any felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor for violation of any state or federal statute or any
local ordinance, other than traffic offenses.
(14) A list of the three most recent locations where the applicant has conducted business as a
peddler or transient merchant.
(15) Proof of any required county license.
(16) Written permission of the property owner or the property owner’s agent for any property
to be used by a transient merchant.
(17) A general description of the items to be sold or services to be provided.
(18) All additional information deemed necessary by the City Council.
(19) The applicant’s driver's license number or other acceptable form of identification.
(20) The license plate number, registration information and vehicle identification number (VIN)
for any vehicle to be used in conjunction with the licensed business, and a physical description of the
vehicle.
(D) Fee. All applications for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by the fee
established by the city, as it may be amended from time to time.
(E) Procedure. Upon receipt of the completed application and payment of the license fee, the City
Clerk-Treasurer, within two regular business days, must determine if the application is complete. An
application is determined to be complete only if all required information is provided. If the City Clerk-
Treasurer determines that the application is incomplete, the City Clerk-Treasurer must inform the
applicant of the required necessary information that is missing. If the application is complete, the City
Clerk-Treasurer must order any investigation, including background checks, necessary to verify the
information provided with the application. Within ten regular business days of receiving a complete
application the City Clerk-Treasurer must issue the license unless there exist grounds for denying the
license under § 113.04, in which case the Clerk-Treasurer must deny the license application. If the City
Clerk-Treasurer denies the license application, the applicant must be notified in writing of the decision,
the reason for denial, and of the applicant's right to appeal the denial by requesting, within 20 days of
receiving notice of rejection, a public hearing before the City Council. The City Council shall hear the
appeal within 20 days of the date of the request for a public hearing. The decision of the City Council
following the public hearing can be appealed by petitioning the Minnesota Court of Appeals for a writ
of certiorari.
(F) Duration. An annual license granted under this chapter shall be valid for one calendar year
from the date of issue. All other licenses granted to peddlers and transient merchants under this chapter
shall be valid only during the time period indicated on the license.
Peddlers and Solicitors 37
(G) License exemptions.
(1) No license shall be required for any person to sell or attempt to sell, or to take or attempt
to take orders for, any product grown, produced, cultivated, or raised on any farm.
(2) No license shall be required of any person going from house-to-house, door-to-door,
business-to-business, street-to-street, or other type of place-to-place movement when the activity is for
the purpose of exercising that person’s State or Federal Constitutional rights such as the freedom of
speech, press, religion and the like, except that this exemption may be lost if the person's exercise of
Constitutional rights is merely incidental to a commercial activity.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.04 LICENSE INELIGIBILITY.
The following shall be grounds for denying a license under this chapter:
(A) The failure of the applicant to obtain and show proof of having obtained any required county
license.
(B) The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the information requested by the city
as a part of the application, or the failure to sign the application, or the failure to pay the required fee
at the time of application.
(C) The conviction of the applicant within the past five years from the date of application for any
violation of any federal or state statute or regulation, or of any local ordinance, which adversely reflects
on the person's ability to conduct the business for which the license is being sought in an honest and
legal manner. Those violations shall include but not be limited to burglary, theft, larceny, swindling,
fraud, unlawful business practices, and any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another
person.
(D) The revocation within the past five years of any license issued to the applicant for the purpose
of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant.
(E) The applicant is found to have a bad business reputation. Evidence of a bad business reputation
shall include, but not be limited to, the existence of more than three complaints against the applicant
with the Better Business Bureau, the Office of the Minnesota Attorney General, or other state attorney
general’s office, or other similar business or consumer rights office or agency, within the preceding 12
months, or three complaints filed against the applicant within the preceding five years.
§ 113.05 LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
(A) Generally. Any license issued under this section may be suspended or revoked at the discretion
of the City Council for violation of any of the following:
38 New Germany - Business Regulations
(1) Subsequent knowledge by the city of fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statements
provided by the applicant on the application form.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made during the course of the licensed activity.
(3) Subsequent conviction of any offense for which granting of a license could have been
denied under § 113.04.
(4) Engaging in prohibited activity as provided under § 113.08.
(5) Violation of any other provision of this chapter.
(B) Multiple persons under one license. The suspension or revocation of any license issued for the
purpose of authorizing multiple persons to conduct business as peddlers or transient merchants on behalf
of the licensee shall serve as a suspension or revocation of each authorized person’s authority to conduct
business as a peddler or transient merchant on behalf of the licensee whose license is suspended or
revoked.
(C) Notice. Prior to revoking or suspending any license issued under this chapter, the city shall
provide the license holder with written notice of the alleged violations and inform the licensee of his or
her right to a hearing on the alleged violation. Notice shall be delivered in person or by mail to the
permanent residential address listed on the license application, or if no residential address is listed, to
the business address provided on the license application.
(D) Public hearing. Upon receiving the notice provided in division (C) of this section, the licensee
shall have the right to request a public hearing. If no request for a hearing is received by the City
Clerk-Treasurer within ten regular business days following the service of the notice, the city may
proceed with the suspension or revocation. For the purpose of mailed notices, service shall be
considered complete as of the date the notice is placed in the mail. If a public hearing is requested within
the stated time frame, a hearing shall be scheduled within 20 days from the date of the request. Within
three regular business days of the hearing, the City Council shall notify the licensee of its decision.
(E) Emergency. If, in the discretion of the City Council, imminent harm to the health or safety of
the public may occur because of the actions of a peddler or transient merchant licensed under this
chapter, the City Council may immediately suspend the person’s license and provide notice of the right
to hold a subsequent public hearing as prescribed in division (C) of this section.
(F) Appeals. Any person whose license is suspended or revoked under this section shall have the
right to appeal that decision in court.
Penalty, see § 10.99
Peddlers and Solicitors 39
§ 113.06 LICENSE TRANSFERABILITY.
No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred to any person other than the person to
whom the license was issued.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.07 REGISTRATION.
All solicitors, and any person exempt from the licensing requirements of this chapter under
§ 113.03, shall be required to register with the city. Persons engaging in door-to-door advocacy shall
not be required to register. The term DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCACY includes door-to-door canvassing
and pamphleteering as vehicles for the dissemination of religious, political and other ideas. Registration
shall be made on the same form required for a license application, but no fee shall be required.
Immediately upon completion of the registration form, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall issue to the
registrant a Certificate of Registration as proof of the registration. Certificates of Registration shall be
non-transferable.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.08 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall conduct business in any of the following manners:
(A) Calling attention to his or her business or items to be sold by means of blowing any horn or
whistle, ringing any bell, crying out, or by any other noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an
enclosed structure.
(B) Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian traffic on any street, alley, sidewalk
or other public right-of-way.
(C) Conducting business in a way as to create a threat to the health, safety and welfare of any
individual or the general public.
(D) Conducting business before 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.
(E) Failing to provide proof of license or registration, and identification, when requested; or using
the license or registration of another person.
(F) Making any false or misleading statements about the product or service being sold, including
untrue statements of endorsement. No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall claim to have the
endorsement of the city solely based on the city having issued a license or certificate of registration to
that person.
40 New Germany - Business Regulations
(G) Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave, or to otherwise conducting
business in a manner a reasonable person would find obscene, threatening, intimidating or abusive.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.09 EXCLUSION BY PLACARD.
No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant, unless invited to do so by the property owner or tenant,
shall enter the property of another for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or
transient merchant when the property is marked with a sign or placard at least four inches long and four
inches wide with print of at least 48 point in size stating “No Peddlers, Solicitors or Transient
Merchants,” or “Peddlers, Solicitors, and Transient Merchants Prohibited,” or other comparable
statement. No person other than the property owner or tenant shall remove, deface or otherwise tamper
with any sign or placard under this section.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.10 EFFECTIVENESS.
The provisions of §§ 113.01, 113.02, 113.08 and 113.09 shall automatically apply upon adoption
of this chapter. Sections 113.03, 113.04, 113.05, 113.06 and 113.07 shall not be effective until the
adoption of a City Council resolution or ordinance authorizing the licensing of persons covered by those
sections.
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
Chapter
130. GENERAL OFFENSES
1
2 New Germany - General Offenses
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
130.01 Curfew for minors
130.02 Loitering
130.03 Explosives
130.04 Disorderly conduct, noise and the like
130.05 Firearms and dangerous weapons
§ 130.01 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
(A) Purpose. The curfew for minors established by this section is maintained for four primary
reasons:
(1) To protect the public from illegal acts of minors committed during the curfew hours;
(2) To protect minors from improper influences that prevail during the curfew hours, including
involvement with gangs;
(3) To protect minors from criminal activity that occurs during the curfew hours; and
(4) To help parents control their minor children.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
EMERGENCY ERRAND. A task that if not completed promptly threatens the health, safety,
or comfort of the minor or a member of the minor’s household. The term shall include, but shall not
be limited to, seeking urgent medical treatment, seeking urgent assistance from law enforcement or fire
department personnel, and seeking shelter from the elements or urgent assistance from a utility company
due to a natural or human-made calamity.
OFFICIAL CITY TIME. The time of day as determined by reference to the master clock used
by the Police Department.
3
4 New Germany - General Offenses
PLACES OF AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAINMENT OR REFRESHMENT. Those places that
include, but are not limited to, movie theaters, pinball arcades, shopping malls, nightclubs catering to
minors, restaurants, and pool halls.
PRIMARY CARE or PRIMARY CUSTODY. The person who is responsible for providing
food, clothing, shelter, and other basic necessities to the minor. The person providing primary care or
custody to the minor shall not be another minor.
SCHOOL ACTIVITY. An event which has been placed on a school calendar by public or
parochial school authorities as a school sanctioned event.
(C) Hours.
(1) Minors under the age of 16 years. No minor under the age of 16 years shall be in or upon
the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings;
nor in or upon places of amusement, entertainment or refreshment; nor in or upon any vacant lot,
between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the following day, official city time.
(2) Minors ages 16 years to 18 years. No minor of the ages of 16 or 17 years shall be in or
upon the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public
buildings; nor in or upon places of amusement, entertainment or refreshment; nor in or upon any vacant
lot, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. the following day, official city time.
(D) Effect on control by adult responsible for minor. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
give a minor the right to stay out until the curfew hours designated in this section if otherwise directed
by a parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor; nor shall
this section be construed to diminish or impair the control of the adult person having the primary care
or custody of the minor.
(E) Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply in the following situations:
(1) To a minor accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or other adult person having the
primary care and custody of the minor.
(2) To a minor who is upon an emergency errand at the direction of his or her parent, guardian,
or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor.
(3) To a minor who is in any of the places described in this section if in connection with or as
required by an employer engaged in a lawful business, trade, profession, or occupation; or to a minor
traveling directly to or from the location of the business, trade, profession or occupation and the minor's
residence. Minors who fall within the scope of this exception shall carry written proof of employment
and proof of the hours the employer requires the minor's presence at work.
(4) To a minor who is participating in or traveling directly to or from an event which has been
officially designated as a school activity by public or parochial school authorities; or who is participating
General Offenses 5
in or traveling directly to or from an official activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a
civic organization, school, religious institution, or similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor
and with the permission of the minor's parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care
and custody of the minor.
(5) To a minor who is passing through the city in the course of interstate travel during the
hours of curfew.
(6) To a minor who is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the
exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly, or freedom of religion.
(7) To minors on the sidewalk abutting his or her residence or abutting the residence of a nextdoor
neighbor if the neighbor does not complain to the city's designated law enforcement provider about
the minor's presence.
(8) To a minor who is married or has been married, or is otherwise legally emancipated.
(F) Duties of person legally responsible for minor. No parent, guardian, or other adult having the
primary care or custody of any minor shall permit any violation of the requirements of this section by
the minor.
(G) Duties of other persons. No person operating or in charge of any place of amusement,
entertainment, or refreshment shall permit any minor to enter or remain in his or her place of business
during the hours prohibited by this section unless the minor is accompanied by his or her parent,
guardian or other adult person having primary care or custody of the minor, or unless one of the
exceptions to this section applies.
(H) Defense. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that the owner, operator, or
employee of an establishment promptly notified the city's designated law enforcement provider that a
minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 130.02 LOITERING.
(A) A person commits a violation if he or she loiters or prowls in a place, at a time, or in a manner
not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons
or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether
alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon appearance of a police officer, refuses to
identify himself or herself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or any object. Unless
flight by the person or other circumstances makes it impractical, a police officer shall, prior to any arrest
for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would
otherwise be warranted, by requesting the person to identify himself or herself and to explain his or her
presence or conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the police officer
did not comply with the preceding sentence, or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the
6 New Germany - General Offenses
person was true and, if it had been believed by the police officer at the time, would have dispelled the
alarm. Any police officer may arrest any person suspected of being a loiterer or prowler without a
warrant if it reasonably appears that the delay in arresting the suspect caused by obtaining a warrant
would result in the suspect’s escape.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person, after first being warned by a police officer, or where a “no
loitering” sign or signs have been posted, to loiter, stand, sit, or lie in or upon any public or quasi-public
sidewalk, street, curb, cross-walk, walkway area, mall or that portion of private property utilized for
public use, so as to hinder or obstruct unreasonably the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles thereon.
It shall be unlawful for any person to block, obstruct, or prevent free access to the entrance to any
building open to the public.
(C) For the purpose of this section, PUBLIC PLACE has the following definition unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: an area generally visible to public view, including
streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots, automobiles (whether moving
or not), and buildings open to the general public, including those which serve food or drink or provide
entertainment, and the doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 130.03 EXPLOSIVES.
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons or copartnership to keep any explosives within the city,
except under the conditions following: any person, persons, copartnership wishing to keep explosives
of any kind for sale or otherwise within the city shall notify the Chief of the Fire Department of the city,
whose duty it shall be to consult the person with reference to the best means and place to keep the
explosives without danger to the live or property of any person, which Chief shall designate a place
suitable for the explosive to be kept and keep a record of the same posted in the engine house where the
same can be read, so that, in case of fire, the loss of life and property can be guarded against.
(Ord. 15, passed 5-29-1901) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 130.04 DISORDERLY CONDUCT, NOISE AND THE LIKE.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to engage in any disorderly conduct, riot, quarrel
or tumultuous assembly, with intent to injure or disturb the good order and public peace of the city
within the corporate limits thereof, either upon the public grounds or within any public or private
buildings or dwellings.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to disturb, interrupt or disquiet any assemblage
of people at any picnic or other public gathering.
General Offenses 7
(C) No person or persons shall disturb any religious meeting, by uttering any profane discourse,
committing any rude or indecent act or make any unnecessary noise either within the place where the
meeting is held or so near to it so as to disturb the order and solemnity of the meeting.
(Ord. 7, passed 5-29-1901) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 130.05 FIREARMS AND DANGEROUS WEAPONS.
It shall be unlawful for any minor person to carry or use any pistol, shot gun, rifle, revolver or other
firearm of any kind or character, and the carrying and use thereof by any minor person within the
corporate limits of the city is hereby declared to be unlawful and is prohibited.
(Ord. 4, passed 5-29-1901) Penalty, see § 10.99
8 New Germany - General Offenses
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
Chapter
150. BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
151. STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
152. STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
153. SUBDIVISIONS
154. ZONING
1
2 New Germany - Land Usage
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
Building Code
150.01 Codes adopted by reference
150.02 Application, administration and enforcement
150.03 Permits and fees
150.04 Optional Building Code chapters
150.05 Perpetual existence
BUILDING CODE
§ 150.01 CODES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
The Minnesota State Building Code (the “Code”), as adopted by the Commissioner of Labor and
Industry pursuant to M.S. §§ 326B.101 to 326B.194, as they may be amended from time to time,
including all of the amendments, rules and regulations established, adopted and published from time to
time by the state’s Commissioner of Labor and Industry, through the Building Codes and Standards Unit,
is hereby adopted by reference with the exception of the optional chapters, unless specifically adopted
in this subchapter. The Minnesota State Building Code is hereby incorporated in this subchapter as if
fully set out herein. For more information, see the Minnesota Department of Labor website at
http://www.dli.mn.gov/.
(Ord. 93, passed 8-8-2007)
§ 150.02 APPLICATION, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
The application, administration and enforcement of the Code shall be in accordance with the
Minnesota State Building Code and Minn. Rules Ch. 1300, as it may be amended from time to time. The
Code shall be enforced within the extraterritorial limits permitted by M.S. § 326B.121, as it may be
amended from time to time, when so established by this subchapter. The Code shall be enforced by a
Minnesota certified building official designated by the City Council to administer the Code.
(Ord. 93, passed 8-8-2007)
3
4 New Germany - Land Usage
§ 150.03 PERMITS AND FEES.
The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as authorized in M.S. § 326B.121, as it
may be amended from time to time. Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by the Code in
accordance with a fee schedule adopted by the City Council. In addition, a surcharge fee shall be
collected on all permits issued for work governed by the Code in accordance with M.S. § 326B.148, as
it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 93, passed 8-8-2007)
§ 150.04 OPTIONAL BUILDING CODE CHAPTERS.
(A) The Minnesota State Building Code, established pursuant to M.S. §§ 326B.101 to 326B.194,
as they may be amended from time to time, allows the city to adopt by reference and enforce certain
optional chapters of the most current edition of the Minnesota State Building Code.
(B) The following optional provisions identified in the most current edition of the state’s Building
Code are hereby adopted and incorporated as part of the Building Code for the city: none.
(Ord. 93, passed 8-8-2007)
§ 150.05 PERPETUAL EXISTENCE.
This subchapter shall perpetually include the most current edition of the Minnesota Statute Building
Code, with the exception of the optional appendix chapters. Optional appendix chapters shall not apply
unless specifically adopted.
(Ord. 93, passed 8-8-2007)
CHAPTER 151: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
Section
151.01 Sidewalk and crosswalk construction
151.02 Encumbrances on streets, sidewalks or alleys
§ 151.01 SIDEWALK AND CROSSWALK CONSTRUCTION.
(A) All sidewalks in the city hereafter to be constructed, unless otherwise specially ordered by the
City Council, shall be constructed of cement, sand and gravel properly mixed so as to form concrete.
(B) All crosswalks must be constructed of cement, sand and gravel properly mixed with water so
as to form concrete.
(C) No sidewalks or crosswalks constructed in accordance with the provisions of this section shall
be accepted by the Street Commissioner or other officers of the city, unless otherwise specially ordered
by the Council.
(Ord. 21, passed 5-20-1919) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 151.02 ENCUMBRANCES ON STREETS, SIDEWALKS OR ALLEYS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to pile, place or deposit upon any of the streets, sidewalks
or alleys of the city any cord wood, lumber, boxes, casks or any other material whatever, whether the
street, sidewalk or alley is adjacent to the person’s lot, building or place of business or not, so as to
hinder or obstruct the free use and travel thereon by the public or by any person without first having
obtained a special permit in writing so to do, from the City Council.
(B) No person or persons shall pile, place or deposit upon any of the streets, or alleys in the city
any garbage, manure, offal, ashes, hay, straw or any other material or matter of any kind or character.
(C) All rubbish, manure or matter of any kind mentioned in division (B) above found remaining
upon the streets, sidewalks or alleys of the city shall be removed therefrom by the owner or occupants
5
6 New Germany - Land Usage
of the lots or lands abutting thereto on or before May 1 of each and every year and to be kept so removed
by the owner or occupant the entire year thereafter.
(D) Whenever any manure accumulates around any stable or yard with the city or any such matter
as is mentioned in division (B) above appears upon the streets or alleys of the city, the owner or occupant
of the stable or yards and the abutting owner or occupants of the lots or land shall remove the same upon
the request or notice of any officer of the city so to do, within the time allowed by the officer so
notifying, and so specified by him or her; provided that, the time allowed within which to remove the
same shall not exceed 15 days from the date of the notice by the officer so complaining.
(Ord. 9, passed 5-29-1901) Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 152: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
152.01 Statutory authorization
152.02 Findings
152.03 Purpose
152.04 Definitions
152.05 Scope and effect
152.06 Plan approval procedures
152.07 Plan review procedure
152.08 Controlling regulations
Approval Standards
152.20 Compliance
152.21 Site dewatering
152.22 Waste and material disposal
152.23 Tracking
152.24 Drain inlet protection
152.25 Site erosion control
152.26 Storm water management criteria for permanent facilities
152.27 Design standards
152.28 Wetlands
152.29 Steep slopes
152.30 Catch basins
152.31 Drain leaders
152.32 Inspection and maintenance
152.33 Methods, methodologies and computations
152.34 Watershed management and ground water management plans
152.35 Easements
Lawn Fertilizer Regulations
152.50 Use of impervious surfaces
152.51 Unimproved land areas
7
8 New Germany - Land Usage
152.52 Fertilizer content
152.53 Buffer zone
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to M.S. § 462.351, as it may be amended from time to time, for
cities and towns and M.S. § 394.21, as it may be amended from time to time, for counties having a
population of less than 3,000 according to the 1950 federal census (1990).
(Ord. 70, passed - -1995)
§ 152.02 FINDINGS.
The city hereby finds that uncontrolled and inadequately planned use of wetlands, woodlands,
natural habitat areas, areas subject to soil erosion and areas containing restrictive soils adversely affects
the public health, safety and general welfare by impacting water quality and contributing to other
environmental problems, creating nuisances, impairing other beneficial uses of environmental resources
and hindering the ability of the city to provide adequate water, sewage, flood control and other
community services. In addition, extraordinary public expenditures may be required for the protection
of persons and property in such areas and in areas which may be affected by unplanned land usage.
(Ord. 70, passed - -1995)
§ 152.03 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote, preserve and enhance the natural resources within the city
and protect them from adverse effects occasioned by poorly-sited development or incompatible activities:
by regulating land-disturbing or development activities that would have an adverse and potentially
irreversible impact on water quality and unique and fragile environmentally sensitive land; by minimizing
conflicts and encouraging compatibility between land-disturbing and development activities and water
quality and environmentally sensitive lands; and by requiring detailed review standards and procedures
for land-disturbing or development activities proposed for the areas, thereby achieving a balance between
urban growth and development and protection of water quality and natural areas.
(Ord. 70, passed - -1995)
§ 152.04 DEFINITIONS.
(A) When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense,
words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the
Storm Water Management 9
plural number. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directive. For the purpose of this
chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
APPLICANT. Any person who wishes to obtain a building permit, zoning or subdivision
approval.
CONTROL MEASURE. A practice or combination of practices to control erosion and attendant
pollution.
DETENTION FACILITY. A permanent natural or man-made structure, including wetlands,
for the temporary storage of runoff which contains a permanent pool of water.
FLOOD FRINGE. The portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway.
FLOODPLAIN. The areas adjoining a watercourse or water basin that have been or may be
covered by a regional flood.
FLOODWAY. The channel of the watercourse, the bed of water basins, and those portions of
the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and discharge flood water and provide
water storage during a regional flood.
HYDRIC SOILS. Soils that are saturated, flooded or ponded long enough during the growing
season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part.
HYDROPHYTIC VEGETATION. Macrophysics plant life growing in water, soil or on a
substrate that is at least periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of excessive water content.
LAND-DISTURBING OR DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES. Any change of the land surface
including removing vegetative cover, excavating, filling, grading and the construction of any structure.
PERSON. Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, franchisee, association or
governmental entity.
PUBLIC WATERS. Waters of the state as defined in M.S. § 103G.005, as it may be amended
from time to time.
REGIONAL FLOOD. A flood that is representative of large floods known to have occurred
generally in the state and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an average
frequency in the magnitude of a 100-year recurrence interval.
RETENTION FACILITY. A permanent natural or human-made structure that provides for the
storage of storm water runoff by means of a permanent pool of water.
SEDIMENT. Solid matter carried by water, sewage or other liquids.
10 New Germany - Land Usage
STRUCTURE. Anything manufactured, constructed or erected which is normally attached to
or positioned on land, including portable structures, earthen structures, roads, parking lots and paved
storage areas.
WETLANDS. Lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water table
is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by shallow water. For purposes of this definition,
WETLANDS must have the following three attributes:
(a) Have a predominance of hydric soils;
(b) Are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration
sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions; and
(c) Under normal circumstances support a prevalence of such vegetation.
(B) Many of the above definitions are derived from state law. A local government should ensure
that the definitions are also consistent with definitions in the local Zoning Code.
(Ord. 70, passed - -1995)
§ 152.05 SCOPE AND EFFECT.
(A) Applicability. Every applicant for a building permit, subdivision approval or a permit to allow
land-disturbing activities must submit a storm water management plan to the Zoning Administrator. No
building permit, subdivision approval or permit to allow land-disturbing activities shall be issued until
approval of the storm water management plan or a waiver of the approval requirement has been obtained
in strict conformance with the provisions of this chapter. The provisions of §§ 152.50 through 152.53
of this chapter apply to all land, public or private, located within the city.
(B) Exemptions. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to:
(1) Any part of a subdivision if a plat for the subdivision has been approved by the City
Council on or before the effective date of this chapter;
(2) Any land-disturbing activity for which plans have been approved by the watershed
management organization within six months prior to the effective date of this chapter;
(3) A lot for which a building permit has been approved on or before the effective date of this
chapter;
(4) Installation of fence, sign, telephone and electric poles and other kinds of posts or poles;
or
(5) Emergency work to protect life, limb or property.
Storm Water Management 11
(C) Waiver. The City Council, upon recommendation of the Planning Commission, may waive any
requirement of this chapter upon making a finding that compliance with the requirement will involve an
unnecessary hardship and the waiver of the requirement will not adversely affect the standards and
requirements set forth in § 152.06 of this chapter. The City Council may require as a condition of the
waiver, the dedication or construction, or agreement to dedicate or construct as may be necessary to
adequately meet the standards and requirements.
(Ord. 70, passed - -1995)
§ 152.06 PLAN APPROVAL PROCEDURES.
(A) Application.
(1) A written application for storm water management plan approval, along with the proposed
storm water management plan, shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator and shall include a statement
indicating the grounds upon which the approval is requested, that the proposed use is permitted by right
or as an exception in the underlying zoning district, and adequate evidence showing that the proposed
use will conform to the standards set forth in this chapter. Prior to applying for approval of a storm
water management plan, an applicant may have the storm water management plans reviewed by the
appropriate departments of the city.
(2) Two sets of clearly legible blue or black lined copies of drawings and required information
shall be submitted to the planning department and shall be accompanied by a receipt from the city’s
Clerk-Treasurer evidencing the payment of all required fees for processing and approval as set forth in
§ 152.07(E) of this chapter and a bond when required by § 152.07(D) of this chapter in the amount to
be calculated in accordance with that section. Drawings shall be prepared to a scale appropriate to the
site of the project and suitable for the review to be performed. At a minimum the scale shall be one inch
equals 100 feet.
(B) Storm water management plan. At a minimum, the storm water management plan shall contain
the following information:
(1) Existing site map. A map of existing site conditions showing the site and immediately
adjacent areas, including:
(a) The name and address of the applicant, the section, township and range, north point,
date and scale of drawing and number of sheets;
(b) Location of the tract by an insert map at a scale sufficient to clearly identify the
location of the property and giving such information as the names and numbers of adjoining roads,
railroads, utilities, subdivisions, towns and districts or other landmarks;
(c) Existing topography with a contour interval appropriate to the topography of the land,
but in no case having a contour interval greater than two feet;
12 New Germany - Land Usage
(d) A delineation of all streams, rivers, public waters and wetlands located on and
immediately adjacent to the site, including depth of water, a description of all vegetation which may be
found in the water, a statement of general water quality and any classification given to the water body
or wetland by the state’s Department of Natural Resources, the state’s Pollution Control Agency and/or
the United States Army Corps of Engineers;
(e) Location and dimensions of existing storm water drainage systems and natural drainage
patterns on and immediately adjacent to the site delineating in which direction and at what rate storm
water is conveyed from the site, identifying the receiving stream, river, public water or wetland, and
setting forth those areas of the unaltered site where storm water collects;
(f) A description of the soils of the site, including a map indicating soil types of areas to
be disturbed as well as a soil report containing information on the suitability of the soils for the type of
development proposed and for the type of sewage disposal proposed and describing any remedial steps
to be taken by the developer to render the soils suitable;
(g) Vegetative cover and clearing delineating any vegetation proposed for removal; and
(h) One hundred year floodplains, flood fringes and floodways.
(2) Site construction plan. A site construction plan including:
(a) Locations and dimensions of all proposed land-disturbing activities and any phasing
of those activities;
(b) Locations and dimensions of all temporary soil or dirt stockpiles;
(c) Locations and dimensions of all constructions site erosion control measures necessary
to meet the requirements of this chapter;
(d) Schedule of anticipated starting and completion date of each land-disturbing activity
including tile installation of construction site erosion control measures needed to meet the requirements
of this chapter; and
(e) Provisions for maintenance of the construction site erosion control measures during
construction.
(3) Plan of final site conditions. A plan of final site conditions on the same scale as the existing
site map showing the site changes including:
(a) Finished grading shown at contours at the same interval as provided above or as
required to clearly indicate the relationship of proposed changes to existing topography and remaining
features;
Storm Water Management 13
(b) A landscape plan, drawn to an appropriate scale, including dimensions and distances
and the location, type, size and description of all proposed landscape materials which will be added to
the site as part of the development;
(c) A drainage plan of the developed site delineating in which direction and at what rate
storm water will be conveyed from the site and setting forth the areas of the site where storm water will
be allowed to collect;
(d) The proposed size, alignment and intended use of any structures to be erected on the
site;
(e) A clear delineation and tabulation of all areas which shall be paved or surfaced,
including a description of the surfacing material to be used; and
(f) Any other information pertinent to the particular project which in the opinion of the
applicant is necessary for the review of the project.
(Ord. 70, passed - -1995)
§ 152.07 PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURE.
(A) Process.
(1) Storm water management plans meeting the requirements of § 152.06 of this chapter shall
be submitted by the Zoning Administrator to the Planning Commission for review in accordance with
the standards of §§ 152.20 through 152.35 of this chapter. The Commission shall recommend approval,
recommend approval with conditions or recommend denial of the storm water management plan.
Following Planning Commission action, the storm water management plan shall be submitted to the City
Council at its next available meeting. City Council action on the storm water management plan must be
accomplished with 120 days following the date the application for approval is filed with the Zoning
Administrator.
(2) The process outlined in division (A)(1) above can be modified to be consistent with the
regulatory process of the particular local government unit. For example, one local government may have
a particular department which reviews land use regulatory matters, except the final decision to approve
or deny a land use plan or permit which is reserved for the governing body of the local government unit.
Another local governmental unit may provide the department which reviews land use regulatory matters
with full authority to take final action on the application. Other local governments may use a hybrid
process where some permits are acted upon by the appropriate regulatory department while other land
use matters are left to the governing body for final approval.
(B) Duration. Approval of a plan submitted under the provisions of this chapter shall expire one
year after the date of approval unless construction has commenced in accordance with the plan.
However, if prior to the expiration of the approval, the applicant makes a written request to the Zoning
Administrator for an extension of time to commence construction setting forth the reasons for the
14 New Germany - Land Usage
requested extension, the Planning Department may grant one extension of not greater than one single
year. Receipt of any request for an extension shall be acknowledged by the Zoning Administrator within
15 days. The Zoning Administrator shall make a decision on the extension within 30 days of receipt.
Any plan may be revised in the same manner as originally approved.
(C) Conditions. A storm water management plan may be approved subject to compliance with
conditions reasonable and necessary to ensure that the requirements contained in this chapter are met.
The conditions may, among other matters, limit the size, kind or character of the proposed development,
require the construction of structures, drainage facilities, storage basins and other fatalities, require
replacement of vegetation, establish required monitoring procedures, stage the work over time, require
alterations of the site design to insure buffering and require the conveyance to the city or other public
entity of certain lands or interests therein.
(D) Performance bond.
(1) Prior to approval of any storm water management plan, the applicant shall submit an
agreement to construct the required physical improvements, to dedicate property or easements, or to
comply with such conditions as may have been agreed to. The agreement shall be accompanied by a bond
to cover the amount of the established cost of complying with the agreement. The agreement and bond
shall guarantee completion and compliance with conditions within a specific time, which time may be
extended in accordance with division (B) above.
(2) The adequacy, conditions and acceptability of any agreement and bond shall be determined
by the City Council or any official of the city as may be designated by resolution of the City Council.
(E) Fees. All applicants for storm water management plan approval shall be accompanied by a
processing and approval fee as determined by the city.
(Ord. 70, passed - -1995)
§ 152.08 CONTROLLING REGULATIONS.
In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of an erosion
control or shoreland protection ordinance adopted by the City Council, the more restrictive standard
prevails.
(Ord. 70, passed - -1995)
Storm Water Management 15
APPROVAL STANDARDS
§ 152.20 COMPLIANCE.
(A) No storm water management plan which fails to meet the standards contained in this subchapter
shall be approved by the City Council.
(B) Sections 152.21 through 152.35 of this chapter are examples of how best management practices
for handling storm water runoff and design criteria for detention ponds can be found in the MPCA
publication Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas.
(Ord. 70, passed - -1995)
§ 152.21 SITE DEWATERING.
Water pumped from the site shall be treated by temporary sedimentation basins, grit chambers, sand
filters, upflow chambers, hydro-cyclones, swirl concentrators or other appropriate controls, as
appropriate. Water may not be discharged in a manner that causes erosion or flooding of the site or
receiving channels or a wetland.
(Ord. 70, passed - -1995) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 152.22 WASTE AND MATERIAL DISPOSAL.
All waste and unused building materials (including garbage, debris, cleaning wastes, wastewater,
toxic materials or hazardous materials) shall be properly disposed of off-site and not allowed to be
carried by runoff into a receiving channel or storm sewer system.
(Ord. 70, passed - -1995) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 152.23 TRACKING.
(A) Each site shall have graveled roads, access drives and parking areas of sufficient width and
length to prevent sediment from being tracked onto public or private roadways.
(B) Any sediment reaching a public or private road shall be removed by street cleaning (not
flushing) before the end of each workday.
(Ord. 70, passed - -1995) Penalty, see § 10.99
16 New Germany - Land Usage
§ 152.24 DRAIN INLET PROTECTION.
All storm drain inlets shall be protected during construction until control measures are in place with
a straw bale, silt fence or equivalent barrier meeting accepted design criteria, standards and specifications
contained in the MPCA publication Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas.
(Ord. 70, passed - -1995) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 152.25 SITE EROSION CONTROL.
The following criteria (divisions (A) through (D) below) apply only to construction activities that
result in runoff leaving the site.
(A) Channelized runoff from adjacent areas passing through the site shall be diverted around
disturbed areas, if practical. Otherwise, the channel shall be protected as described below. Sheetflow
runoff from adjacent areas greater than 10,000 square feet in area shall also be diverted around disturbed
areas, unless shown to have resultant runoff rates of less than one-half foot (3/sec.) across the disturbed
area for the one-year storm. Diverted runoff shall be conveyed in a manner that will not erode the
conveyance and receiving channels.
(B) All activities on the site shall be conducted in a logical sequence to minimize the area of bare
soil exposed at any one time.
(C) Runoff from the entire disturbed area on the site shall be controlled by meeting either divisions
(C)(1) and (C)(2) below or divisions (C)(1) and (C)(3) below.
(1) All disturbed ground left inactive for 14 or more days shall be stabilized by seeding or
sodding (only available prior to September 15) or by mulching or covering or other equivalent control
measure.
(2) For sites with more than ten acres disturbed at one time, or if a channel originates in the
disturbed area, one or more temporary or permanent sedimentation basins shall be constructed. Each
sedimentation basin shall have a surface area of at least 1% of the area draining to the basin and at least
three feet of depth and constructed in accordance with accepted design specifications. Sediment shall be
removed to maintain a depth of three feet. The basin discharge rate shall also be sufficiently low as to
not cause erosion along the discharge channel or the receiving water.
(3) For sites with less than ten acres disturbed at one time, silt fences, straw bales or
equivalent, control measures shall be placed along all sideslope and downslope sides of the site. If a
channel or area of concentrated runoff passes through the site, silt fences shall be placed along the
channel edges to reduce sediment reaching the channel. The use of silt fences, straw bales or equivalent
control measures must include a maintenance and inspection schedule.
(D) Any soil or dirt storage piles containing more than ten cubic yards of material should not be
located with a downslope drainage length of less than 25 feet from the toe of the pile to a roadway or
Storm Water Management 17
drainage channel. If remaining for more than seven days, they shall be stabilized by mulching, vegetative
cover, tarps or other means. Erosion from piles which will be in existence for less than seven days shall
be controlled by placing straw bales or silt fence barriers around the pile. In-street utility repair or
construction soil or dirt storage piles located closer than 25 feet of a roadway or drainage channel must
be covered with tarps or suitable alternative control, if exposed for more than seven days, and the storm
drain inlets must be protected with straw bale or other appropriate filtering barriers.
(Ord. 70, passed - -1995) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 152.26 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT CRITERIA FOR PERMANENT FACILITIES.
(A) An applicant shall install or construct, on or for the proposed land-disturbing or development
activity, all storm water management facilities necessary to manage increased runoff so that the two-year,
ten-year and 100-year storm peak discharge rates existing before the proposed development shall not be
increased and accelerated channel erosion will not occur as a result of the proposed land-disturbing or
development activity. An applicant may also make an in-kind or monetary contribution to the
development activities undertaken by one or more persons, including the applicant.
(B) The applicant shall give consideration to reducing the need for storm water management
facilities by incorporating the use of natural topography and land cover such as wetlands, ponds, natural
swales and depressions as they exist before development to the degree that they can accommodate the
additional flow of water without compromising the integrity or quality of the wetland or pond.
(C) The following storm water management practices shall be investigated in developing a storm
water management plan in the following descending order of preference:
(1) Natural infiltration of precipitation on-site; (The purpose of this provision is to encourage
the development of a storm water management plan that encourages natural infiltration. This includes
providing as much natural or vegetated areas on the site as possible, minimizing impervious surfaces,
and directing runoff to vegetated areas rather than to adjoining streets, storm sewers and ditches.)
(2) Flow attenuation by use of open vegetated swales and natural depressions;
(3) Storm water retention facilities; and
(4) Storm water detention facilities.
(D) A combination of successive practices may be used to achieve the applicable minimum control
requirements specified in division (A) above. Justification shall be provided by the applicant for the
method selected.
(Ord. 70, passed - -1995) Penalty, see § 10.99
18 New Germany - Land Usage
§ 152.27 DESIGN STANDARDS.
Storm water detention facilities constructed in the city shall be designed according to the most
current technology as reflected in the MPCA publication Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas and
shall contain, at a minimum, the following design factor:
(A) A permanent pond surface area equal to 2% of the impervious area graining to the pond or 1%
of the entire area draining to the pond, wherever amount is greater;
(B) An average permanent pool depth of four to ten feet; (An alternative to division (A) above and
this division (B) would be to require that the volume of the permanent pool be equal to or greater than
the runoff from a two-inch rainfall for the fully developed site.)
(C) A permanent pool length-to-width ration of three to one (3:1) or greater;
(D) A minimum protective shelf extending ten feet into the permanent pool with a slope of ten to
one (10:1), beyond which slopes should not exceed three to one (3:1);
(E) A protective buffer strip of vegetation surrounding the permanent pool at a minimum width of
one rod (16.5 feet); (This width is consistent with the draft rules developed by the Board of Water and
Soil Resources under the Wetland Conservation Act of 2004, being Minn. Rules part 8420.)
(F) All storm water detention facilities shall have a device to keep oil, grease and other floatable
material from moving downstream as a result of normal operations;
(G) Storm water detention facilities for new development must be sufficient to limit peak flows in
each subwatershed to those that existed before the development for the ten-year storm event. All
calculations and hydrologic models/information used in determining peak flows shall be submitted along
with the storm water management plan; and
(H) All storm water detention facilities must have a forebay to remove course-grained particles prior
to discharge into a watercourse or storage basin.
(Ord. 70, passed - -1995)
§ 152.28 WETLANDS.
(A) Runoff shall not be discharged directly into wetlands without pre-settlement of the runoff.
(B) A protective buffer strip of natural vegetation at least one rod (16.5 feet) in width shall surround
all wetlands. This width is consistent with the draft rules developed by the Board of Water and Soil
Resources under the Wetland Conservation Act of 2004, being Minn. Rules part 8420.
Storm Water Management 19
(C) Wetlands must not be drained or filled, wholly or partially, unless replaced by restoring or
creating wetland areas of at least equal public value. Replacement must be guided by the following
principles in descending order of priority:
(1) Avoiding the direct or indirect impact of the activity that may destroy or diminish the
wetland;
(2) Minimizing the impact by limiting the degree or magnitude of the wetland activity and its
implementation;
(3) Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating or restoring the affect wetland
environment;
(4) Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations
during the life of the activity; and
(5) Compensating for the impact by replacing or providing substitute wetland resources or
environments. (Compensation, including the replacement ratio and quality of replacement, should be
consistent with the requirements outlined in the rules which will be adopted by the Board of Water and
Soil Resources to implement the Wetland Conservation Act of 2004, being Minn. Rules part 8420.)
(Ord. 70, passed - -1995) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 152.29 STEEP SLOPES.
No land-disturbing or development activities shall be allowed on slopes of 18% or more.
(Ord. 70, passed - -1995) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 152.30 CATCH BASINS.
All newly installed and rehabilitated catch basins shall be provided with a sump area for the
collection of course-grained material. The basins shall be cleaned when they are half-filled with material.
(Ord. 70, passed - -1995) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 152.31 DRAIN LEADERS.
(A) All newly constructed and reconstructed buildings will route drain leaders to pervious area
wherein the runoff can be allowed to infiltrate.
(B) The flow rate of water exiting the leaders shall be controlled so no erosion occurs in the
pervious areas.
(Ord. 70, passed - -1995) Penalty, see § 10.99
20 New Germany - Land Usage
§ 152.32 INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE.
All storm water management facilities shall be designed to minimize the need of maintenance, to
provide access for maintenance purposes and to be structurally sound. All storm water management
facilities shall have a plan of operation and maintenance that assures continued effective removal of
pollutants carried in storm water runoff. The Director of Public Works, or designed representative, shall
inspect all storm water management facilities during construction, during the first year of operation and
at least once every five years thereafter. The inspection records will be kept on file at the Public Works
Department for a period of six years. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain any
necessary easements or other property interests to allow access to the storm water management facilities
for inspection and maintenance purposes.
(Ord. 70, passed - -1995) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 152.33 MODELS, METHODOLOGIES AND COMPUTATIONS.
Hydrologic models and design methodologies used for the determination of runoff and analysis of
storm water management structures shall be approved by the city engineering firm. Plans, specification
and computations for storm water management facilities submitted for review shall be sealed and signed
by a registered professional engineer. All computations shall appear on the plans submitted for review,
unless otherwise approved by the city engineering firm.
(Ord. 70, passed - -1995) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 152.34 WATERSHED MANAGEMENT AND GROUND WATER MANAGEMENT PLANS.
Storm water management plans shall be consistent with adopted watershed management plans and
ground water management plans prepared in accordance with the state’s Board of Water and Soil
Resources in accordance with state law.
(Ord. 70, passed - -1995)
§ 152.35 EASEMENTS.
If a storm water management plan involves direction of some or all runoff off of the site, it shall be
the responsibility of the applicant to obtain, from adjacent property owners, any necessary easements
or other property interests concerning flowage of water.
(Ord. 70, passed - -1995) Penalty, see § 10.99
Storm Water Management 21
LAWN FERTILIZER REGULATIONS
§ 152.50 USE OF IMPERVIOUS SURFACES.
No person shall apply fertilizer to or deposit grass clippings, leaves or other vegetative materials
on impervious surfaces, or within storm water drainage systems, natural drainage ways or within wetland
buffer areas.
(Ord. 70, passed - -1995) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 152.51 UNIMPROVED LAND AREAS.
Except for driveways, sidewalks, patios, area occupied by structures or areas which have been
improved by landscaping, all areas shall be covered by plants or vegetative growth.
(Ord. 70, passed - -1995) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 152.52 FERTILIZER CONTENT.
Except for the first growing season for newly established turf areas, no person shall apply liquid
fertilizer which, contains more than 0.5% by weight of phosphorus, or granular fertilizer which contains
more than 3% by weight of phosphorus, unless the single application is less than or equal to one-tenth
pound of phosphorus per 1,000 square feet. Annual application amount shall not exceed one-half pound
of phosphorus per 1,000 square feet of lawn area.
(Ord. 70, passed - -1995) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 152.53 BUFFER ZONE.
Fertilizer applications shall not be made within one rod (16.5 feet) of any wetland or water resource.
(This distance is consistent with the draft rules developed by the Board of Water and Soil Resources
under the Wetland Conservation Act of 2004, being Minn. Rules part 8420.)
(Ord. 70, passed - -1995) Penalty, see § 10.99
22 New Germany - Land Usage
CHAPTER 153: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
153.001 Title
153.002 Purpose
153.003 Authority
153.004 Compliance
153.005 Scope
153.006 Jurisdiction
153.007 Repeal of previous Subdivision Ordinance
153.008 Comprehensive Plan
153.009 Administration
153.010 Definitions
153.011 Effective date
Permits, Variances and Premature Subdivisions
153.025 Permits
153.026 Variances
153.027 Premature subdivisions
Procedures
153.040 Purpose
153.041 General
153.042 Minor subdivisions
153.043 Preliminary plat
153.044 Final plat
Preliminary and Final Plat Submittal Requirements
153.055 Preliminary plat
153.056 Final plat
23
24 New Germany - Land Usage
Design Standards
153.070 General
153.071 Block and lot standards
153.072 Street plan, street design and lot access standards
153.073 Other improvements
153.074 Park dedication
Construction of Basic Improvements
153.085 General
153.086 Development agreement
153.087 Financial guarantee
153.088 Construction plans and inspection
153.089 Required basic improvements
153.090 Completion of required basic improvements
153.091 Prior improvements
153.092 Non-conformance
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 TITLE.
This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the “City of New Germany Subdivision
Ordinance”, except as referred to herein as “this chapter”.
(Ord. 104, passed 10-16-2012)
§ 153.002 PURPOSE.
These regulations are established to protect and provide for the public health, safety and general
welfare of the city and to:
(A) Provide for and guide the orderly, economic and safe development and redevelopment of land
and the provision of public services;
(B) Avoid piecemeal and inefficient planning of subdivisions that results in poor traffic circulation,
inadequate public services, poorly designed park and trail systems and undesirable parcels;
Subdivisions 25
(C) Establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions and resubdivisions,
to provide for the orderly layout and use of land according to the requirements of this chapter and
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan;
(D) Assure that a reasonable portion of subdivisions are dedicated to the public or preserved for
public and semi-public uses such as streets, sanitary sewer facilities, public water facilities, storm water
drainage and associated facilities, parks and open space, electricity, gas, telecommunications and other
similar utilities and improvements;
(E) Provide for the rights of the public to access public lands and waters;
(F) Establish requirements for public improvements to assure that the improvements are designed
to provide sufficient capacity to serve existing and new development and constructed to reasonable and
safe standards;
(G) Protect and enhance the value of land, buildings and improvements throughout the city; and
(H) Prevent the pollution of air, streams and lakes; ensure the adequacy of drainage facilities;
protect water resources and encourage the wise use and management of natural resources in order to
preserve the integrity, stability and beauty of the city.
(Ord. 104, passed 10-16-2012)
§ 153.003 AUTHORITY.
(A) The City Council shall serve as the platting authority in accordance with M.S. § 462.358 and
Ch. 505, as they may be amended from time to time. The City Council may refer the review of
subdivisions of land to the Planning Commission for comment and recommendations.
(B) No subdivision of land shall be accepted for filing by the county’s Office of Property Records
unless the subdivision is accompanied by a resolution approving the subdivision adopted by the
affirmative vote of the majority of the City Council.
(C) The subdivision shall not be valid until it has been filed with the county’s Office of Property
Records.
(Ord. 104, passed 10-16-2012)
§ 153.004 COMPLIANCE.
Following the adoption of this chapter, the following shall not be permitted in a subdivision unless
a subdivision plat has been approved by the city and recorded with the county’s Office of Property
Records and until the improvements required by the city in accordance with the approved plans have
been constructed or arranged for as provided in this chapter:
26 New Germany - Land Usage
(A) No lot in a subdivision shall be sold;
(B) No building permit shall be issued in a subdivision; and
(C) No building shall be erected in a subdivision.
(Ord. 104, passed 10-16-2012)
§ 153.005 SCOPE.
(A) These regulations shall apply to all subdivisions of land within the city; however, the
requirements for a final plat are not applicable to registered land surveys and conveyances by metes and
bounds.
(B) All subdivisions of land within the city shall meet or exceed the requirements of this chapter
unless the city has granted a variance, as established in § 153.026 of this chapter, from the provisions
of this chapter.
(C) The city may impose additional, reasonable standards and conditions that are related to the
subdivision to protect the public’s health, safety and general welfare.
(D) This chapter shall not repeal, annul or in any way impair or interfere with the provisions of
other ordinances or regulations of the city, except as expressly provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 104, passed 10-16-2012)
§ 153.006 JURISDICTION.
The regulations governing plats and the subdivision of land shall apply to the area within the
corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. 104, passed 10-16-2012)
§ 153.007 REPEAL OF PREVIOUS SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.
Ord. 71, adopted by the City Council on 3-6-1996, and all amendments to Ord. 71, are hereby
repealed.
(Ord. 104, passed 10-16-2012)
§ 153.008 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
(A) The city has adopted a Comprehensive Plan, that may be amended from time to time, that
establishes the policies for the establishment and provisions of this chapter.
Subdivisions 27
(B) All land uses and development shall comply with the Comprehensive Plan and the provisions
of this chapter.
(Ord. 104, passed 10-16-2012)
§ 153.009 ADMINISTRATION.
(A) Notices. Failure to give notice or to give adequate notice when such is required by the
provisions of this chapter shall not invalidate any proceeding; provided that, a good faith attempt has
been made to comply with the notice requirement.
(B) Interpretation.
(1) The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted as the minimum requirements necessary
to accomplish the purposes of this chapter. Except as provided within this chapter, the provisions of this
chapter are cumulative and in addition to the provisions of other laws and ordinances governing the same
subjects.
(2) Where the provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions than those of any law, other
ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
(3) Where the provisions of any law or other ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions
than this chapter, the greater restrictions shall be controlling.
(4) Words or terms defined in this chapter shall have the meanings assigned to them unless the
meaning is clearly contrary to the intent of this chapter.
(a) The singular number shall include the plural.
(b) The present tense shall include the past and future tenses.
(c) The word “shall” is mandatory and “may” is permissive.
(5) All measured distances expressed in feet shall be to the nearest tenth of a foot, in event of
conflicting provisions, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.
(C) Separability. The city declares that the provisions of this chapter are separable in accordance
with the following.
(1) If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this chapter to be
invalid, the judgment shall not affect any other provisions of this chapter not specifically included in the
judgment.
28 New Germany - Land Usage
(2) If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision
of this chapter to a particular property or subdivision, the judgment shall not affect the application of the
provision to any other property or subdivision not specifically included in the judgment.
(D) Amendments. This chapter may be amended after consideration and recommendation by the
Planning Commission and action by the City Council. Amendments must be published according to law.
(Ord. 104, passed 10-16-2012)
§ 153.010 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ALLEY. A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property.
APPLICANT. An owner, agent or person, individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership,
corporation, trust or other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in a property to request a
subdivision of the property under this chapter.
APPLICATION, COMPLETE. Any necessary form, as provided by the city, and all accompanying
information as required by this chapter to be completed by the applicant for the requested action.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE(S). Sediment and erosion control methods established in
Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas: Best Management Practices for Minnesota, prepared by the
state’s Pollution Control Agency (MPCA), 3-1-2001, and subsequent updates.
BLOCK. An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets or a combination
of streets, exterior boundary lines of the subdivision and/or bodies of water.
BOULEVARD. The portion of a street right-of-way between the curb or curb line and the property
line.
BUILDING. A structure which may provide shelter and enclosure for persons, personal property
or animals and when the structure is divided by party walls without openings, each portion so formed
and separated shall be deemed to be a separate BUILDING.
CERTIFICATE OF SURVEY. A document prepared by a registered engineer or registered land
surveyor, which precisely describes the area, dimensions and locations of a parcel or parcels of land.
CITY. City of New Germany, Carver County, Minnesota.
CITY CLERK-TREASURER. The City Clerk-Treasurer, appointed by the City Council, and shall
serve as the official Zoning Officer of the city, unless another individual is appointed by the City
Council.
Subdivisions 29
CITY COUNCIL. The governing body of the City of New Germany.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The city’s 2030 Comprehensive Plan, as may be amended from time
to time.
CONSTRUCTION PLANS. The maps or drawings, accompanying a subdivision, showing the
specific location and design of required public or private improvements to be installed in the subdivision
in accordance with the requirements of the city and this chapter as a condition of the approval of the
subdivision.
COUNTY. The governing board of Carver County, Minnesota.
CUL-DE-SAC. A road with only one outlet that contains an area at the end to allow vehicles to turn
around.
DESIGN STANDARDS. The minimum requirements for the preparation and layout of plats and
associated required improvements.
EASEMENT. A grant or authorization by a property owner to use certain property for a specified
use, such as the construction and maintenance of utilities, roadways, parks and pedestrian trails,
drainage, driveway or other use.
ESCROW. A deposit of cash with the city or escrow agent to secure the promise to perform certain
actions associated with a subdivision.
FEE SCHEDULE. The current fee schedule as adopted by the City Council.
FINANCIAL GUARANTEE. A financial security posted with the city with the approval of a final
plat or development contract, guaranteeing compliance with the approved final plat, construction plans
and conditions of approval set forth by the city.
IMPROVEMENTS. Public or private utilities including, but not limited to, water supply and
sanitary sewer systems, storm sewers, roads, sidewalks, pedestrian/bicycle trails, landscaping, lighting,
energy and communication facilities.
LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Any land change that may result in soil erosion from wind,
water and/or ice and the movement of sediments into or upon waters, lands or rights-of-way within the
city, including, but not limited to, building demolition, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating,
transporting and filling of land.
LOT. A parcel of land designated by plat, metes and bounds, registered land survey, auditor’s plot,
or other accepted means that is adequate for a use allowed by this chapter; abutting a public street; and
of sufficient size to meet the required setbacks and area required by this chapter. The terms PARCEL
and TRACT have the same meaning as LOT.
30 New Germany - Land Usage
LOT AREA. The total area within the lot lines of a lot excluding dedicated public rights-of-way.
LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting upon two intersecting streets. The greater frontage of a CORNER
LOT shall be the lot depth and the lesser frontage is the lot width.
LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot having frontage on two non-intersecting streets.
LOT FRONTAGE. The portion or side of a lot that abuts public right-of-way.
LOT LINE. A property boundary line of any lot, except any portion of the lot that extends into the
abutting street or alley.
LOT LINE, FRONT. A lot line abutting a public right-of-way and if a corner lot, it shall be the
shortest dimension on a public street.
LOT LINE, REAR. The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD. A parcel of land whose legal description was established in the county’s Office
of Property Records by plat, subdivision or as otherwise permitted by law.
LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured at the required front setback
line.
MANUAL OF STANDARD PROCEDURES. A procedural manual governing the requirements and
procedures for plats and registered land surveys as approved by the County Board, as may be amended.
METES AND BOUNDS. A method of property description prepared by a land surveyor registered
in the state described by the direction and distance from an identifiable point of beginning.
MnDOT. The Minnesota Department of Transportation.
OPEN SPACE. An area set aside for the preservation of natural open spaces to counteract the effects
of urban congestion and monotony.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL (OHL). The boundary of public waters and wetlands, which
shall be an elevation delineating the highest water level which has been maintained for a sufficient period
of time to leave evidence upon the landscape, commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes
from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. For watercourses, the ORDINARY HIGH
WATER LEVEL is the elevation of the top of the bank of the channel. For reservoirs and flowages, the
ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL is the operating elevation of the normal summer pool.
Subdivisions 31
OUTLOT. A parcel of land shown on a subdivision plat as an outlot and designated
alphanumerically (for example - Outlot A). OUTLOTS are used to designate:
(1) Land that is part of the subdivision but is to be subdivided into lots and blocks at a later
date;
(2) Land that is to be used for a specific purpose as designated in a developer’s agreement;
(3) Land for use by agreement between the city and the applicant; or
(4) Land for a public purpose.
PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS. Public lands and open space in the city dedicated for and usable
for recreation purposes including public parks, recreational facilities, playgrounds, trails, open space or
a related public use.
PEDESTRIAN/BICYCLE TRAIL. A public or private sidewalk or path and associated right-of-way
across a lot or lots to provide access for pedestrians, and non-motorized vehicles and which may be used
for the installation of utilities.
PERCENTAGE OF GRADE. The distance vertically (up or down) from the horizontal in feet and
tenths of a foot for each 100 feet of horizontal distance on street centerline.
PERSON. A firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation, as well
as an individual.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). An integrated development involving two or more
principal uses or structures, including, but not limited to, single-family or multiple-family residential
uses, business uses or any combination thereof, and similar such uses or combinations.
PLANNING COMMISSION. The City of New Germany Planning Commission.
PLAT. The drawing or map of a subdivision prepared for filing of record in accordance with M.S.
Ch. 505, as it may be amended from time to time, and containing all elements and requirements in this
chapter, pursuant to M.S. § 462.358 and Ch. 505, as they may be amended from time to time.
PLAT, FINAL. A drawing or map of a subdivision presented to the City Council for approval that
meets the requirements of this chapter and that is to be recorded with the county’s Office of Property
Records and meeting state law regarding the final platting of land.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY. A drawing or map of a proposed subdivision meeting the requirements of
this chapter.
PROTECTIVE COVENANTS. A restriction of the use placed upon the property by a present or
former owner and recorded with the county’s Office of Property Records.
32 New Germany - Land Usage
PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE. A notice published in the official newspaper of the city, other
qualified newspaper or communication method available to the general public as allowed by state law,
at least ten days before the date of the hearing. The NOTICE shall specify the general time, purpose and
place of the hearing.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. Any sewer, water or drainage facility, street, park or other facility for
which the city or any other government may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and
operation.
REGISTERED LAND SURVEY (RLS). A survey map of registered land designed to simplify a
complicated metes and bounds description, designating the same into a tract or tracts of registered land
survey number.
RESUBDIVISION. A change in an approved or recorded subdivision plat that affects any street
layout, area reserved for public use or any lot line on the plat; or affects any map, or plan legally
recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions.
RIGHT-OF-WAY. An area or strip of land, either public or private, on which an irrevocable rightof-
passage has been recorded for the use of vehicles or pedestrians or both.
ROAD/STREET. A vehicular way lying within public right-of-way which affords primary access
to abutting properties and defined as a local, collector or minor arterial in the Comprehensive Plan.
ROAD, COLLECTOR. Roads that provide connections between cities and minor business
concentrations within the county, as designated in the Comprehensive Plan and the county’s
Transportation Plan, as may be amended.
ROAD, LOCAL. City and township roads that serve the shortest trips and providing access to
adjacent property, as designated in the Comprehensive Plan and the county’s Transportation Plan, as may
be amended.
ROAD, MINOR ARTERIAL. Roadways that serve medium to short trips as designated in the
Comprehensive Plan and the county’s Transportation Plan, as may be amended.
SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between a structure and the nearest property line or
right-of-way line.
SKETCH PLAN REVIEW. An informal, non-binding review of a conceptual subdivision or a
development of property referenced in the Planned Unit Development (PUD) District.
SUBDIVISION. The division of land into two or more lots or parcels for the purpose of transfer
of ownership or building development or, if a new public road is involved, any division of a parcel of
land, except those separations:
Subdivisions 33
(1) Where all the resulting lots or interests will be 20 acres or larger in size and 500 feet in
width for residential or agricultural uses and five acres or larger in size for commercial and industrial
uses;
(2) Creating cemetery lots; and
(3) Resulting from court orders or the adjustment of a lot line by the relocation of a common
boundary.
WATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE, CITY. The city’s Ord. 70, as set out in Ch. 152 of this
code of ordinances, as amended.
WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN, CARVER COUNTY. The county’s Water Management Plan, as
may be amended.
WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN, CITY. The city’s 2007 Storm Water Management Plan, as may
be amended.
WETLAND CONSERVATION ACT. An act adopted by the state, as amended, classifying,
governing and defining wetlands within the state.
ZONING OFFICER. The City Clerk-Treasurer or other individual, as appointed by the City
Council.
ZONING ORDINANCE. Ord. 100, adopted by the city on 11-15-2011, and as may be amended
from time to time, codified as Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 104, passed 10-16-2012)
§ 153.011 EFFECTIVE DATE.
This chapter was adopted by the City Council on 10-16-2012 and became effective upon publication
according to law.
(Ord. 104, passed 10-16-2012)
PERMITS, VARIANCES AND PREMATURE SUBDIVISIONS
§ 153.025 PERMITS.
No building or grading permits shall be issued by the city for the construction of any structure or
improvement on any land within any plat until all requirements of this chapter and any requirements
imposed upon the approval of the subdivision by the City Council have been complied with, including,
34 New Germany - Land Usage
but not limited to, other agency permits, development agreements, receipt of application fees,
reimbursement of all out of pocket expenses incurred by the city, deposit of any required financial
guarantees and insurance, and payment of any delinquent taxes, special assessments or other fees and
payments owed to the city.
(Ord. 104, passed 10-16-2012)
§ 153.026 VARIANCES.
(A) A subdivision shall not be approved where a variance will be required to use the lots for their
intended use.
(B) The Planning Commission may recommend, and the City Council may grant, a variance from
this chapter; provided, the variance is not inconsistent with the purpose of this chapter, Ch. 154 of this
code of ordinances and the Comprehensive Plan.
(C) A variance may only be granted when the City Council finds that all of the following factors
pertain to the property for which the variance is requested:
(1) The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public safety, health or welfare
or injurious to other property;
(2) The conditions upon which the request for variance is based are unique to the property for
which the variance is requested and are not generally applicable to other properties;
(3) An unusual hardship or practical difficulty exists on the property because of the property’s
particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions that warrant varying the requirements
of this chapter; and
(4) The condition or circumstances that cause the unusual hardship or practical difficulty does
not result from actions of the property owner or the applicant.
(D) In granting the variance, the Planning Commission may recommend and the City Council may
impose conditions that it finds necessary or desirable to affect the purposes of this chapter and to protect
the public interest.
(E) A variance from this chapter shall be requested by the applicant of the subdivision at the same
time the preliminary plat or minor subdivision application is submitted to the city and shall be considered
in the same manner as a preliminary plat or minor subdivision.
(F) The variance, if granted by the City Council, shall expire one year from the date of approval
of the preliminary plat or minor subdivision by the City Council if the subdivision has not been filed with
the county, unless a request for a time extension is submitted by the applicant and approved by the City
Council prior to the date the preliminary plat or minor subdivision is to become void.
(Ord. 104, passed 10-16-2012)
Subdivisions 35
§ 153.027 PREMATURE SUBDIVISIONS.
(A) The City Council shall deny any preliminary plat or minor subdivision that is premature for
development according to certain conditions.
(B) A subdivision may be deemed premature should any of the conditions exist:
(1) Inadequate drainage, as defined by the following:
(a) Surface or subsurface water retention and runoff constitutes a hazard on or off the
property resulting in flooding, loss of life, property damages or other losses;
(b) Drainage from or caused by the subdivision will contribute pollution to waterbodies
or damage other natural resources;
(c) The proposed site grading and development will cause damage from erosion,
sedimentation or slope instability outside the subdivision property;
(d) The proposed subdivision fails to comply with the city’s Surface Water Management
Plan and the county’s Water Management Plan requirements; and
(e) Factors considered in making determinations of inadequate drainage may include, but
is not limited to:
1. Average rainfall for the area;
2. Area drainage patterns;
3. The relationship of the land to floodplains;
4. The nature of soils and sub-soils and their ability to adequately support surface
water runoff and waste disposal systems;
5. The slope and stability of the land; and
6. The presence of woodlands, wetlands, hydric soils, waterbodies and/or other
natural resources.
(2) Inadequate or lack of connection to a public water supply: no subdivision shall be approved
unless all property within the subdivision is connected to the municipal water system and the public water
supply system has adequate capacity to meet supply domestic and firefighting needs as determined by
the City Council;
(3) Lack of an adequate public wastewater treatment, as defined by the following:
36 New Germany - Land Usage
(a) There is inadequate capacity in the existing or planned municipal wastewater treatment
system to accommodate the subdivision when fully developed;
(b) The subdivision is located outside of the current or planned municipal wastewater
treatment service area or inconsistent with the public facilities phasing plan included in the
Comprehensive Plan; and
(c) The planned wastewater treatment system for the subdivision is unable to meet the
requirements of this chapter or requirements of the state’s Pollution Control Agency.
(4) Lack of adequate roads to serve the subdivision, as defined by the following:
(a) County or local roads which serve the proposed subdivision are inadequate due to
design or capacity to accommodate an increase in traffic volume generated by the proposed subdivision,
or would create a hazard to public safety and general welfare or seriously aggravate an already hazardous
condition; and
(b) The traffic generated by the proposed subdivision would create or contribute to unsafe
conditions on the adjacent or nearby roadways due to the inadequate roadway capacity of the adjacent
or nearby roadways existing at the time of the application or proposed for completion within the next
two years.
(5) Lack of public service capacity to serve the subdivision: no subdivision shall be approved
where the city, county or school district lacks necessary public service capacity for recreational facilities,
schools, police and fire protection and other public facilities, which must be provided at public expense,
and cannot reasonably be provided for within the next five years; and
(6) Inconsistency with capital improvement policies to serve the subdivision: no subdivision
shall be approved when the city or county has not programmed improvements and/or services necessary
to accommodate the proposed subdivision. This provision may be waived when it can be demonstrated
that a revision to the capital improvement program or policies can be accommodated.
(C) The burden shall be upon the applicant or owner of the property to show evidence that the
proposed subdivision is not premature.
(Ord. 104, passed 10-16-2012)
Subdivisions 37
PROCEDURES
§ 153.040 PURPOSE.
The purpose of platting is to establish easily identified and described properties which reduce public
administrative burdens and avoid general public confusion in identifying, tracking and monitoring private
property.
(Ord. 104, passed 10-16-2012)
§ 153.041 GENERAL.
(A) All subdivisions shall be platted or described by registered land survey in accordance with M.S.
Ch. 505, as it may be amended from time to time, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
(B) No subdivision of land into two or more parcels shall be permitted, except in conformance with
this chapter, except for the following.
(1) Registered land surveys.
(a) All requests for approval of a subdivision described by registered land surveys shall
follow the same procedure for review of a minor subdivision or preliminary plat as described in this
chapter, as applicable, and be filed with the county’s Office of Property Records.
(b) The standards and requirements of this chapter shall apply to all registered land
surveys.
(c) Unless approved by the City Council, a registered land survey shall not be used to
divide a parcel of land into lots for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development, if any
of the lots do not have the required frontage on a dedicated public street.
(2) Metes and bounds conveyances.
(a) All requests for approval of a subdivision described by a metes and bounds description
shall follow the same procedure for review of a minor subdivision as described in this chapter.
(b) All requests for approval of a subdivision described by a metes and bounds description
may be allowed; provided, the division of property results in no more than three lots and no new road,
the resultant lots are easily described, the legal descriptions of the lots are accepted by the County
Surveyor and the lots comply with the dimensional requirements of Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances.
38 New Germany - Land Usage
(3) Planned unit developments (PUDs).
(a) All requests for approval of a subdivision within a PUD District shall follow the same
procedure for review of a preliminary plat and final plat, as described in this chapter.
(b) Standards for the design of subdivisions and public improvements within PUDs may
be varied from the requirements of this chapter due to the uniqueness of the PUD; provided, the city
finds that strict adherence to the requirements or specifications is not required to meet the intent of this
section or to protect the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the PUD, the surrounding area or
the city as a whole.
(C) The city shall not approve any preliminary plat unless a public hearing is held in accordance
with M.S. § 462.358, as it may be amended from time to time.
(D) The applicant shall pay all reasonable fees and other extraordinary costs incurred by the city
for the review of the subdivision, as follows.
(1) A subdivision application fee as established by the city in the city’s fee schedule to recover
costs associated with the administration and review of the subdivision.
(2) Costs incurred by the city for the subdivision review by city consultants such as the City
Engineer, City Planner and City Attorney.
(a) The city may require the applicant to deposit fees in an escrow account or other form
of financial security, approved by the city, at the time of submission of the subdivision application to the
city.
(b) The city may withhold final action on a subdivision and/or withhold all other permits
pertaining to the property until all fees related to the review of the subdivision are paid.
(E) No improvements shall be installed unless the preliminary plat is approved by the City Council,
and no public funds shall be expended for road and utility maintenance services until the City Council
has approved the final plat and accepted the final improvements.
(Ord. 104, passed 10-16-2012)
§ 153.042 MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.
(A) At the discretion of the City Council, the requirements for platting may be waived for minor
subdivisions as defined as:
(1) Moving a lot line between no more than two existing lots;
(2) Platting of county or city road rights-of-way;
Subdivisions 39
(3) A division of a lot along a party wall(s) of a multi-family building; provided that, the
multi-family building is existing; the lot line(s) is along an existing common wall; and verification that
the building will meet Building and Fire Code requirements with the new lot line;
(4) The creation of no more than three lots provided that no new public road is created or
required by the city, that all lots have the minimum required frontage on a public road, and the proposed
lots meet all dimensional and area requirements this chapter and Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances; and
(5) Subdivisions creating separate lots designed to be combined with adjacent lots; provided
that, the newly created lots or parcels, when combined, meet all dimensional and area requirements this
chapter and Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances.
(B) An application for a minor subdivision, on a form provided by the city, shall be filed with the
city’s Clerk-Treasurer a minimum of one month prior to the Planning Commission meeting along with
the following information:
(1) A certificate of survey prepared by a registered land surveyor that includes:
(a) Legal descriptions for the lots to be created;
(b) The existing and proposed lot lines and dimensions;
(c) Lot acreage;
(d) Existing and proposed structures and utilities;
(e) Existing and proposed easements; and
(f) A wetland delineation, as required by the Wetland Conservation Act of 2004, being
Minn. Rules part 8420.
(2) Title evidence for the property in a form acceptable to the City Attorney; and
(3) Fees in accordance herewith.
(C) (1) The city’s Clerk-Treasurer shall schedule the review of the minor subdivision at a Planning
Commission meeting after submission of a complete application by the applicant.
(2) The city’s Clerk-Treasurer may provide a courtesy notice to property owners abutting the
proposed minor subdivision property prior to action by the Planning Commission.
(3) The Planning Commission shall determine if the minor subdivision application complies
with this chapter and the Comprehensive Plan, and shall recommend that the City Council approve,
approve with modifications, or disapprove the application. The Planning Commission shall state reasons
for its recommendation regarding the minor subdivision application to the City Council.
40 New Germany - Land Usage
(4) The City Council shall act to approve, approve with modifications or deny the minor
subdivision within 120 days of submittal of a complete application, unless the applicant agrees to a delay
in writing.
(5) The City Council shall approve, approve with modifications or disapprove the minor
subdivision and shall include findings of fact as part of the official record of the City Council decision.
(D) The minor subdivision shall comply with all applicable standards as required in §§ 153.070
through 153.074 and 153.085 through 153.092 of this chapter.
(E) (1) The applicant shall submit easements, agreements and other documents pertaining to public
services and access provided to the property and their maintenance to the City Attorney for review and
approval before the subdivision is filed with the county’s Office of Property Records.
(2) The applicant shall furnish evidence that the subdivision documents, including any
agreements or easements, have been filed with the county within six months of the City Council approval
or before a building permit is requested, whichever occurs first.
(Ord. 104, passed 10-16-2012)
§ 153.043 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
(A) Sketch plan.
(1) Prior to the submittal of a preliminary plat application, the city may require the submittal
of a sketch plan depicting the general layout of property development for informal discussion and review
with the Planning Commission and the City Council.
(2) The sketch plan review shall consist of the following procedures.
(a) An application for a sketch plan review, on a form provided by the city, with the city’s
Clerk-Treasurer shall be filed a minimum of one month prior to a regularly scheduled Planning
Commission meeting along with the following information:
1. The proposed lot layout and size, intended land use, overall street layout, general
storm water drainage requirements and existing natural features of the property;
2. A narrative describing the need for any required amendments to Ch. 154 of this
code of ordinances and Comprehensive Plan; and
3. A narrative explaining the applicant’s interest in the property, the general timing
or staging of development within the proposed subdivision.
(b) The Planning Commission will informally advise the applicant of the conformance of
the sketch plan with the requirements this chapter, Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances and the
Subdivisions 41
Comprehensive Plan, and will discuss possible plan modifications as necessary to ensure conformance
with this chapter and any other city requirements.
(c) The sketch plan review application and comments from the Planning Commission
pertaining to the sketch plan will be forwarded to the City Council for review and comment at the next
available City Council meeting following review by the Planning Commission.
(3) Any comments and recommendations by the Planning Commission and City Council are
advisory and shall not constitute approval or a commitment to approve a request for any preliminary plat
application for the property.
(B) Preliminary plat review procedure.
(1) The applicant shall submit an application for a preliminary plat, on a form provided by the
city, to the city’s Clerk-Treasurer a minimum of one month prior to a regularly scheduled Planning
Commission meeting along with the following information:
(a) Ten paper copies of the preliminary plat of an accurate scale and supporting
information containing information required in §§ 153.055 and 153.056 of this chapter;
(b) An electronic copy of the preliminary plat and supporting information that may be
printed to a maximum size of 11 inches by 17 inches;
(c) Fees in accordance herewith; and
(d) A county certified list of the names and addresses of owners of properties within a 350-
foot radius of the property to be subdivided.
(2) The city’s Clerk-Treasurer shall determine if the application for the preliminary plat is
complete and notify the applicant if it is found incomplete.
(3) The city’s Clerk-Treasurer may distribute copies of the complete preliminary plat
application and accompanying information to the following persons and agencies for review and
comment prior to its consideration by the Planning Commission and City Council:
(a) Other staff, as may be appropriate, including any other city consultants;
(b) The Carver County Engineer, if the property abuts a county road, or access is
requested from a county road;
(c) The county’s Planning and Zoning Department for review of applicability of watershed
management rules; and
(d) Any other state or county agency as required or deemed appropriate by the city’s
Clerk-Treasurer.
42 New Germany - Land Usage
(C) Planning Commission public hearing and review.
(1) The city’s Clerk-Treasurer shall set a date for a public hearing within 30 days of receipt
of a complete application.
(2) A notice of the public hearing shall be published by the city’s Clerk-Treasurer in the city’s
official newspaper and mailed to property owners within 350 feet of the property to be subdivided a
minimum of ten days prior to the hearing. The public hearing notice shall state:
(a) The date, time and location of the hearing before the Planning Commission;
(b) A general description of the request to be heard; and
(c) The address or location of the property to be subdivided.
(3) The city’s Clerk-Treasurer shall submit any reports and comments from city staff,
consultants or any agency pertaining to the preliminary plat and the preliminary plat application to the
Planning Commission for review.
(4) The Planning Commission may request the applicant to submit additional information
relevant to the preliminary plat to properly consider the plat before or after the public hearing.
(5) Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall:
(a) Determine whether the preliminary plat conforms to this chapter, Ch. 154 of this code
of ordinances, the Comprehensive Plan and any other city regulations; and
(b) Recommend that the City Council approve, approve with modifications or deny the
preliminary plat. If the Planning Commission recommends that the City Council deny the preliminary
plat, the reason(s) for denial shall be included in the minutes.
(6) The city’s Clerk-Treasurer shall forward the Planning Commission’s recommendation and
the minutes of the public hearing pertaining to the preliminary plat to the City Council for consideration.
(D) City Council consideration and action.
(1) The City Council shall consider the reports and comments submitted by the city staff, city
consultants and any agency; comments from the public; and the Planning Commission recommendation
pertaining to the preliminary plat.
(2) The City Council shall act on the preliminary plat within 120 days of submittal of the
complete application to the city, unless the applicant agrees to a delay in writing.
(3) The City Council shall approve, approve with modifications or deny the preliminary plat
and shall include findings of fact as part of the official record of the City Council decision.
Subdivisions 43
(4) The City Council may attach conditions and requirements to the preliminary plat approval
that must be satisfied by the time of final plat approval or such other time as identified by the city.
(5) If the City Council approves the preliminary plat, the applicant may complete a final plat
in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
(6) The approval of the preliminary plat shall be void if the final plat has not been approved
by the City Council within one year from the date of preliminary plat approval by the city, unless a
request for a time extension is submitted by the applicant and approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 104, passed 10-16-2012)
§ 153.044 FINAL PLAT.
(A) General.
(1) The final plat shall be in substantial compliance with the approved preliminary plat and
shall incorporate all of the conditions of the preliminary plat approval unless otherwise specified by the
city.
(2) A development agreement, if required by the city, developed in accordance with the
requirements of §§ 153.085 through 153.092 of this chapter shall be approved by the city and signed by
the applicant prior to final plat approval to ensure the performance of the conditions needed to
satisfactorily complete all required public improvements.
(3) If the final plat is for a portion of the preliminary plat, the applicant must submit the
remainder of the preliminary plat as a final plat within three years from the date of preliminary plat
approval or that portion of the preliminary plat shall become void unless a request for a time extension
is submitted by the applicant and approved by the City Council.
(4) The procedure for review of a preliminary and final plat may be combined if the proposed
subdivision does not include the provision of a new public road or extension of public improvements.
(B) Final plat review procedure.
(1) The applicant shall submit a final plat application, on a form provided by the city, with the
city’s Clerk-Treasurer a minimum of one month prior to a regularly scheduled City Council meeting
along with the following information:
(a) Ten paper copies of the final plat of an accurate scale and supporting information
containing information required in §§ 153.055 and 153.056 of this chapter;
(b) Two prints of the construction plans and specifications for the required public
improvements as specified in § 153.088 of this chapter;
44 New Germany - Land Usage
(c) An electronic copy of the final plat and supporting information that may be printed to
a maximum size of 11 inches by 17 inches;
(d) An up-to-date certified abstract of title, registered property report or other evidence
as required by the city showing sufficient title or control of the property; and
(e) Fees in accordance herewith.
(2) The city’s Clerk-Treasurer shall determine if the information is complete and notify the
applicant if the final plat or application for final plat review is found incomplete.
(3) The city’s Clerk-Treasurer may distribute copies of the final plat and accompanying
information to city staff, city consultants or any other person or agency deemed appropriate by the city’s
Clerk-Treasurer.
(C) City Council consideration and action.
(1) The City Council shall act on the final plat within 60 days of the date of submission of a
complete application for a final plat to the city, unless the applicant agrees to a delay in writing.
(2) The City Council shall consider conformance of the final plat to the preliminary plat
approval and any conditions attached to the preliminary plat approval by the City Council, comments
of the city staff, city consultants and any agency and state statute requirements.
(3) The City Council shall approve or deny the final plat, and include findings of fact
supporting the motion that shall be entered into the proceedings of the City Council and transmitted to
the applicant in writing.
(4) Following City Council approval, the applicant shall submit a reproducible Mylar print or
other permanent prints suitable for recording and meeting the requirements of state statute and the
county’s Office of Property Records for signatures by the city.
(D) Final plat recording.
(1) The applicant shall record the final plat with the county’s Office of Property Records within
one year of the City Council approval of the final plat. The final plat to be recorded shall be in
conformance with the final plat approved by the City Council and any conditions attached to the
approval.
(2) After the final plat is recorded with the county’s Office of Property Records, the applicant
shall furnish the city with one print of the final plat showing evidence of the recording and an electronic
copy of the final plat.
(E) Applicant responsibility. The city will not issue any permits for the property unless the
applicant:
Subdivisions 45
(1) Has furnished evidence that the final plat has been filed with the county’s Office of Property
Records;
(2) Submitted an electronic copy of the final plat to the city in a format acceptable to the city;
and
(3) Paid all required fees as specified herein associated with the review of the preliminary and
final plat.
(Ord. 104, passed 10-16-2012)
PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLAT SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 153.055 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
(A) General. The preliminary plat and supporting information shall include all of the items
contained within this section, unless determined by the city to be not applicable to the subdivision, and
shall be prepared in accordance with M.S. Ch. 505, as it may be amended from time to time.
(B) Identification and description.
(1) The proposed name of the subdivision;
(2) Correct legal description of the existing property;
(3) A north arrow, graphic scale that is not more than one inch to 100 feet and date of
preparation;
(4) Vicinity map of area showing geographical points for orientation within a 350-foot radius
of the preliminary plat;
(5) Names and addresses of the property owner(s), the applicant, the surveyor of the plat and
applicant’s engineer, as appropriate;
(6) Consent to the preliminary plat application by the property owner; and
(7) Certification by registered surveyor that the survey and preliminary plat is accurate.
(C) Existing features and conditions.
(1) A certificate of survey of the existing property that comprise the preliminary plat, including
all contiguous land owned or controlled by the owner(s) of the property to be subdivided;
46 New Germany - Land Usage
(2) The total acreage of the property to be subdivided;
(3) The existing zoning classification and land use for the property to be subdivided and
properties within 100 feet of the proposed;
(4) The following existing improvements and encumbrances within the property to be
subdivided and to a distance of 100 feet beyond the property boundaries:
(a) Public and private properties, structures, easements or other encumbrances and their
purpose, and public boundaries;
(b) Location, right-of-way, width, type of surface, grades and names of existing or platted
streets or other public roadways;
(c) The location and width of private driveways, roads and accesses;
(d) The location, size, invert elevations and capacity of existing and abandoned drainage
and storm water facilities including culverts, catch basins and other drainage facilities located within
roadways and fire hydrants;
(e) The location, size and invert elevations of any public water supply and sewage disposal
facilities and associated structures and the location and characteristics of any private wells or subsurface
sewage treatment systems; and
(f) Other essential services and telecommunication facilities, including the location of poles
and corridors.
(5) The following topographic data and natural features within the property to be subdivided
and to a distance of 100 feet beyond the property boundaries:
(a) Topography showing contour intervals of no more than two feet and wooded areas;
(b) Wetlands shall be delineated in accordance with the Wetland Conservation Act of 2004,
being Minn. Rules part 8420; and
(c) The location and elevation of all water bodies and any shoreland areas including the
100-year flood elevation, the ordinary high water level (OHWL) and the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) zone elevations.
(D) Proposed features and conditions.
(1) Proposed lot and block layout, lot lines and dimensions including acreage, and lot and block
numbers of all new lots;
Subdivisions 47
(2) If the preliminary plat is a re-arrangement or a re-plat of any recorded plat, the lot and
block arrangement of the original plat, its original name and all revised or vacated roadways shall be
shown by dotted or dashed lines;
(3) Roadway and pedestrian/bicycle trails location, right-of-way, width, drainage facilities and
profiles and narrative describing planned short- and long-term road maintenance responsibility;
(4) Location, right-of-way and width of any road extensions to adjacent property(ies), as
required by the city;
(5) Proposed uses of all lots within the subdivision including public areas, drainage areas and
open space;
(6) The minimum required setbacks, including those required by public agencies from any
public facilities, water resources or adjacent land uses;
(7) The location and general design of individual access from lots within the subdivision to
public roads;
(8) Location and preliminary design of utilities to serve the subdivision, including profiles of
public sanitary sewer and public water lines;
(9) Location, dimensions and purpose of all proposed easements;
(10) Any required storm water pollution prevention plan meeting the requirements of the city’s
Surface Water Management Plan and Ordinance and the county’s Water Management Plan requirements
including:
(a) Grading plans showing how the subdivision will be graded and the final contours of
all lots within the property, at contour intervals of no more than two feet;
(b) Drainage facilities and any required design computations;
(c) Erosion control measures to prevent erosion and sedimentation both during and after
development;
(d) Construction schedule;
(e) Location of rock construction entrance; and
(f) Plan for maintenance and inspections.
(11) Tree preservation and landscape plan;
(12) Any proposed protective covenants, restrictions or homeowner association documents; and
48 New Germany - Land Usage
(13) Any plans for street lighting, sidewalks, boulevard improvements or other associated
subdivision improvements.
(E) Additional information to be furnished.
(1) If the entire property will not be subdivided for individual lots, a sketch showing how the
remaining property can be subdivided in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan, Ch. 154 of this code
of ordinances and this chapter, and how access to a public road will be provided;
(2) A narrative explaining the development concept of the subdivision according to the zoning
district in which it is located, the type and number of residential dwelling units, as appropriate, and
consistency with the Comprehensive Plan, including the public facility phasing plan; and
(3) Other information as required by the city.
(Ord. 104, passed 10-16-2012)
§ 153.056 FINAL PLAT.
(A) General.
(1) The final plat and supporting information shall include all of the items contained within this
chapter, unless determined by the city to be not applicable to the subdivision, and shall be prepared in
accordance with M.S. Ch. 505, as it may be amended from time to time, and county platting
requirements.
(2) The name of the subdivision shall not duplicate or be similar to any existing subdivision
names in the county.
(3) The final plat may cover only a portion of the preliminary plat approved by the City
Council; provided, it is in conformity with the approved preliminary plat and conditions attached to the
approval by the City Council and the requirements of this chapter.
(B) Information required. The final plat shall include the following information:
(1) The boundary line of the property included within the plat, fully dimensioned, including:
(a) All angles of the boundary, excepting the closing angle;
(b) All monuments and survey’s irons; and
(c) Each angle point of the boundary perimeter to be monumented.
Subdivisions 49
(2) All lot, block and outlot dimensions, including all necessary angles and other information
to reproduce the plat on the ground. If the final plat is a re-plat of an earlier subdivision, the original
platting of the subdivision shall be shown and identified by dotted lines;
(3) Lots and blocks clearly numbered and labeled in numerical order;
(4) Streets and roadways named, as approved by the city and county, with all dimensions
including horizontal curve data and the lengths of all areas;
(5) The location, dimensions and purpose of any area to be dedicated or reserved for public
use, or for the exclusive use of property owners within the subdivision;
(6) The location, dimensions and purpose of all easements to be dedicated;
(7) Any judicial and county ditches shall be shown by dimensions and angles as determined
from county records;
(8) Certification by a registered land surveyor, as required by M.S. § 505.03, as it may be
amended from time to time; and
(9) Space for:
(a) Signatures of all owners of any interest in the land and mortgage holders in a form
required by the county;
(b) Certification of approval and signature of the Mayor and space for attestation of the
signatures by the city’s Clerk-Treasurer; and
(c) Certificates of approval and review as required by the county.
(C) Accompaniments. The final plat shall be accompanied with:
(1) A copy of all private restrictions or covenants and homeowner association documents for
the subdivision in a form approved by the City Attorney; and
(2) Construction plans and specifications to be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 104, passed 10-16-2012)
50 New Germany - Land Usage
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 153.070 GENERAL.
(A) No subdivision shall be approved if the property is not suitable for the proposed land uses of
the plat because of potential flooding, topography, inaccessibility, adverse soil conditions, rock
formations or protected waters and wetlands.
(B) Subdivisions shall be designed to complement the surrounding properties, natural features,
environmental conditions, historic features and public access to allow for coordinated, attractive and
efficient development within the city and environs.
(C) If one or more lots in the subdivision may be further subdivided in compliance with the zoning
district of the property and the Comprehensive Plan, the city may require the platting of public right-ofway
or dedication of easements to allow for the extension of public roads.
(D) In addition to meeting the requirements of this subchapter, the design of all improvements
required by the subdivision shall comply with the:
(1) The construction plans approved by the city pertaining to the design of streets, sidewalk,
trail and municipal sewer and water facilities;
(2) The city’s Surface Water Management Plan and Ordinance; and
(3) The county’s Water Management Plan.
(Ord. 104, passed 10-16-2012)
§ 153.071 BLOCK AND LOT STANDARDS.
(A) Blocks. All blocks shall be designed to meet the following minimum standards.
(1) Blocks shall be designed to provide two tiers of lots, except if the property adjoins a
wetland, lake, stream, railroad or minor arterial roadway or where one tier of lot is necessary because
of topographic or environmental conditions.
(2) The maximum block length shall not exceed 1,200 feet in length unless the city finds that
topography or other conditions justify a departure from this standard.
(3) The city may require the placement of rights-of-way or easements for pedestrian/bicycle
access through the block to provide access to parks, schools, other public facilities and pedestrian/bicycle
oriented destinations.
Subdivisions 51
(4) Blocks intended for business or industrial use shall be designed to satisfy the zoning district
requirements and accommodate adequate space for off-street parking, deliveries and loading in locations
where safe and convenient limited access to the roadway system exists.
(B) Lots. All lots shall be designed to meet the following minimum standards.
(1) Lots shall be designed to meet the area and dimensional standards for the zoning district
in which the lot is located, accommodate the intended use and required parking by meeting all required
setbacks and any applicable zoning provisions.
(2) All lots shall have at least the minimum required frontage required by the zoning district
on a publicly dedicated street.
(3) Side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines or radial to curved street lines unless the
city determines that due to topographic conditions an alternative layout will result in a better street or
lot plan.
(4) Corner lots shall meet the following.
(a) The minimum lot width along one of the public streets abutting the corner lot shall be
a minimum of ten feet wider than that required by the zoning district.
(b) Lots shall contain sufficient width and depth to comply with the front yard building
setback requirement of the zoning district.
(5) Double-frontage lots shall not be permitted, except as follows.
(a) The City Council may permit double frontage lots designed adjacent to minor arterial
roads; provided, the lot contains additional depth for screen planting along the rear lot line and lot access
is provided to a local roadway.
(b) The City Council may permit double frontage lots where topographic or other physical
conditions make subdividing otherwise unreasonable.
(6) All lot remnants below the minimum required dimensions for the zoning district must be
added to adjacent or abutting lots unless the applicant can demonstrate an acceptable use for the remnant
to the city.
(7) No outlots shall be created, except when related to the phasing of development or for a
specific purpose as approved by the city. No outlots shall become buildable unless approved by the city.
(Ord. 104, passed 10-16-2012)
52 New Germany - Land Usage
§ 153.072 STREET PLAN, STREET DESIGN AND LOT ACCESS STANDARDS.
(A) Street plan.
(1) The arrangement, function and design of streets planned within a subdivision shall be
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and include consideration of:
(a) Reasonable traffic circulation within the subdivision and the existing and future
supporting road network;
(b) Topographic, vegetation and environmental conditions including wetland preservation;
(c) Proper storm water drainage;
(d) Public convenience and safety; and
(e) The proposed uses of the area to be served.
(2) Streets shall be designed to:
(a) Provide access to all lots within the subdivision and to adjacent un-subdivided parcels,
when reasonable and practical; and
(b) Connect with existing and planned streets in adjoining or adjacent subdivisions or to
provide for future connections to adjoining unsubdivided parcels.
(3) The following roadways are prohibited:
(a) Reserved strips and land-locked areas or parcels;
(b) Alleys constructed after the date of adoption of this chapter; and
(c) Private roads and dead-end streets, except for private roadways approved by the City
Council within a PUD District.
(B) Street and roadway design.
(1) All streets shall be dedicated for public use and the roadway shall be located within the
street right-of-way. If a proposed subdivision includes an existing private roadway, except as approved
within a PUD District, the private roadway shall be dedicated for public use and improved to public
street standards.
(2) Cul-de-sacs are permitted when designed to permit future road extensions into adjoining
properties or where topography, environmental, land use or existing conditions justify their use as
approved by the city and shall comply with the following.
Subdivisions 53
(a) Permanent cul-de-sac roads shall not exceed 500 feet in length, as measured along the
centerline from the nearest intersection to the center point of the cul-de-sac turnaround.
(b) The cul-de-sac turnaround shall be a nearly circular shape with a minimum right-ofway
diameter of 100 feet and a minimum roadway diameter of 84 feet.
(c) The property line at the intersection of the turnaround and the straight portion of the
cul-de-sac shall be rounded at a radius of not less than 15 feet.
(d) The road right-of-way for a temporary cul-de-sac shall be continued to the property
line to permit future extension to the adjoining property and shall meet the following.
1. Right-of-way for a temporary cul-de-sac turnaround shall be provided at an
appropriate location near the adjacent property.
2. The land included for a temporary turnaround that is no longer needed for right-ofway
when the road is extended to adjacent property shall revert to the abutting property owners.
(3) Wherever the proposed subdivision includes or is adjacent to the right-of-way of a minor
arterial roadway or railroad right-of-way, the City Council may require the platting and installation of
a service road. The distance of the service road intersection from the arterial roadway or railroad shall
be based upon the function of the intersecting roads as designated in the Comprehensive Plan, existing
and future traffic volumes, land use, lot depths and other factors that contribute to the design of safe and
convenient access.
(4) Subdivision road access spacing shall be as follows:
(a) No less than 500 feet onto local roads;
(b) No less than one-fourth mile onto local collector roads; and
(c) As required by the county or Mn/DOT requirements on minor arterial or other arterial
roads.
(5) All street connections to minor arterials and collector roads shall be located to provide
adequate intersection sight distance, as determined by the City Engineer or County Engineer, if a county
road.
(6) No public street connection shall be located within a turn lane to another public street or
a private driveway.
(7) The minimum right-of-way widths and pavement widths (face to face of curb) for each type
of public road shall be as follows:
54 New Germany - Land Usage
Type of Road Right-of-Way Width Pavement Width
Collector street 80 ft. or as required by the county or state 40 ft. or as required by the county or state
Local street 50 ft. - 66 ft., as determined by the city 34 ft.
Minor arterial road 80 ft. or as required by the county or state 52 ft. or as required by the county or state
(8) Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing road of right-of-way width that is less
than required, additional width shall be dedicated to meet division (B)(7) above.
(9) Dedication of substandard width right-of-way and roads to the city may be approved by the
City Council where:
(a) The proposed right-of-way is adjacent to a platted right-of-way and, when combined,
the right-of-way meet the requirements of this chapter;
(b) The city finds that the dedication will allow for reasonable access and circulation when
the adjoining property is subdivided; or
(c) Where satisfactory assurance to the city for dedication of the remaining part of the
street can be secured.
(10) The City Council may require the dedication of additional right-of-way and pavement width
within subdivisions, as permitted by law, to accommodate anticipated traffic volumes in a manner that
promotes public safety and convenience.
(11) Roadway design shall comply with the following:
(a) Road jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet shall not be allowed;
(b) When connecting road lines deflect from each other at any one point by more than ten
degrees, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius of not less than 100 feet;
(c) Centerline gradients shall be at least 0.5%, but no greater than 7%;
(d) Different connecting street gradients shall be connected with vertical curves. Minimum
length, in feet, of these curves shall be 20 times the algebraic difference in the percent of grade of the
two adjacent slopes;
(e) The angle formed by intersecting streets shall not be less than 60 degrees, with 90-
degree intersections preferred;
(f) Intersections of more than four corners shall be prohibited;
Subdivisions 55
(g) Roadways of street intersections shall be rounded by a radius of not less than 20 feet;
and
(h) Other specifications as required by the City Engineer.
(C) Lot access (driveways). All access to lots shall meet the following minimum standards.
(1) All lots shall be provided with direct access to an improved public roadway or a private
roadway within a PUD District that has been approved by the City Council.
(2) All lots within the subdivision shall be provided access from the subdivision roadway unless
the subdivision contains no roadway or the City Council finds that topography, environmental conditions
or existing development prohibits access from the subdivision roadway.
(3) All driveways shall be constructed of concrete or bituminous and installed within one year
of issuance of a building permit for the house served by the driveway.
(4) A shared driveway may serve no more than two single-family lots. Private cross-access
easements and a cooperative maintenance agreement in a form approved by the City Attorney shall be
filed with the county and a copy submitted to the city prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy
for any home served by the driveway.
(5) The following shall apply to lots that obtain access from a minor arterial or collector
roadway.
(a) A maximum of one access per lot shall be permitted.
(b) The driveway shall have a turn-around area to prevent backing onto the roadway.
(c) An access permit shall be required from the county or state, as appropriate.
(6) For double frontage or corner lots, access shall be obtained from the lower functional class
roadway, as defined in the Comprehensive Plan.
(7) Commercial/industrial accesses shall also meet the following standards.
(a) The City Engineer shall determine the minimum spacing between accesses, or between
an access and a public road. If lot frontage is inadequate to meet this requirement, access via a shared
entrance or cross-access easement with adjacent property shall be required.
(b) Turn lanes shall be provided as required by the City Engineer to improve safety.
(Ord. 104, passed 10-16-2012)
56 New Germany - Land Usage
§ 153.073 OTHER IMPROVEMENTS.
(A) Trails and sidewalks.
(1) Pedestrian/bicycle trails or sidewalks shall be located in areas of the subdivision as required
by the city or as designated in the Comprehensive Plan, and coordinated with those of adjacent
subdivisions.
(2) All pedestrian/bicycle trails or sidewalks shall be placed in the public right-of-way or within
easements that are a minimum of 20 feet in width.
(3) The design of the pedestrian/bicycle trails or sidewalks shall be in conformance with the
City Engineer’s requirements as approved by the City Council.
(B) Street lights, mail boxes and public street signs.
(1) A street light fixture of a design approved by the city shall be provided at each street
intersection within or abutting the subdivision in a location(s) to be approved by the City Engineer.
(2) All mailboxes shall be placed in locations approved by the U.S. Postal Service and
mailboxes serving homes on cul-de-sacs shall be grouped in a location approved by the City Engineer.
(3) The type and location of public street name, regulatory and traffic-control signs shall be
determined by the City Engineer and provided within the right-of-way of the subdivision.
(C) Sanitary sewer and water utilities.
(1) Subdivisions must be served with televised, public sanitary sewer and public water. Sewer
and water systems shall be provided according to the specifications of the City Engineer, as approved
by the City Council.
(2) Public sewer and water facilities, including fire hydrants, shall be designed to serve each
lot in the subdivision.
(3) Sewer and water trunk lines shall be extended to the lot lines of abutting sites that do not
have municipal sewer and water service, as required by the city.
(4) The city may require oversizing of utilities to provide future service for more intense
development of the land or to provide future service to other areas.
(D) Drainage and water quality.
(1) All subdivisions shall include provisions or facilities that control the quantity and quality
of storm water runoff.
Subdivisions 57
(2) A required storm water pollution prevention plan shall comply with the city’s Water
Management Plan and Ordinance and the requirements of the county’s Water Management Plan.
(3) Drainage facilities shall be of an adequate size to accommodate upstream drainage areas
that may be located outside of the boundaries of the subdivision.
(4) No storm water drainage within a subdivision shall be designed to enter the public sanitary
sewer system.
(5) All subdivisions shall be designed and constructed in accordance with best management
practices to treat storm water discharge.
(6) Private storm water facilities shall be maintained as follows.
(a) All private storm water facilities shall be privately maintained in proper condition
consistent with the performance standards for which they were originally designed.
(b) All settled materials from drainage facilities shall be removed and properly disposed
of on an annual basis as required by the City Engineer.
(E) Erosion and sediment control.
(1) The design of the subdivision shall conform to the overall topography of the land, to the
extent reasonable, to minimize to minimize the potential for erosion and sedimentation resulting from
land-disturbing activities.
(2) No subdivision shall be approved that requires land-disturbing activities unless erosion and
sedimentation controls are submitted to the city as part of required storm water pollution prevention
plans meeting City Water Management Plan and Ordinance and County Water Management Plan
requirements.
(F) Easements.
(1) Easements for drainage and utilities of at least ten feet wide shall be provided along all lot
lines and may be centered on the lot line of side or rear lot lines. In instances where a side or rear lot
line abuts unplatted land, the easements shall be a minimum of ten feet wide.
(2) Drainage easements shall be provided over any watercourse, ponding and wetland areas
to a sufficient elevation as determined by the City Engineer to provide protection of property, storm
water retention and runoff, water quality and for installation and maintenance of facilities.
(3) Utility easements shall connect with easements established on adjoining properties.
58 New Germany - Land Usage
(G) Tree preservation and landscaping requirements.
(1) A tree preservation and landscaping plan shall be prepared for all subdivisions containing
three or more lots.
(2) All subdivisions shall be planned, designed and maintained so that:
(a) Existing native vegetation shall not be disturbed, injured or removed prior to grading
and site development; and
(b) Existing healthy trees and native vegetation on the site are preserved to the extent
feasible and protected during construction by techniques approved by the city, including, but not limited
to:
1. Installation of snow fencing or similar device at the drip line;
2. The prohibition of fill placed against the trunk, on the root crown and under the
drip line of the tree;
3. Installation of erosion control measures;
4. Prevention of spillage or leakage of harmful or toxic materials near tree
preservation areas; and
5. Prohibition of pruning of oak trees from April 15 through July 1.
(3) The tree preservation plan and protection measures shall be followed during all grading
activities, including subdivision development and home construction.
(4) Each new subdivision shall include the equivalent of two shade trees per lot meeting the
following standards.
(a) Trees shall not be planted within five feet of road right-of-way or within any utility or
drainage easement.
(b) All shade trees shall have a minimum trunk diameter of not less than two inches when
planted as measured 12 inches above ground level.
(c) The shade tree species to be planted shall be limited to long-lived shade trees acceptable
to the city.
(d) The location of all new trees to be provided shall be approved by the city.
Subdivisions 59
(5) If a new residential subdivision is located along an arterial roadway, the city may require
the installation of coniferous, shade trees or fencing along the arterial roadway to screen the view and
to reduce noise levels in residential areas.
(Ord. 104, passed 10-16-2012)
§ 153.074 PARK DEDICATION.
(A) Purpose and application.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of the city park dedication requirements is to:
(a) Provide areas in the city for public parks, recreational facilities, playgrounds, trails
or open space as allowed by M.S. § 462.358, subd. 2b, as it may be amended from time to time;
(b) Allow and enhance active and passive recreational opportunities for city residents and
visitors as a part of overall community development and improvement activities; and
(c) Require a reasonable contribution of land or funds from subdivision development which
results in additional demands on city parks, trails, open spaces and associated facilities in order to
maintain commensurate amounts of park and open space opportunities within the city.
(2) Application. The park dedication requirements shall be applied to all subdivisions as
follows.
(a) The applicant for a subdivision of land into more than one lot shall dedicate land for
parks, playgrounds, public open spaces and pedestrian bicycle/trails or sidewalks, or make a cash
contribution to the city’s Park Fund as provided for in this chapter. The city may elect to receive a
combination of cash, land and/or private park and open space development, in accordance with division
(B) below, as the park dedication requirement.
(b) Where a proposed park, playground, trail system or other public use shown on the
Comprehensive Park Plan is located within or partially within a subdivision, the area shall be dedicated
to the public or reserved for public purchase at fair market value. If, within two years of recording of
the plat, the purchase is not consummated, the reservation shall be canceled.
(c) Property that is resubdivided with the same number of lots shall be exempt from all
park dedication requirements.
(d) If the number of lots within a subdivision is increased or if land outside the previously
recorded subdivision is added, the park dedication requirement shall be based on the additional lots and
on the additional land being added to the plat.
60 New Germany - Land Usage
(e) The park dedication requirement shall be in addition to property dedicated in fee title
or as easement to the city or another government agency for public streets, other public improvements
or drainage facilities unrelated to parks, open space and trails.
(f) The property to be conveyed as the park dedication requirement shall not be used in
calculating any of the density, lot area or dimensions or open space requirements of the zoning district
of the property.
(g) The applicant of a development within a PUD District with mixed land uses shall make
cash and/or land park dedication contributions in accordance with this chapter based upon the acreage
of land devoted to commercial or industrial uses and the number of residential units.
(B) Dedication requirements.
(1) General.
(a) At the time of subdivision, the applicant shall dedicate land for public open space and
public use, such as parks, playgrounds, recreation facilities, trails, in an amount equal to the
development’s proportional share of the city park system, as determined by this chapter.
(b) Land to be dedicated shall be reasonably suitable for park and open space activities as
determined by the city and shall be at a location that is convenient to the public. The suitability of land
to be dedicated to the city shall consider the following:
1. Existing natural features which enhance the attractiveness of the community, such
as trees, watercourses, historical places and similar irreplaceable assets that could be preserved, insofar
as possible, in the design of the subdivision;
2. Property designated for parks or open space in the Comprehensive Plan; and
3. Land located within wetlands, areas subject to flooding, and land used for ponding
or infiltration areas will not be accepted to meet the land dedication requirements.
(c) If the city determines that the area proposed to be dedicated is not suitable or desirable
for public park, recreational facilities, playgrounds, trails, open space or a related public use based on
the factors listed in division (B)(1)(b) above, the city may require an equivalent amount in cash to be
remitted to the city in lieu of land dedication.
(d) If the City Council determines that land is needed with a subdivision, but in a lesser
amount than what is required, the Council may require payment of cash in lieu of land dedication based
on a proportional share of the land dedication that would otherwise be required.
(e) The City Council may waive the park dedication fee under special circumstances, such
as economic development projects, where public funding and subsidies are utilized for project feasibility.
Subdivisions 61
(2) Land dedication or payment of fees.
(a) Calculation of dedication.
1. For residential subdivisions or residential portions of PUDs, a minimum of 10%
of the total area of the property or portion of the property devoted to residential uses in a PUD is deemed
a reasonable portion to meet dedication requirements.
2. The land must be suitable for public use and the city is not required to accept land
which will not be usable for park purposes or which would require extensive expenditures on the part
of the public to make them usable.
3. For non-residential subdivisions or non-residential portions of PUDs, such as
commercial or industrial plats, the city requires a minimum cash park dedication on a per acre basis, as
specified in the city’s fee schedule. However, where the City Council deems it in the public interest, it
may require a minimum land dedication of 5% of the commercial or industrial land to be subdivided in
lieu of a cash dedication. The lands must be indicated on the city’s Comprehensive Plan or must be
designated on specific area plans for parks, trails and public open space.
(b) Land dedication.
1. The preliminary plat shall show the location and dimensions of all park, trail and
open space areas proposed for dedication to the city as lots or outlots. The Planning Commission shall
provide a recommendation regarding the location and adequacy of the proposed park and open space area
to the City Council.
2. Private park and/or open space proposed within the subdivision may fulfill all or
a part of the requirement for park dedication at the discretion of the city. The private park and/or open
space area shall be designated and protected for long-term park and/or open space purposes in a form
to be approved by the City Attorney.
3. Signed deeds for the lots or outlots shall be given to the city prior to the city’s
release of the final plat for filing. No building permits shall be issued for the development until the
required deeds are received by the city.
4. The applicant shall be responsible for finished grading and ground cover and
construction of trails in all lands to be dedicated to the city.
5. The fair market value shall be determined for undeveloped land at the day of final
plat approval by the City Council in accordance with the following:
a. The city and the applicant may agree as to the fair market value based upon
a current appraisal; or
62 New Germany - Land Usage
b. The market value of the property as determined by a recent selling price of
the land to be platted.
(3) Cash fee.
(a) Park dedication fees shall be as established by the city in the city’s fee schedule.
(b) When a cash fee is to be paid in lieu of land dedication, the payment of the fee shall
be required as follows.
1. For all residential developments, park dedication fees shall be paid prior to the city
releasing the signed final plat for recording. An exception may be granted by the City Council for
multiple-family structures, including multi-unit townhomes, condos and apartments, to allow payment
of the fee prior to the issuance of building permits. Payment shall be made for all units within each
building prior to issuance of any building permits for that structure.
2. For commercial and industrial developments, the total fee shall be paid prior to
issuance of any building permits for the development. The City Council may grant deferral of a portion
of the fees if the subdivider proposes to construct significantly less square footage than the site supports.
The remaining fees shall be paid at the time of building permit application for additional square footage
to be constructed on the site.
(4) Payment.
(a) The terms for the payment of the park dedication cash fee for each land use shall be
included in the development agreement and in no event shall be later than issuance of a building permit
for the property.
(b) Park cash contributions shall be deposited in the city’s Park Fund and shall only be
used for the acquisition of land for public parks, recreational facilities, playgrounds, trails or open space,
and for the development of existing park and playground sites.
(Ord. 104, passed 10-16-2012)
CONSTRUCTION OF BASIC IMPROVEMENTS
§ 153.085 GENERAL.
(A) The city, in consultation with the applicant, shall define the public improvements to be
constructed by the applicant and establish procedures to assure satisfactory and completion of the
required public improvements.
Subdivisions 63
(B) All required improvements shall be furnished and installed at the sole expense of the applicant
and at no expense to the city.
(C) If any improvement installed within the subdivision will be of substantial benefit to property
outside the boundaries of the subdivision, the City Council may adopt provisions to assess a fair share
portion of the improvement cost which represents the proportional benefit to the property, against the
benefitting properties. The applicant will be required to pay for the portion of the total cost of
improvements that benefit property within the subdivision.
(Ord. 104, passed 10-16-2012)
§ 153.086 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT.
(A) The applicant shall enter into a development agreement for any subdivision requiring the
construction of required public improvements including street, water and sanitary sewer improvements.
(1) The applicant may enter into the development agreement with the city after preliminary plat
approval has been granted to a subdivision by the city.
(2) No construction of any improvement or issuance of any permit, including a land alteration
permit, shall be granted by the city unless the development agreement has been signed by the applicant.
(B) If the city requires the applicant to complete all improvements, the development agreement shall
specify:
(1) All improvements are to be installed at the applicant’s expense, at no cost to the city, and
completed in a manner that is satisfactory to the City Engineer;
(2) The type and extent of the public improvements to be constructed;
(3) That all required improvements shall be constructed according to construction plans and
specifications meeting the requirements of the city, county and the state, as appropriate; and reviewed
and approved by the City Engineer;
(4) The cost of construction and the construction time schedule;
(5) The city’s authority to inspect the construction; and
(6) To furnish a financial security, to be approved by the City Attorney, guaranteeing
satisfactory completion of all improvements and meeting the requirements of this chapter.
(C) If the city agrees to undertake the installation of the required public improvements, the
developers agreement shall state that the applicant agrees to the following:
64 New Germany - Land Usage
(1) Pay for all expenses including all construction, engineering, legal, financing, inspection
and administrative costs incurred by the city;
(2) The method and schedule of payment to the city;
(3) To furnish a financial security, to be approved by the City Attorney, guaranteeing payment
to the city for completion of all improvements; and
(4) Other items, as required by the city, to guarantee reimbursement of all expenses and
payments related to the completion of improvements.
(Ord. 104, passed 10-16-2012)
§ 153.087 FINANCIAL GUARANTEE.
(A) Prior to the approval of the final plat, the applicant shall make a financial guarantee in a form
acceptable to the City Attorney equal to 120% of the total construction cost of the improvements as
estimated by the City Engineer, including the cost of inspection by the city.
(1) If the applicant defaults on the construction of the improvements, the city may utilize the
financial guarantee and pursue its remedies.
(2) The term of any financial guarantee shall be specified and approved by the city and
deposited in an account specified by the city.
(3) The city may agree to provide for reduction of the amount of any financial guarantee
commensurate with completion or payment for the improvements for which the financial guarantee has
been made.
(4) The city may impose special assessments against benefitted property for improvements
made on it.
(B) If the city undertakes the installation of the required improvements and if requested by the city,
the applicant shall deposit a financial security, to be approved by the City Attorney, in an amount agreed
to with the city for the installation of the improvements. Any such deposit or bond shall accrue to the
city in case of default of the subdivider.
(Ord. 104, passed 10-16-2012)
§ 153.088 CONSTRUCTION PLANS AND INSPECTION.
(A) (1) The applicant shall be responsible for the preparation of construction plans and
specifications that are based on approved preliminary plans and the plans shall be prepared in conjunction
with the final plat.
Subdivisions 65
(2) All construction plans shall be prepared in accordance with the public improvement
standards or specifications as approved by the city and county.
(3) Two prints of the construction plans and specifications shall be filed with the city’s Clerk-
Treasurer, at the time of final plat submission.
(B) All construction plans and specifications for the required improvements shall:
(1) Conform to the requirements of this chapter and the City Engineer;
(2) Be prepared by a registered professional engineer at the applicant’s expense;
(3) Be accompanied by the quantities of construction items and an estimate of the total costs
for the grading, erosion control, public improvements and other required improvements for review and
approval by the City Engineer; and
(4) Become part of the development agreement, upon approval by the City Engineer.
(C) The City Engineer shall inspect all required improvements in the subdivision installed under the
provisions of this chapter during construction, at the applicant’s expense.
(D) The acceptance of the improvements by the city shall require written certification by the City
Engineer that the improvements have been constructed in compliance with the plans and specifications.
(Ord. 104, passed 10-16-2012)
§ 153.089 REQUIRED BASIC IMPROVEMENTS.
(A) Monuments.
(1) Official permanent monuments shall be placed as requested by the City Engineer as
required.
(2) All monument markers shall be correctly in place upon final grading and installation of
utilities.
(3) All federal, state, county or other official benchmarks, monuments or triangulation stations
in or adjacent to the property shall be preserved in precise position.
(B) Streets and street fixtures.
(1) Soil samples shall be collected and analyzed by a testing laboratory with a report submitted
to the City Engineer with the street pavement plans before construction. Soil samples shall be taken along
the centerline of the proposed road at intervals not exceeding 300 feet unless otherwise approved by the
City Engineer.
66 New Germany - Land Usage
(2) Streets shall be graded the entire width of the right-of-way and shall provide a boulevard
section, in addition to the minimum pavement width, in accordance with the standards and construction
plans established by the City Engineer.
(3) All roads shall have a sub-base and shall be improved with concrete or bituminous surface,
in accordance with the following:
Classification Pavement Design: Axle Load
Local streets 7-ton minimum
Minor arterial, collector streets and streets
serving commercial or industrial uses
10-ton minimum
(4) Design B-618 concrete curb and gutter, approved by the City Engineer, shall be constructed
on both sides of all paved surfaces of streets.
(5) The portion of the right-of-way outside of the pavement material shall be sodded.
(6) The design of all street name and traffic-control signs and street lighting fixtures shall be
approved by the City Engineer.
(C) Sidewalks.
(1) All sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete four inches thick placed on a four-inch gravel
base, with grades approved by the City Engineer.
(2) Sidewalks shall be placed in the public right-of-way, a minimum of one foot from the
property lines.
(D) Private driveways. All private driveways providing access to public rights-of-way shall approach
at grade level.
(E) Grading and drainage.
(1) Storm water and drainage facilities shall be designed as required by the City Engineer to
insure adequate drainage for the area. All such drainage facilities shall be constructed in accordance with
standards and specifications established by the City Engineer.
(2) All land-disturbing or land filling activities or soil storage shall be undertaken in a manner
consistent with the required storm water pollution prevention plan approved for the subdivision, the city
storm water management plan and county storm water plan requirements.
(3) A grading permit shall be obtained from the city before any land-disturbing activity
associated with the subdivision commences on the property and shall meet the following:
Subdivisions 67
(a) Shall be accompanied by the final required storm water pollution prevention plan that
was submitted to the city and county, as appropriate; and
(b) Shall not be issued unless the applicant provides evidence that the final required storm
water pollution prevention plan has been approved by the county.
(4) After issuance of the grading permit by the city, the applicant shall:
(a) Install the erosion and sedimentation controls as approved on the final plans;
(b) Comply with all requirements of the county and the city; and
(c) Maintain the erosion and sedimentation controls on a continual basis until the City
Engineer authorizes the discontinuance or removal of the measures.
(5) All individual lots shall be graded to avoid slopes of an average grade of 30% or more and
slopes that create a potential erosion, drainage or public safety hazard. The city may require the applicant
to incorporate the following techniques to mitigate hazards:
(a) Design slopes to be in character with the surrounding natural terrain;
(b) Use benching, terracing or other slope-stabilizing techniques for fill, as determined
appropriate by the City Engineer;
(c) Install and maintain erosion control measures during construction in accordance with
current best management practices;
(d) Revegetate disturbed slopes as soon as practical after grading to stabilize steep slopes
and prevent erosion, as required by the city; or
(e) Install fencing or other protective measures to protect public safety.
(F) Public utilities.
(1) Water. A minimum water main of six-inch ductile cast iron pipe or other pipe approved by
the City Engineer shall be required.
(2) Sanitary sewer. The following shall be provided and approved by the City Engineer.
(a) Sewer lines shall be of PVC pipe of a size and appropriate grades determined by the
City Engineer.
(b) Service wyes shall be six inches.
(c) Root repellent joint material shall be required.
68 New Germany - Land Usage
(3) House services. Public sewer and water lines shall be stubbed to the property line of each
lot within the subdivision, in accordance with the following: a cap or plug placed at property line until
the service is extended to the structure.
(a) A one-inch, Type K, copper water service, corporation cock and curb box and stop,
and six-inch of the type and class of adjoining pipe sewer service shall be minimum requirements and
may be placed in a common trench in accordance with the city’s Plumbing Code.
(b) Curb boxes shall be easily located and visible.
(G) Restoration. Utility and road construction restoration shall be required in accordance with the
following.
(1) Utility trenches are to be backfilled according to the specifications of the City Engineer.
(2) All areas disturbed by construction are to be restored to a condition equal to or better than
what existed prior to construction.
(3) Topsoil shall be applied to the restoration areas prior to sod or seed. Topsoil shall be
pulverized black dirt acceptable to the City Engineer and shall be spread to a compacted thickness of
three inches.
(4) Sod shall be required where improved lawn areas are disturbed and shall meet the
following.
(a) Sod shall be densely rooted blue grass or other approved grasses free of noxious weeds
and objectionable grasses.
(b) After placement, sod shall be pressed into the underlying soil by rolling or tamping.
(c) Pegging of sod shall be required on steeper slopes.
(5) Seed shall be required where construction activities disturb unimproved areas. The
application of seed and mulch shall conform to specifications approved by the City Engineer.
(6) In areas of steep slopes, seeding with wood fiber blankets may be substituted for sod, if
approved by the City Engineer.
(7) All sodded and seeded areas are to be watered and maintained in a satisfactory condition
until acceptance of that portion of the work. Sod and seed that dies, or washes out, prior to acceptance
are to be replaced by the applicant.
(8) Waste materials of any kind shall not be buried in any land or left deposited on any lot or
road.
Subdivisions 69
(H) Other improvements.
(1) Telecommunications, electric and gas service lines shall meet the following.
(a) All lines shall be placed underground, where practical and feasible, within dedicated
public ways or recorded easements in a manner as not to conflict with other underground services.
(b) All underground installation of service lines within street rights-of-way shall be
completed prior to street surfacing.
(c) Following completion of the installation of underground service lines in dedicated
public ways, an electronic copy and two paper copies of the construction plans and specifications
showing the completed installation shall be filed with the city’s Clerk-Treasurer.
(2) All necessary utility poles, except those providing street lighting, shall be placed in rear
lot line easements.
(Ord. 104, passed 10-16-2012)
§ 153.090 COMPLETION OF REQUIRED BASIC IMPROVEMENTS.
(A) The applicant shall complete all required basic improvements no later than one year following
the commencement of work on the improvements, except:
(1) Street lighting shall be completed within two years following the initial commencement of
work on the required basic improvements;
(2) Landscaping shall be completed within one year following the issuance of a building permit
for the last vacant lot within the subdivision unless weather precludes completion, in which case the
landscaping shall be completed at the outset of the next growing season;
(3) All streets constructed in conjunction with sanitary sewer, water main and/or storm sewer
improvements shall be completed over two construction seasons, except for phased developments. The
initial phase of construction shall include the complete installation of the underground utilities, gravel
base, curb and gutter and bituminous base course within the street areas. The bituminous wearing course
shall be completed after at least one winter, but before the third winter.
(a) The minimum thickness of the bituminous base shall be two inches during the interim
period.
(b) All manholes and valve boxes are to be installed in the bituminous base course and left
one-half inch below the surface throughout the winter and then raised to one-half inch below the final
surface prior to placing the bituminous wearing course.
70 New Germany - Land Usage
(4) For developments that are approved as phased developments by the City Council, a phasing
schedule for completion of the roadway and utilities within a reasonable period of time shall be submitted
by the applicant to the City Engineer for review and approval. The City Council may require the
submittal of an additional financial guarantee to assure completion of the phased improvements within
a reasonable period of time.
(B) The acceptance of the public improvements and any release of the required financial guarantee
by the city for the public and private improvements shall be subject to the:
(1) The City Engineer’s certificate of compliance of all improvements with the final
construction plans in the development agreement;
(2) Submission of a warranty/maintenance guarantee in the form of a bond or a letter of credit
to be approved by the City Attorney that is equal to the original cost of the improvements or a lesser
amount as agreed to by the City Engineer:
(a) The required warranty period for materials and workmanship from the utility contractor
installing public sewer and water mains shall be two years from the date of final city acceptance of the
work;
(b) The required warranty period for all work relating to street construction, including
concrete curb and gutter, sidewalks and trails, curb boxes, materials and equipment shall be subject to:
1. One year from the date of final city acceptance; or
2. Two years from the date of final city acceptance of the work if the wearing course
is applied during the same construction season as the bituminous base.
(c) The required warranty period for sod, trees and landscaping is two years following
installation of landscaping materials; and
(d) Warranties for other public improvements and phased developments approved by the
City Council shall be established by the City Council.
(3) The applicant shall be required to replace and/or repair any public improvements, including
curb stops, public signage, manholes and the like, that are damaged during the grading of the property
for building constructions; and
(4) (a) A paper copy and electronic copy of a complete set of as-built construction drawings
of all public improvements shall be submitted to the city within 120 days after construction of the public
improvements is completed and approved by the city.
(b) The final financial guarantees shall not be released until the as-built drawings have been
submitted to the city.
(Ord. 104, passed 10-16-2012)
Subdivisions 71
§ 153.091 PRIOR IMPROVEMENTS.
Improvements which have been completed prior to application for final plat approval or execution
of the development agreement shall be accepted as equivalent improvements provided the City Engineer
shall certify in writing that the improvements conform to city standards.
(Ord. 104, passed 10-16-2012)
§ 153.092 NON-CONFORMANCE.
(A) The City Engineer shall order cessation of all construction within the subdivision for any nonconformance
with the standards of this chapter, the development agreement or other city ordinances in
the installation of the required improvements by the applicant.
(B) No further construction shall be allowed until the non-conformance is corrected.
(Ord. 104, passed 10-16-2012)
72 New Germany - Land Usage
CHAPTER 154: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
154.001 Title
154.002 Purpose
154.003 Authority
154.004 Scope
154.005 Repeal of previous Zoning Ordinance
154.006 Separability
154.007 Interpretation
154.008 Compatibility with the Comprehensive Plan
154.009 Uses not provided for within a zoning district
154.010 Non-conforming uses and structures
154.011 Definitions
154.012 Effective date
154.013 Official zoning map
Planning Commission
154.025 Establishment
154.026 Appointment and removal
154.027 Term and vacancies
154.028 Powers and actions
154.029 Procedures
Administration
154.040 Enforcement Officer and duties
154.041 Deadlines for city actions and voting requirements
154.042 Public hearing requirements
154.043 Fees
154.044 Single-family detached dwelling unit requirements
154.045 Lot, yard and height provisions and exceptions
73
74 New Germany - Land Usage
Zoning Districts and Procedures
154.060 Zoning ordinance text and map (rezoning) amendment
154.061 Variances
154.062 Conditional use permits
154.063 Interim use permits
154.064 Site plan review
154.065 Official zoning map; interpretation and districts
154.066 Zoning district regulations
154.067 Conditional use permit standards
Performance Standards
154.080 Purpose
154.081 Traffic visibility
154.082 Accessory buildings and structures
154.083 Swimming pools
154.084 Fences
154.085 Sewer and water facilities
154.086 Grading and erosion control
154.087 Surface water management
154.088 Wetland conservation
154.089 Off-street parking and loading
154.090 Signs
154.091 Pollution control and nuisances
154.092 Solar electric systems
Adult Uses
154.105 Purpose
154.106 Definitions
154.107 Adult uses
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 TITLE.
This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the “City of New Germany Zoning
Ordinance”, except as referred to herein, where it shall be known as “this chapter”.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011)
Zoning 75
§ 154.002 PURPOSE.
This chapter is adopted for the following purposes:
(A) To promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the people;
(B) To promote the orderly development of the residential, business, industrial, parks and open
space and public areas;
(C) To divide the city into zones or districts that reasonably regulate the location, use and
development of buildings, structures and land for residential, business, industrial, parks and open space
and other specified uses;
(D) To provide for adequate light, air and convenience of access to property by regulating the use
of land and buildings, and the characteristics of structures in relationship to surrounding properties;
(E) To limit congestion in the public rights-of-way;
(F) To provide for the compatibility of different land uses and the most appropriate use of the land;
(G) To require and facilitate the adequate provision of water, sewerage and other public services
and facilities to land uses;
(H) To maintaining, to a reasonable extent, the values of property and the tax base of the city;
(I) To encourage the conservation and management of natural resources and renewable energy; and
(J) To provide for the administration of this chapter, defining the powers and duties imposed by
this chapter, and prescribing penalties for the violation of its provisions.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011)
§ 154.003 AUTHORITY.
(A) This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the Municipal Planning Act, M.S.
§§ 462.352 to 462.365, as they may be amended from time to time. The provisions of this chapter shall
be interpreted and applied in accordance and as permitted by the state.
(B) This chapter shall not repeal, annul or in any way impair or interfere with the provisions of
other ordinances or regulations of the city, except as expressly provided within this chapter.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011)
76 New Germany - Land Usage
§ 154.004 SCOPE.
(A) The use of all land and all buildings erected, altered, enlarged or relocated shall be in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter, from and after the effective date of this chapter.
(B) Any building, structure or use lawfully existing on 4-7-1964, which is not in conformity with
this chapter shall be regarded as non-conforming, but may be continued except as, and subject to, the
requirements contained in this chapter.
(C) This chapter shall not repeal, annul or in any way impair or interfere with the provisions of
other ordinances or regulations of the city, except as expressly provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011)
§ 154.005 REPEAL OF PREVIOUS ZONING ORDINANCE.
Ord. 38A, adopted by the City Council on 11-10-1998, and all amendments to Ord. 38A are hereby
repealed.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011)
§ 154.006 SEPARABILITY.
The city declares that the provisions of this chapter are separable in accordance with the following.
(A) If any court of competent jurisdiction shall decide that any provision of this chapter to be
invalid, the decision shall not affect any other provisions of this chapter not specifically included in the
decision.
(B) If any court of competent jurisdiction shall decide that the application of any provision of this
chapter to a particular property, building or other structure is invalid, the decision to invalidate shall not
affect the application of the provision to any other property, building or structure not specifically
included in the decision to invalidate.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011)
§ 154.007 INTERPRETATION.
(A) The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted as the minimum requirements necessary to
accomplish the purposes of this chapter.
(B) Except as provided within this chapter, the provisions of this chapter are cumulative and in
addition to the provisions of other laws and ordinances governing the same subjects.
Zoning 77
(1) Where the provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions than those of any law, other
ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
(2) Where the provisions of any law, or other ordinance or regulation impose greater
restrictions than this chapter, the greater restrictions shall be controlling.
(3) Words or terms defined in this chapter shall have the meanings assigned to them unless the
meaning is clearly contrary to the intent of this chapter.
(a) The singular number shall include the plural.
(b) The present tense shall include the past and future tenses.
(c) The word “shall” is mandatory and “may” is permissive.
(4) All measured distances expressed in feet shall be to the nearest tenth of a foot. In event of
conflicting provisions, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011)
§ 154.008 COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
The city has adopted a Comprehensive Plan, that may be amended from time to time, that establishes
the policies for the establishment and provisions of this chapter. All land uses and development shall
comply with the Comprehensive Plan and the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011)
§ 154.009 USES NOT PROVIDED FOR WITHIN A ZONING DISTRICT.
(A) Uses not specifically identified in this chapter as a permitted, conditional, interim or accessory
use shall be prohibited.
(B) Whenever a use is not specifically permitted, the City Council, the Planning Commission or the
owner of the property may request consideration of an interim use permit or an amendment to this
chapter to determine if the particular use should be allowed as a permitted, conditional, interim use or
accessory use.
(C) The City Council within its discretion shall approve or deny the request for an interim use
permit or an amendment to this chapter following the applicable procedures established in § 10.99.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011)
78 New Germany - Land Usage
§ 154.010 NON-CONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES.
(A) Purpose. This section is established to regulate existing uses, structures and property within the
city that were established before the adoption of this chapter and no longer meet all the provisions of this
chapter. The regulation of uses, structures and property no longer meeting the requirements of this
chapter are intended to reduce their impacts on adjacent properties, prevent and abate nuisances, and to
protect the public health, safety and welfare.
(B) General standards.
(1) Any non-conformity, including the lawful use or occupation of land or premises existing
at the time of the adoption of this chapter may be continued, including the repair, replacement,
restoration, maintenance or improvement, but not including expansion, unless:
(a) The non-conformity or occupancy is discontinued for a period of more than one year;
or
(b) The non-conforming use is destroyed by fire or other peril to the extent of greater than
50% of its market value, and no building permit has been applied for within 180 days of when the
property is damaged. In this case, the city may impose reasonable conditions upon a building permit in
order to mitigate any newly created impact on adjacent property.
(2) Any subsequent use or occupancy of the land or premises shall be a conforming use or
occupancy.
(3) The city may impose reasonable regulations on a non-conforming use to prevent and abate
nuisances and to protect the public health, welfare or safety.
(4) When any lawful non-conforming use of any structure or land in any district has been
changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be changed to a non-conforming use.
(5) A lawful non-conforming use of a structure or land may be changed to a similar nonconforming
use or to another non-conforming land use of lesser intensity if it is found to be in the public
interest upon review and approval by the City Council. In all instances, the applicant has the burden of
proving that the proposed land use is similar or less intense than the exiting non-conforming land use.
Once a structure or parcel of land has been placed in a non-conforming use of less intensity, it shall not
return to a more intensive non-conforming use.
(6) Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing or related to a lawful nonconforming
use is permitted, including necessary non-structural repairs and incidental alterations which
do not extend or intensify the non-conforming use.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011)
Zoning 79
§ 154.011 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ABUT. To border upon or share all or a portion of a common property line, public right-of-way or
alley.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure subordinate to and servicing the principal structure on the
same lot including, but not limited to, garages, sheds or storage buildings exceeding 120 square feet,
swimming pools, spas and other similar structures.
ACCESSORY USE. A use incidental to, and on the same lot as, a principal use.
AGRICULTURE AND HORTICULTURE. Land used for agricultural and horticultural purposes,
excluding feedlots, that includes the raising, cultivation, drying or storage of agricultural and
horticultural products for sale, or the storage of machinery or equipment used in support of agricultural
production by the same farm entity.
ALLEY. A public right-of-way that affords a secondary means of access to abutting property.
ALTERATION. Any modification, additions or change in construction or type of occupancy of a
structure; any horizontal or vertical enlargement of a structure; or the moving of a structure from one
location to another.
AMENDMENT. Any modification of the text of this chapter or the zoning map. A map amendment
shall also be known as a rezoning.
ANTENNA DEVICES, PERSONAL. A device used for transmitting or receiving
telecommunication, television or radio signals that is used for personal wireless telecommunication
service.
APPLICANT. An owner, agent or person, individual firm, association, syndicate, partnership,
corporation, trust or other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest to request approval of a
development, variance, conditional or interim use permit, zoning amendment or other related action as
required by this chapter.
APPLICATION, COMPLETE. Any necessary form, as may be provided by the city, and all
accompanying information as required by this chapter to be completed by the applicant for the requested
action.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR GARAGES. A business that conducts general repair, rebuilding or
reconditioning of engines, bodywork, framework, welding, major painting services and other similar
work incidental to the repair of automobiles, trucks and trailers.
80 New Germany - Land Usage
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. Any structure used for the retail sale of vehicular fuels along
with associated sales of lubricants, grease, tires, batteries or minor automobile accessories. Associated
services may include: the installation of tires, batteries or minor accessories; minor automobile repairs;
and greasing or washing of individual automobiles. AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS shall not
include the sale or storage of vehicles, automobile wrecking or detached car washes.
BASEMENT. A portion of the building located wholly or partially underground but having at least
one-half of its floor to ceiling height below the grade of the adjoining ground.
BOATHOUSE, COMMUNITY. A boathouse designed for communal use by property owners
residing in residential subdivisions designed as a planned development; and excluding any commercial
or retail activities.
BOATHOUSE, PRIVATE. An uninhabited accessory structure designed and used solely for the
storage of boats, water recreation vehicles or boating and water recreation equipment, and associated
with a single-family residential home with lakeshore frontage.
BOULEVARD. The portion of a street right-of-way between the curb or curb line and the property
line.
BUILDING. A structure which may provide shelter and enclosure for persons, chattels or animals,
and when the structure is divided by party walls without openings, each portion so formed and separated
shall be deemed to be a separate BUILDING.
BUILDING FACE. The portion of any exterior elevation of a building or other structure extending
from the grade level to the top of a wall and the entire width of the building or structure elevation.
BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the mean curb level along the front lot
line or from the mean ground level for all of the portion of the structure having frontage on a public
right-of-way, whichever is higher, to the:
(1) Highest point of the coping of a flat or shed roof;
(2) To the deck line of a mansard roof; or
(3) To the average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hip roof.
BUSINESS SERVICE USE. Commercial establishments engaged in providing services and
assistance to other businesses, individuals and government.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line parallel to a lot line or the ordinary high water mark
indicating the maximum extent where a building may be erected or placed.
Zoning 81
CEMETERY. Land used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including
columbarium’s, mausoleums and associated service uses.
CITY. City of New Germany, Carver County, Minnesota.
CITY CLERK-TREASURER. The City Clerk-Treasurer, appointed by the City Council, and shall
serve as the official Zoning Officer of the city, unless another individual is appointed by the City
Council.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The document entitled “The City of New Germany 2030
Comprehensive Plan”, as may be amended from time to time.
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. A permit to allow a conditional use in a particular zoning district
as approved by the City Council.
COUNTY. The governing board of Carver County, Minnesota.
DAY CARE FACILITY, STATE LICENSED. A day care facility licensed by the state serving 12
or fewer persons, and a group family day care facility serving 14 or fewer children and licensed under
Minn. Rules parts 9502.0315 to 9502.0445.
DECK. A structure which is either free standing or attached to a principal or accessory building,
constructed at grade or above grade, intended or designed for use as outdoor living space and unenclosed
by solid or non-solid walls or a roof.
DENSITY. The number of dwelling units per acre of land as regulated by the Comprehensive Plan,
excluding right-of-way and wetlands or floodplain area.
DWELLING. A building or portion thereof used exclusively for residential purposes, including
single-family, double-family, town-houses and multiple-family dwellings, but not including hotels,
motels or rooming houses.
DWELLING, ATTACHED. A dwelling attached to one or more dwellings by common walls or
floors.
DWELLING, DETACHED. A dwelling that is not attached to any other dwelling or structure by
any means.
DWELLING, DOUBLE-FAMILY. A building containing two dwelling units totally separated from
each other by an unpierced wall extending from ground to roof or an unpierced ceiling and floor
extending from exterior wall to exterior wall, except for a common stairwell exterior to both dwelling
units.
82 New Germany - Land Usage
DWELLING, MULTIPLE FAMILY. A building containing three or more dwelling units totally
separated from each other and designed with more than one dwelling unit connecting to a common
corridor or entranceway.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE. Three or more residential dwellings within a building having one
or more side by side common walls extending from the foundation to the roof with another dwelling and
oriented so all entrances/exits open directly to the outside.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED. A detached dwelling unit designed for occupancy
by one family, including a single manufactured home, as defined by M.S. § 327.31, as it may be
amended from time to time.
EDUCATIONAL FACILITY. A public or private elementary, middle, secondary, post-secondary
or vocational school having a course of instruction meeting the compulsory education requirements of
the state.
FAMILY. An individual or two or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit and
maintaining a common household.
FENCE, PERMANENT. A permanent structure, other than a building, which is a barrier and used
as a boundary or means of protection or confinement.
FENCE, TEMPORARY. A temporary structure, other than a building, which is a barrier and used
as a boundary or means of protection or confinement during a portion of the year. Examples of
TEMPORARY FENCES include snow fencing, garden fencing and invisible fences.
GARAGE. A building for the private use of the owner or occupant of a principal building situated
on the same lot and used for the storage of personal items and vehicles.
HOME OCCUPATION. An activity which is clearly secondary to the principal use on the property
and does not change the nature of the principal use. It shall have no exterior evidence of the occupation,
no significant increase in traffic or demand for parking, no significant increase in levels of noise, air or
other pollution, no exterior signage, and no persons employed in the business who does not reside in the
dwelling. It may have only limited retail sales activity.
HOME OCCUPATION (WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT). An activity which is clearly
secondary to the principal use and does not change the nature of the principal use. it may have a minimal
exterior indication of the business use and may have only limited retail sales activity, as specified in
§ 154.067(B) of this chapter.
HOTEL or MOTEL. A building containing guest rooms where temporary lodging is provided with
or without meals for compensation and in which the principle access to and from all rooms is made
through an inside lobby or a supervised office.
Zoning 83
INDUSTRY. An enterprise that involves the production, processing or storage of materials, goods
or products.
INTERIM USE. A temporary use of property until a particular date, until the occurrence of a
particular event or it no longer permitted by this chapter.
LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Any land change that may result in soil erosion from wind,
water and/or ice and the movement of sediments into or upon waters, lands or rights-of-way within the
city, including, but not limited to, building demolition, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating,
transporting and filling of land.
LANDSCAPING. Plantings such as trees, grass, bushes or shrubs.
LOADING SPACE. An unobstructed area on a property designed for temporary parking and loading
and unloading of vehicles.
LOT. A parcel of land designated by plat, metes and bounds, registered land survey, auditors plot
or other accepted means that is adequate for a use allowed by this chapter; abutting a public street; and
of sufficient size to meet the required setbacks and area required by this chapter.
LOT AREA. The total area within the lot lines of a lot excluding dedicated public rights-of-way.
LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT. The number of square feet of lot area required per dwelling
unit.
LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting upon two intersecting streets. The greater frontage of a CORNER
LOT shall be the lot depth and the lesser frontage is the lot width.
LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot having frontage on two non-intersecting streets.
LOT FRONTAGE. The portion or side of a lot that abuts public right-of-way.
LOT LINE. A property boundary line of any lot, except any portion of the lot that extends into the
abutting street or alley.
LOT LINE, FRONT. A lot line abutting a public right-of-way and if a corner lot, it shall be the
shortest dimension on a public street.
LOT LINE, REAR. The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
84 New Germany - Land Usage
LOT OF RECORD. A parcel of land whose legal description was established in the county property
records by plat, subdivision or as otherwise permitted by law.
LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured at the required front setback
line.
MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, that is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed for single family residential use with or without a permanent
foundation when attached to the required utilities, as further defined in M.S. § 327.31, as it may be
amended from time to time. The term does not include a recreational vehicle.
NET ACRE. An acre of land excluding areas excluding road right of ways, wetlands, floodplain
areas or other water features.
NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE. A structure, including signage, which does not meet the
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located due to the enactment of this chapter or as
amended, but which was lawfully existing as of the date of its construction or placement.
NON-CONFORMING USE. A use which does not meet the requirements of the zoning district in
which it is located due to the enactment of this chapter or as amended, but which was a lawful use as of
the date it was first commenced.
NOXIOUS MATTER. Any substance capable of causing injury to living organisms or of causing
detrimental effects on the physical or economic well being of individuals.
OFF-STREET PARKING. A maintained area, other than on a public street or right-of-way, for the
storage of an automobile.
OFFICE USE. A building or portion of a building for the conduct of business activities involving
predominantly professional, administrative or clerical service operations such as attorneys, financial
advisors, consultants, insurance, travel and other uses of similar character.
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS. Standards established in §§ 154.080 through 154.092 of this
chapter to assure that development will not be a detriment to the public health, safety and general welfare
of the city.
PHOTOVOLTAIC (PV) DEVICE. A system of components that generates electricity from incident
sunlight by means of the photovoltaic effect, whether or not the device is able to store the energy
produced for later use.
PHOTOVOLTAIC (PV) EFFECT. The phenomenon that occurs when photons, the “particles” in
a beam of light, knock electrons loose from the atoms they strike. When this property of light is
combined with the properties of semiconductors, electrons flow in one direction across a junction, setting
up a voltage. With the addition of circuitry, current will flow and electric power will be available.
Zoning 85
PHOTOVOLTAIC (PV) MODULE (PV PANEL). The essentially planar assembly of solar cells and
ancillary parts, such as interconnections, terminals (and protective devices such as diodes) intended to
generate direct current or alternating current in direct and diffuse sunlight.
PHOTOVOLTAIC (PV) SYSTEM. A complete set of components for converting sunlight into
electricity by the photovoltaic process, including the array and balance of system components.
PLANNING COMMISSION. The City of New Germany Planning Commission, as established by
the City Council.
PRACTICAL DIFFICULTY(IES). In connection with the granting of a variance, it means that the
property owner proposes to use the property in a reasonable manner not permitted by an official control;
the plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to the property not created by the landowner;
and the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality. PRACTICAL
DIFFICULTY(IES) also includes, but is not limited to, inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar
energy systems.
PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE. A notice published in the official newspaper of the city, other
qualified newspaper or communication method available to the general public as allowed by state law,
at least ten days before the date of the hearing. The notice shall specify the general time, purpose and
place of the hearing.
PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES. Public utility structures including, but not limited to,
transformers, lift stations, water towers and public utility buildings.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. A building, together with any accessory buildings and uses where
persons regularly assemble for religious service and are maintained and controlled by an organized group
for public worship.
RETAIL USE. The sale of goods and products in small quantities directly to the consumer and
rendering services incidental to the sale of these items all occurring within an enclosed building.
Examples of RETAIL USES includes stores selling apparel, health and beauty products, food,
appliances, furniture, tools, hardware, toys and sporting goods.
RIGHT-OF-WAY. An area or strip of land, either public or private, on which an irrevocable
right-of-passage has been recorded for the use of vehicles or pedestrians or both.
ROAD/STREET. A vehicular way lying within public right-of-way which affords primary access
to abutting properties further defined as a local, collector or minor arterial as established in the
Comprehensive Plan.
ROAD, COLLECTOR. Roads that provide connections between cities and minor business
concentrations within the county, as designated in the Comprehensive Plan and the county’s
Transportation Plan, as may be amended.
86 New Germany - Land Usage
ROAD, LOCAL. City and township roads that serve the shortest trips and providing access to
adjacent property, as designated in the Comprehensive Plan and the county’s Transportation Plan, as may
be amended.
ROAD, MINOR ARTERIAL. Roadways that serve medium to short trips as designated in the
Comprehensive Plan and the county’s Transportation Plan, as may be amended.
SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between a structure and the nearest property line or
right-of-way line.
SETBACK, FRONT. The shortest horizontal distance from the forward-most point of a building to
the nearest point on the front lot line.
SETBACK, REAR. The shortest horizontal distance from any part of a building to the nearest point
on a rear lot line.
SETBACK, SIDE YARD. The shortest horizontal distance from any part of a building to the nearest
point on a side lot line.
SETBACK, STREET. The shortest horizontal distance from any part of a building to the nearest
point on a side lot line that adjoins a street.
SIGN. Any structure either stationary or movable, containing any writing, number, illustration,
decoration, symbol, insignia or illumination which is displayed for informational or communicative
purposes for commercial and non-commercial speech. It does not include any official court or other
public notices, nor shall it include the flag, emblem or insignia of a nation, political unit, school or
religious, service or fraternal group.
SIGN, AWNING. A sign constructed of awning material which incorporates a written message or
graphics on the exterior.
SIGN, COPY. The portion of a sign that contains characters, letters or illustrations that can be
changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign, or incorporates a technology
or an electronic method to allow the sign face to change the image without having to physically or
mechanically replace the sign face or its components.
SIGN, FLASHING.
(1) A sign where light is not maintained as stationary or constant in intensity and color at all
times when the sign is in use and exhibits changing light or color effect, outside the copy area, by any
means, so as to provide intermittent illumination; and
(2) Also any mode of lighting which resembles zooming, twinkling or sparkling.
Zoning 87
SIGN, FREE-STANDING. A self-supporting sign affixed to a supporting frame structure or
anchored in the ground and not attached to a building.
SIGN, OFF-PREMISES. A commercial speech sign that directs the attention of the public to any
type of business, activity or product that is not located on the same premises where such sign is located.
SIGN, TEMPORARY. A sign which is designed or intended to be displayed for a short period of
time and is not permanently installed.
SIGN, WALL. A single faced sign attached to or erected against an exterior wall of a building with
the face in a parallel plane to the plane of the building wall and which does not project more than 18
inches.
SKETCH PLAN REVIEW. An informal, non-binding review of a conceptual subdivision or a
development of property referenced in the Planned Unit Development (PUD) District.
SITE PLAN. A development plan for property showing the existing and proposed conditions of the
property, including topography, floodplain, wetlands, open spaces, means of ingress/egress, parking,
grading, drainage, utilities, structures, building elevations and other information which may reasonably
be required by the city.
SOLAR ENERGY. Electromagnetic energy transmitted from the sun (solar radiation).
SOLAR ELECTRIC SYSTEM. A set of devices whose primary purpose is to collect solar energy
and convert (and possibly store) it into electric power by means of any combination of collecting,
transferring or converting solar-generated energy.
SOLAR ELECTRIC SYSTEM, RETAIL. A solar electric system established for the primary
purpose of meeting all or part of the electric energy needs of the host building, whether residential,
commercial, industrial or institutional.
SOLAR ELECTRIC SYSTEM, WHOLESALE. A solar electric system established for the primary
purpose of generating electricity and selling it directly to a third party (e.g., electric utility company).
SOLAR PANEL. See PHOTOVOLTAIC (PV) MODULE.
SPEECH, COMMERCIAL. Speech advertising a business, profession, commodity, service or
entertainment.
SPEECH, NON-COMMERCIAL. Dissemination of messages not classified as commercial speech
which include, but are not limited to, messages concerning political, religious, social, ideological, public
service and informational topics.
88 New Germany - Land Usage
STATE. The State of Minnesota.
STRUCTURE. Anything built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of
work composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, except parking lots and driveways.
STRUCTURE, PRINCIPAL. A building in which the principal use of the lot on which the building
is located is conducted.
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES. Licensed wireless services used for commercial purposes
including cellular, personal communication telecommunication services, specialized mobilized radio,
enhanced specialized mobilized radio, paging and similar services.
TELECOMMUNICATION TOWER. A free-standing, self-supporting lattice, guyed or monopole
structure constructed from grade intended to support antennas, except towers used for amateur radio
operations.
USE. The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is designated, arranged or
intended, or for which it is occupied, utilized or maintained, and shall include the performance of the
activity, as defined by this chapter.
USE, ACCESSORY. A subordinate use which is secondary and associated with the principal use
and is located on the same lot as the principal building or use.
USE, CONDITIONAL.
(1) A use permitted in a particular zoning district only upon showing that the use in a specified
location will comply with all standards of this chapter for the location or operation of the use.
(2) The city may impose additional conditions in specific instances to protect the public health,
safety or welfare.
USE, INTERIM. An interim use is a temporary use of property until a certain date established by
the City Council or until the use is no longer permitted by this chapter.
USE, NON-CONFORMING. The use of land, buildings or structures existing at the time of
adoption of this chapter or subsequent amendments that do not comply with all the regulations of this
chapter governing the zoning district in which the use is located.
USE, PERMITTED. A use that conforms to the requirements of this chapter.
USE, PRINCIPAL. The primary use of land or structures as distinguished from accessory uses.
Zoning 89
UTILITY BUILDING. A detached accessory building, not used for vehicle storage, is one-story
in nature, is used or intended for the storage of hobby tools, garden equipment and the like, and which
is incidental to the principal dwelling structure.
VARIANCE. Any modification or variation of official controls where it is determined that because
of practical difficulty (as defined in this chapter) that strict enforcement of official control is impractical.
WAREHOUSING. The storage of materials or equipment within an enclosed building.
WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN, CARVER COUNTY. The county’s Water Management Plan, as
may be amended.
WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN, CITY. The city’s 2007 Storm Water Management Plan, as may
be amended.
WETLAND CONSERVATION ACT. An act adopted by the state, as amended, classifying,
governing and defining wetlands within the state.
WINDMILLS (WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS). An apparatus capable of converting
wind energy into electricity.
YARD. An unoccupied and unobstructed open space between a building and the adjoining lot lines.
ZONING AMENDMENT. A change authorized by the City Council either in the text of the Zoning
Ordinance or in the boundaries or location of a zoning district.
ZONING DISTRICT. An area of the city designated in the Zoning Ordinance text and delineated
on the official zoning map, in which requirements for the use of land and building and development
standards are prescribed and uniform.
ZONING MAP, OFFICIAL. The map or maps incorporated into this chapter designating the zoning
districts.
ZONING OFFICER. The City of New Germany City Clerk-Treasurer or other individual, as
appointed by the City Council.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011; Ord. 100A, passed - -2016)
§ 154.012 EFFECTIVE DATE.
This chapter was adopted by the City Council on 11-15-2011 and shall be effective upon publication
according to law.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011)
90 New Germany - Land Usage
§ 154.013 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011)
Cross-reference:
See also the city’s current comprehensive plan map found in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer
Zoning 91
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 154.025 ESTABLISHMENT.
The Planning Commission of five members is established and will constitute the planning agency
of the city. The Planning Commission members shall be residents of the city and shall be appointed by
the City Council.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011)
§ 154.026 APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL.
(A) Each newly appointed Planning Commission member shall be subject to a six-month
probationary period. At the end of the probationary period, the City Council may review the status and
work effort of the member and may determine if the member should remain on the Planning Commission
or be removed.
(B) A vote to remove the member shall be by majority vote of the entire City Council.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011)
§ 154.027 TERM AND VACANCIES.
Planning Commission members shall be appointed for staggered terms of three calendar years.
Members shall hold their offices until their successors are appointed and qualified. Vacancies shall be
filled by the City Council for the unexpired portion of the term.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011)
§ 154.028 POWERS AND ACTIONS.
(A) The Planning Commission shall have such powers and duties as provided by state law and city
ordinances; however, the Planning Commission’s actions shall be advisory to the City Council and shall
work under the direction of the City Council. Duties include, but are not limited to, investigating,
reviewing and making recommendations to the City Council in regard to:
(1) The Comprehensive Plan;
(2) Zoning and subdivision ordinances;
(3) Subdivision sketch plans, preliminary and final plats;
(4) Variances;
92 New Germany - Land Usage
(5) Conditional use and interim use permits; and
(6) General planning matters.
(B) The Planning Commission shall make recommendations to the City Council on items before it
within a reasonable time or such time as shall be prescribed by state law or city ordinance. Failure by
the Planning Commission to make a recommendation within the required period shall be deemed to be
a recommendation for denial if the delay is appealed by the applicant.
(C) The Planning Commission may recommend that the City Council place conditions on
applications and permits required under this chapter in order to carry out the intent of this chapter. The
Planning Commission shall accompany its decision to recommend a denial of an application with a
statement of its findings regarding the matter.
(D) The City Council may adopt, modify or reject the recommendation of the Planning Commission
by vote of a majority of those present.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011)
§ 154.029 PROCEDURES.
(A) At the first meeting of each year, the Planning Commission shall elect from its membership a
Chairperson, a Vice Chairperson and a Secretary. The officers shall take office immediately following
their election and shall hold office for a term of one calendar year until their successors are elected and
assume office.
(B) The duties of the Commission officers are as follows.
(1) The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings and perform such other duties as may be
directed by the Commission.
(2) The Vice Chairperson shall act in the capacity of the Chairperson in the absence of the
Chairperson. If the office of the Chairperson becomes vacant, the Vice Chairperson shall succeed to this
office for the unexpired term and the Commission shall elect a successor to the office of Vice
Chairperson for the unexpired term.
(3) The Secretary shall be responsible for taking the minutes of the meeting and any other
correspondence of the Commission.
(C) The Planning Commission shall hold regular meetings as it determines appropriate and
necessary to efficiently and effectively carry out the work and duties of the Commission or as directed
by the City Council. All meetings shall be open to the public and posted as required by law.
Zoning 93
(D) The Planning Commission may adopt bylaws or rules for the conduct of its business. The
Commission shall keep a record of its transactions, findings and minutes of each meeting. These records
shall be a public record and shall be submitted to the city’s Clerk-Treasurer to distribute to the City
Council for review.
(E) Expenses of the Commission shall be within the amount appropriated for such purposes by the
City Council.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 154.040 ENFORCEMENT OFFICER AND DUTIES.
(A) The city’s Clerk-Treasurer shall serve as the zoning officer for the city and shall be responsible
for the administration and enforcement of this chapter as directed by the City Council. The city’s Clerk-
Treasurer may consult with other governmental agencies, the city’s building official and other city
consultants in the administration and enforcement of this chapter.
(B) The duties of the city’s Clerk-Treasurer shall include the following:
(1) Determine that all uses of land and building permits comply with the terms of this chapter,
including the interpretation of this chapter;
(2) Authorize the city’s Building Inspector to conduct the inspection of buildings and use of
land, as allowed by state statute, to determine compliance with the terms of this chapter;
(3) Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter, including, but not limited to, all
maps, zoning ordinance and map amendments, variances, conditional use and interim use permits,
applications, other permits and appeals;
(4) Receive, file and forward all applications for zoning ordinance and map amendments,
variances, conditional use and interim use permits, appeals or other related matters to the Planning
Commission, City Council, other governmental reviewing agency and other designated parties;
(5) Prepare for publication all public hearing notices and other notifications required by this
chapter;
(6) Receive and deposit in the city account all required fees for zoning applications and building
permits and manage any financial security as required by the City Council; and
94 New Germany - Land Usage
(7) Any person aggrieved by any procedure or decision of the city’s Clerk-Treasurer may
appeal to the City Council.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011)
§ 154.041 DEADLINES FOR CITY ACTIONS AND VOTING REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Deadlines for city actions.
(1) The City Council shall act upon all applications required by this chapter within 60 days of
the submission of a complete application or a longer period agreed to by the applicant.
(2) The city may take an additional 60 days for a decision after notifying the applicant of the
reasons for such an extension.
(3) If an application is denied by the City Council, the reasons for denial shall be stated in the
record of the Council proceedings and the applicant shall be provided with a written statement on the
reasons for denial.
(4) If the City Council fails to make a timely decision, the application shall be deemed to have
been approved.
(B) Voting requirements.
(1) All applications for a conditional use permit, variance, interim use permit, site plan or an
amendment to the text of this chapter shall be issued on the affirmative vote of a majority of the entire
City Council.
(2) Any amendment to this chapter that changes the boundary of any zoning district (rezoning)
or changes the regulation of any existing zoning district requires an affirmative vote of two-thirds of the
entire City Council.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011)
§ 154.042 PUBLIC HEARING REQUIREMENTS.
(A) The following requirements shall apply to all public hearings required by this chapter.
(1) The city’s Clerk-Treasurer publish a notice of the public hearing in the official newspaper
at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing, after submission of a complete application for the
requested action to the city by the applicant.
Zoning 95
(2) The city’s Clerk-Treasurer shall mail notice of the public hearing for complete applications
pertaining to a zoning amendment which involves a change in the boundaries of a zoning district,
variance or conditional or interim use at least ten days prior to the date of a hearing to:
(a) The current owners of all property, as shown in the certified records of the county’s
Office of Taxpayer Services, that are located within 350 feet of the property that is the subject of the
application; and
(b) Any other governmental agency required to review the application as specified by state
law or applicable ordinance.
(B) Failure to mail the notice or failure of the property owners to receive the notice shall not
invalidate the proceedings required by this chapter.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011)
§ 154.043 FEES.
Fees, established by the City Council, for all building permits, zoning ordinance and map
amendments, variances, conditional use and interim use permits and other related applications or permits
shall be payable at the time of filing any application with the city and are not refundable.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011)
§ 154.044 SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING UNIT REQUIREMENTS.
(A) All single-family detached dwellings, including manufactured homes, shall have a width of at
least 22 feet for at least 50% of their depth and a depth of at least 22 feet for at least 50% of their width.
(B) All dwellings shall have a permanent foundation in conformance with the state’s Building Code.
(C) The use and occupancy of a tent, recreational vehicle, unfinished dwelling or other temporary
dwelling for the purpose of living quarters or residency is prohibited.
(D) Pursuant to the authority granted in M.S. § 462.3593, as it may be amended from time to time,
the city opts out of the requirements of M.S. § 462.3593, which defines and regulates temporary family
health care dwellings, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011; Ord. 100A, passed - -2016)
§ 154.045 LOT, YARD AND HEIGHT PROVISIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.
(A) Lots of record. A lot of record shall be considered a buildable lot for the permitted uses within
the zoning district the lot is located even though the lot area and/or dimensions are less than those
required for the district; provided:
96 New Germany - Land Usage
(1) The width of the lot is not less than 40 feet;
(2) The lot fronts on a public street; or
(3) No adjacent lot or land is owned by the owner of the lot of record lot or has been sold by
the owner since the effective date of this chapter.
(B) Principal uses and buildings. No more than one principal building shall be located on a single
lot, except as provided for in §§ 154.060 through 154.066 of this chapter.
(C) Yard and setback requirements and exceptions.
(1) No required yard or open space allocated to a structure or parcel of land in compliance with
this chapter shall be used to satisfy yard, other open spaces or minimum lot area requirements for any
other structure or land.
(2) On double frontage lots, the required front yard setback shall be provided on both streets.
(3) The following shall be exceptions on minimum yard requirements.
(a) Chimneys, flues, sills, gutters, mechanical devices, eaves, bay windows, ornamental
features and other similar features may extend into the required yard setback area no more than three
feet.
(b) Patio slabs, public utility and flag poles, mail boxes, plantings, recreation equipment
and means of access such as sidewalks, driveways and steps may occupy any part of a required yard
setback.
(c) Detached retaining walls that are less than five feet in height, including staged walls,
which cumulatively do not exceed five feet in height.
(d) Yard lights may extend into the required yard setback areas; provided, the direct light
source is not visible from a public right-of-way or an adjacent residential property.
(D) Height exceptions. Height limitations established in the A-1 Agricultural, R-1 Single-Family
Residential District and R-2 Multiple-Family District may be increased by 50% when applied to the
following:
(1) Personal receive only satellite dish antennas, other personal antenna devices and amateur
radio devices;
(2) Spires, steeples and belfries on religious and educational institutions or public uses
containing uninhabitable space;
Zoning 97
(3) Chimneys;
(4) Flag poles;
(5) Public water towers;
(6) Wind mills used in conjunction with agricultural uses; and
(7) Telecommunications facilities, if located on an existing structure.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011)
ZONING DISTRICTS AND PROCEDURES
§ 154.060 ZONING ORDINANCE TEXT AND MAP (REZONING) AMENDMENT.
(A) General.
(1) This chapter may be amended whenever the City Council finds it consistent with the intent
of this chapter, the Comprehensive Plan and the public health, safety or general welfare. An amendment
to this chapter may be initiated in accordance with the following:
(a) An application by the owner or owners of the property of the zoning of which is
proposed to be changed;
(b) A recommendation of the Planning Commission; or
(c) Action of the City Council.
(2) All zoning amendments shall require a public hearing before the City Council.
(B) Zoning amendment application.
(1) All applications for zoning amendments which are initiated by the owner or owners of the
property to be rezoned shall be filed with the city’s Clerk-Treasurer.
(2) When the petition involves the changing of a zoning district and its boundaries, it shall be
accompanied by an application form provided by the city and be accompanied by the following:
(a) A map or plat showing the property proposed to be changed;
(b) The legal description and address of the property;
98 New Germany - Land Usage
(c) Evidence of ownership or an interest in the property;
(d) A list of the names and addresses of all property owners within 350 feet from the
county’s Office of Taxpayer Services;
(e) The fee as established by the City Council; and
(f) Other information as may be required by the city.
(3) An application for a change in the boundaries of a zoning district which would result in the
creation of a zoning district which is inconsistent with the land use designation of the property in the
Comprehensive Plan must be accompanied by an application for an amendment to the Comprehensive
Plan.
(4) All complete applications for zoning ordinance text and map (rezoning) amendments to this
chapter shall be referred to the Planning Commission for review.
(5) (a) The Commission shall make a recommendation to the City Council after consideration
of a complete application for the request or any continuance which is not appealed by the applicant.
(b) The Planning Commission shall base its recommendation to the City Council upon the
following criteria:
1. Compliance with the text and maps of the Comprehensive Plan; and
2. Adherence of the property and any proposed use(s) to the provisions of the zoning
district proposed for the property that is subject to the rezoning application.
(c) The Planning Commission may recommend that the City Council attach conditions to
zoning map (rezoning) amendments to carry out the intent of this chapter.
(6) (a) The Planning Commission shall provide a report to the City Council of its findings and
recommendations on the application.
(b) The City Council shall hold a public hearing to consider the Planning Commission’s
recommendation.
(c) The City Council shall act upon the amendment within the appointed time or a longer
period agreed to by the applicant of the zoning amendment and shall state the reasons for the approval,
denial or other action.
(d) The City Council may attach conditions to zoning map (rezoning) amendments to carry
out the intent of this chapter.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011)
Zoning 99
§ 154.061 VARIANCES.
(A) General.
(1) The City Council may grant variances from strict application of the provisions of this
chapter in cases where strict enforcement would cause practical difficulties in complying with the
requirements of this chapter applicable to the individual property under consideration when it is
demonstrated that the variance would be consistent with the spirit and intent of this chapter and the
Comprehensive Plan, economic considerations do not constitute practical difficulties.
(2) No variance shall be granted to declare a substandard lot buildable unless, in addition to
meeting the requirements of division (A)(1) above, the applicant has exhausted all reasonable possibility
of combining the lot with an adjacent vacant lot.
(3) No variance shall be granted to permit a use which is not allowed as a permitted, accessory
or conditional use under this chapter for property in the zoning district in which the land is located.
(4) All variance requests shall require an official public hearing before the City Council.
(B) Variance application procedure.
(1) An application for a variance shall be filed with the city’s Clerk-Treasurer stating the
practical difficulties applicable to the individual property along with the following information:
(a) A map or plat of the property which shows all lot lines, existing and proposed
structures, driveways and parking areas, and any significant features;
(b) The legal description and address of the property;
(c) Evidence of ownership or an interest in the property;
(d) A list of the names and addresses of all property owners within 350 feet from the
county’s Office of Taxpayer Services;
(e) The fee as established by the City Council; and
(f) Other information as may be required by the city.
(2) After the application for a variance has been found complete, the variance application shall
be referred to the Planning Commission for review.
100 New Germany - Land Usage
(C) Planning Commission review.
(1) The Commission shall make a recommendation to the City Council for the variance request
or any continuance which is not appealed by the applicant, after consideration of the following criteria:
(a) The health, safety and welfare of the existing and anticipated land use and character
of the city;
(b) Traffic conditions, light and air, danger of fire, risk to the public safety;
(c) Whether or not the conditions applying to the structure or land of the application
present practical difficulties associated with the property or immediately adjoining property and do not
apply generally to other land or structures in the zoning district in which the property of the application
is located;
(d) Granting the proposed variance will not in any way impair health, safety, comfort or
in any other respect be contrary to the intent of this chapter;
(e) The granting of the variance will not merely serve as a convenience to the applicant
but is necessary to alleviate demonstrated practical difficulty associated with the property; and
(f) The variance request is not required for solely economic purposes.
(2) The Planning Commission may recommend that the City Council attach conditions to the
variance to carry out the intent of this chapter.
(D) City Council action.
(1) The City Council shall consider the Planning Commissions recommendation and any
conditions, the criteria listed in division (A) above and comments received at the public hearing.
(2) The City Council shall act upon the variance request within the appointed time or a longer
period agreed to by the applicant of the variance request and shall state the reasons for the approval,
denial or other action.
(3) The City Council may attach conditions to the variance to carry out the intent of this
chapter.
(E) Variance term and conditions.
(1) Any variance granted by the city shall run with the land and shall be perpetual unless prior
to December 31 of the year following the year of approval and no building permit has been issued or
substantial work performed on the project that is subject to the variance, in which case the variance shall
be null and void.
Zoning 101
(2) The City Council may extend the period for construction upon finding that the interest of
the owners of neighboring properties will not be adversely affected by the extension.
(3) The variance shall be valid only for the project for which it was granted and construction
of the project shall be in substantial compliance with the plans approved by the City Council.
(4) A certified copy of the variance or notice of the variance shall be filed by the applicant with
the county’s Office of Taxpayer Services, in accordance with state law requirements.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011)
§ 154.062 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.
(A) General.
(1) It shall be unlawful to use any structure or land for any purpose requiring a conditional use
permit in the zoning district in which the property is located without first obtaining a conditional use
permit from the city.
(2) All conditional use permits shall require a public hearing before the City Council.
(B) Conditional use permit application. An application for a conditional use permit shall be filed
with the city’s Clerk-Treasurer accompanied with the following information:
(1) The legal description and address of the property;
(2) Evidence of ownership or an interest in the property by the applicant;
(3) A list of the names and addresses of all property owners within 350 feet from the county’s
Office of Taxpayer Services;
(4) A narrative explaining the characteristics of the proposed conditional use;
(5) A site plan drawn at scale showing the proposed use and the location of all existing and
proposed buildings, curb cuts, driveways, parking space and loading areas or other relevant conditions
of the property;
(6) If the proposed conditional use involves a new development or redevelopment, the
following shall be submitted:
(a) Elevation drawings indicating the architectural materials and design of all proposed
buildings and structures;
102 New Germany - Land Usage
(b) A landscaping plan including the location, size and type of all proposed planting
materials;
(c) A general floor plan of all proposed buildings and structures; and
(d) Storm water drainage plan, and public sewer and water utility plan.
(7) The fee as established by the City Council; and
(8) Other information as may be required by the city.
(C) Planning Commission review.
(1) All complete applications for conditional use permits shall be referred to the Planning
Commission for review of the application according to the standards found in § 154.067 of this chapter.
(2) The Planning Commission shall make its recommendation to the City Council after
consideration of the application for the conditional use permit or any continuance which is not appealed
by the applicant.
(3) The Planning Commission may recommend that the City Council attach conditions to the
conditional use permit to carry out the intent of this chapter.
(D) City Council action.
(1) The City Council shall consider the conditional use permit application, the Planning
Commissions recommendation, conditions for the conditional use permit, if any, and comments received
at the public hearing.
(2) The City Council shall act upon the conditional use permit request within the appointed time
or such longer period agreed to by the applicant.
(3) In evaluating the conditional use permit application, the City Council must consider and
adopt findings regarding compliance with the standards for the use as established in § 154.067 of this
chapter.
(4) The City Council may attach conditions to the conditional use permit to carry out the intent
of this chapter.
(E) Conditional use permit conditions.
(1) A certified copy of the conditional use permit shall be recorded by the applicant with the
county’s Office of Taxpayer Services.
Zoning 103
(2) The City Council may revoke a permit upon violation of any condition of the permit, any
state or federal law, county regulation or any city ordinance.
(3) The conditional use permit shall remain in effect for so long as the conditions agreed upon
by the applicant are observed and shall expire if:
(a) Normal operation of the use has been discontinued for 12 or more months from the date
the conditional use permit is approved by the City Council; and
(b) If the conditional use permit involves new development or redevelopment, substantial
construction has not been completed within 12 months from the date the conditional use permit is
approved by the City Council, unless an extension has been granted by the City Council.
(4) (a) The city’s Clerk-Treasurer shall refer all documented complaints of potential violations
of any conditional use permit to the Planning Commission for review.
(b) The Planning Commission shall forward a recommendation to the City Council for
appropriate action of violation, if any.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011)
§ 154.063 INTERIM USE PERMITS.
(A) General. This section establishes interim use permit procedures to allow flexibility in the use
of land or structures in the city when such uses are not permanent and when such uses meet appropriate
conditions and performance standards that protect the public health, safety and welfare. The intent of the
interim use permit procedure is:
(1) To allow a use for a brief period of time until a permanent location is obtained or while the
permanent location is under construction;
(2) To allow a use that is presently judged acceptable by the City Council, but that with
anticipated development or redevelopment, will not be acceptable in the future or will be replaced in the
future by a permitted or conditional use; and
(3) To establish standards for interim uses in the location and circumstances under which the
uses may be established without detriment to the public health, safety and welfare of neighboring
property owners or occupants.
(B) Interim use application and procedural requirements.
(1) The application and procedure requirements for interim use permits shall be the same as
those for amendments to this chapter, as established in § 154.060 of this chapter.
104 New Germany - Land Usage
(2) If a proposed interim use is not listed as a permitted interim use in this chapter, an
amendment to this chapter will be required, as established in § 154.060 of this chapter, before an interim
use permit may be considered by the city.
(C) Standards.
(1) The interim use must be allowed in the zoning district where the property is located.
(2) The interim use must meet or exceed the standards established in §§ 154.080 through
154.092 of this chapter and other applicable city regulations.
(3) The interim use must comply with the specific standards for the use identified in this
chapter and must comply with all conditions of approval of the permit.
(D) Conditions. The City Council may impose conditions on granting the interim use permit in order
to ensure compliance with the criteria or to effect the purpose of this chapter.
(E) Termination. All interim use permits shall terminate on the occurrence of any of the following
events, whichever occurs first:
(1) The termination date established by the City Council and stated in the interim use permit;
(2) A violation of the conditions under which the interim use permit was issued; or
(3) A change in this chapter that causes the use to become non-conforming.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011)
§ 154.064 SITE PLAN REVIEW.
(A) General. A site plan must be reviewed by the Planning Commission and approved by the City
Council is required for all new non-single-family residential development and redevelopment in any
zoning district prior to the issuance of any building permit to ensure compliance with the standards of
this chapter.
(B) Site plan application requirements. Applications for site plan review shall include the following
minimum submittal requirements:
(1) Legal description and ownership of the property;
(2) A narrative description of the proposed property uses;
Zoning 105
(3) Scaled drawings of the existing property including property dimensions, easements, the
locations and setbacks of all existing buildings and the locations and setbacks of all other structures and
uses, such as driveways, parking areas and utilities;
(4) Scaled drawings of the proposed uses, easements and buildings including all dimensions
and property setbacks;
(5) Scaled drawings of building elevations and descriptions of exterior building materials;
(6) Scaled locations and descriptions of any proposed fencing, screening, signage, landscaping
or site lighting;
(7) A site grading and drainage plan, including erosion and sedimentation control plans,
including scaled delineations of any wetlands or floodplain areas; and
(8) Identification of any wetland or floodplain encroachments and detailed mitigation plans.
(C) Planning Commission review.
(1) All complete applications for site plans shall be referred to the Planning Commission for
review of the application according to the standards found in this chapter.
(2) The Planning Commission shall make its recommendation to the City Council after
consideration of the site plan application or any continuance which is not appealed by the applicant.
(3) The Planning Commission may recommend that the City Council attach conditions to the
site plan to carry out the intent of this chapter.
(D) City Council action.
(1) The City Council shall consider the site plan application, the Planning Commission
recommendation and any recommended conditions.
(2) The City Council shall act upon the site plan application within the appointed time or a
longer period agreed to by the applicant.
(3) The City Council may attach conditions to the site plan to carry out the intent of this
chapter.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011)
106 New Germany - Land Usage
§ 154.065 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP; INTERPRETATION AND DISTRICTS.
(A) Interpretation of the official zoning map.
(1) The boundaries for the zoning districts listed in this chapter are indicated on the official
zoning map which includes the map and all notations, references and data, which is hereby adopted by
reference and may be amended by reference. The boundaries of the official zoning map shall be modified
in accordance with § 154.060 of this chapter.
(2) Zoning district boundary lines are intended to follow lot lines, or be parallel or
perpendicular to a lot line; or along the centerlines of streets, rights-of-way; or follow the boundaries
of water features; unless the boundary lines are fixed by dimensions shown on the official zoning map.
(3) Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot, the location of any zoning district
boundary line, unless indicated by dimensions shown on the zoning map or rezoning description shall
be determined by the map scale shown on the official zoning map.
(4) The city’s Clerk-Treasurer shall make an interpretation of the map upon request of any
person where there is an uncertainty, contradiction or conflict regarding the intended location of any
zoning district boundary shown on the official zoning map due to the scale, lack of detail, illegibility or
other conflicting information. The City Clerk-Treasurer’s interpretation may be appealed to the City
Council.
(5) All property within the city shall have a zoning designation shown on the official zoning
map. If there is any discrepancy or inconsistency between the official zoning map and any other map,
ordinance or source which purports to indicate the zoning of property, the official zoning map shall take
precedence.
(B) Establishment and classification of zoning districts. For purposes of this chapter, the city shall
be divided into the following districts:
(1) A, Agricultural District;
(2) R-1, Single-Family Residential District;
(3) R-2, Multiple-Family Residential District;
(4) B, Business/Commercial District;
(5) I, Industrial District; and
(6) PUD, Planned Unit Development.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011)
Zoning 107
§ 154.066 ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
(A) A - Agricultural District.
(1) Purpose. The A - Agricultural District is established to allow agricultural activities as a
transitional use of the land until such time that municipal services are available to serve the property.
Because of the limited long-term duration of the agricultural uses within this zoning district and the
incompatibilities, which often exist between agricultural and non-agricultural land uses, permitted uses
in the A - Agricultural District are oriented towards non-intensive agricultural uses. This zoning district
applies to properties that are annexed into the city limits in accordance with orderly annexation
agreements or other municipal adjustment proceedings with Camden and Hollywood Townships.
(2) Permitted uses. Within any A - Agricultural District, no structure or land shall be used,
except for one or more of the following uses:
(a) Single-family detached residential dwellings at a density not exceeding one dwelling
per 40 acres;
(b) Agriculture and horticulture land uses, except feedlots, including existing agricultural
buildings and equipment typically associated with agriculture activities;
(c) A state-licensed residential facility or housing with services establishment registered
to serve six or fewer persons, except those as provided for under M.S. § 462.357, subd. 7, as it may be
amended from time to time;
(d) A state-licensed day care facility serving 12 or fewer persons or a group family day
care facility serving 14 or fewer children and licensed under Minn. Rules parts 9502.0315 to 9502.0445;
(e) Cemeteries; and/or
(f) Public parks and playgrounds.
(3) Accessory uses. Within any A - Agricultural District, the following uses shall be permitted
accessory uses:
(a) Private garages and parking spaces, utility buildings, detached decks, gazebos and
fences and similar structures;
(b) Private swimming pools meeting any state rules, tennis courts and other recreational
facilities for exclusive use by the property owner;
(c) Solar collection and geo-thermal heating and cooling systems used in conjunction with
permitted uses;
108 New Germany - Land Usage
(d) Roadside stands for sale of agricultural products grown on the property; provided,
sufficient off-street parking is available;
(e) Personal receive-only satellite dish antennas, other personal antenna devices and
amateur radio devices;
(f) Home occupations meeting the definition of “home occupation” found in § 154.011
of this chapter;
(g) Telecommunication facilities that meet the height requirements of this district if freestanding
or may be allowed up to 70 feet in height if located on an existing structure; and
(h) Signs, as regulated in § 154.090 of this chapter.
(4) Conditional uses. Within the A - Agricultural District, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses, except by conditional use permit and in conformance with the standards found
in § 154.067 of this chapter:
(a) Religious institutions that may include state-licensed day care facilities serving more
than six persons;
(b) Public buildings and facilities that are greater than 1,000 square feet in area such as
water treatment facilities, wastewater treatment plants, water towers and other similar uses; and
(c) Home occupations that do not meet the definition of a “home occupation” as found in
§ 154.011 of this chapter.
(5) Interim uses. Retail solar electric systems.
(6) District standards. No building or land in the A - Agricultural District shall be used, except
in conformance with the following:
(a) Minimum lot area: two acres;
(b) Minimum lot width: 150 feet of frontage on a public road;
(c) Maximum structure height: 35 feet;
(d) Minimum setbacks (all structures):
1. Front: 75 feet;
2. Corner lot: 30 feet; and
3. Interior:
Zoning 109
a. Side: 30 feet; and
b. Rear: 30 feet.
(e) All uses shall comply with the provisions of §§ 154.080 through 154.092 of this
chapter.
(B) R-1 - Single-Family Residential District.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of the R-1 Single-Family Residential District is to provide areas for
single-family detached homes consistent with the low-density residential land use designation in the
Comprehensive Plan. Residential development within the R-1 Single-Family Residential District shall
occur at densities that are less than four dwelling units per net acre and shall be served by municipal
sanitary sewer and water facilities.
(2) Permitted uses. Within any R-1 Single-Family Residential District, no structure or land
shall be used, except for one or more of the following uses:
(a) Single-family detached residences;
(b) A state-licensed residential facility or housing with services establishment registered
to serve six or fewer persons, except those as provided for under M.S. § 462.357, subd. 7, as it may be
amended from time to time;
(c) A state-licensed day care facility serving 12 or fewer persons or a group family day
care facility serving 14 or fewer children licensed under Minn. Rules parts 9502.0315 to 9502.0445; and
(d) Public and private parks, athletic fields, playgrounds and open space.
(3) Accessory uses. Within any R-1 Single-Family Residential District, the following uses shall
be permitted accessory uses:
(a) Private garages and parking spaces, utility buildings, detached decks, gazebos, private
boathouses, fences and similar structures;
(b) Private swimming pools meeting state rules, tennis courts and other recreational
facilities for exclusive use by the property owner;
(c) Solar collection and geo-thermal heating and cooling systems used in conjunction with
permitted uses;
(d) Personal receive-only satellite dish antennas, other personal antenna devices and
amateur radio devices;
110 New Germany - Land Usage
(e) Home occupations meeting the definition of “home occupation” found in § 154.011
of this chapter;
(f) Telecommunication facilities that meet the height requirements of this district if freestanding
or may be allowed up to 70 feet in height if located on an existing structure; and
(g) Signs, as regulated in § 154.090 of this chapter.
(4) Conditional uses. Within the R-1 Single-Family Residential District, no structure or land
shall be used for the following uses, except by conditional use permit and in conformance with the
standards found in § 154.067 of this chapter:
(a) Double-family residential dwellings;
(b) Educational facilities and religious institutions that may include state-licensed day care
facilities serving more than six persons;
(c) Public buildings and facilities greater than 1,000 square feet in area, such as water
treatment facilities, wastewater treatment plants, water towers and other similar uses;
(d) Home occupations not meeting the definition of a “home occupation”, as found in
§ 154.011 of this chapter; and
(e) Community boathouses.
(5) Interim uses. Retail solar electric systems.
(6) District standards. No building or land in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District shall
be used, except in conformance with the following:
(a) Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet per dwelling unit;
(b) Minimum lot width: 70 feet;
(c) Maximum structure to lot coverage: 35%;
(d) Maximum structure height: 35 feet;
(e) Minimum front yard setbacks requirements (all structures) from property line:
1. Front yards abutting right-of-way of new minor arterial or collector roadways
constructed after the date of adoption of this chapter: 50 feet;
2. Front yards abutting right-of-way of local streets: 25 feet; and
Zoning 111
3. Minimum setbacks:
a. Corner lot:
i. Principal structures: 25 feet; and
ii. Accessory structures: 15 feet.
b. Interior:
i. Side:
(A) Principal structures: ten feet; and
(B) Accessory structures: five feet.
ii. Rear:
(A) Principal structures: 30 feet; and
(B) Accessory structures: ten feet.
(f) All uses shall comply with the provisions of §§ 154.080 through 154.092 of this
chapter.
(C) R-2 - Multiple-Family Residential District.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of the R-2 Multiple-Family Residential District is to provide area
for multiple-family dwelling units consistent with the medium density residential land use designation
in the Comprehensive Plan. Residential development within the R-2 Multiple-Family Residential District
shall occur at densities that are more than four dwelling units per net acre, but do not exceed ten
dwelling units per net acre. Greater densities per net acre may be allowed at the discretion of the City
Council to achieve city goals for life cycle and affordable housing.
(2) Permitted uses. Within any R-2 Multiple-Family Residential District, no structure or land
shall be used, except for one or more of the following uses:
(a) Double-family residential dwellings, townhouses and multiple-family dwellings; and
(b) Public and private parks, athletic fields, playgrounds and open space.
(3) Accessory uses. Within any R-2 Multiple-Family Residential District, the following uses
shall be permitted accessory uses:
112 New Germany - Land Usage
(a) Private garages and parking spaces, detached decks, gazebos, fences and similar
structures;
(b) Private swimming pools meeting state rules, tennis courts and other recreational
facilities for exclusive use by the residents of the property;
(c) Solar collection and geo-thermal heating and cooling systems used in conjunction with
permitted uses;
(d) Personal receive-only satellite dish antennas, other personal antenna devices and
amateur radio devices;
(e) Signs as regulated by § 154.090 of this chapter;
(f) Telecommunication facilities that meet the height requirements of this district if freestanding
or may be allowed up to 70 feet in height if located on an existing; and
(g) Home occupations meeting the definition of “home occupation”, found in § 154.011
of this chapter.
(4) Conditional uses. Within the R-2 Multiple-Family Residential District, no structure or land
shall be used for the following uses, except by conditional use permit and in conformance with the
standards found in § 154.067 of this chapter:
(a) A state-licensed residential facility serving from seven through 16 persons;
(b) A state-licensed day care facility serving from 13 through 16 persons;
(c) Educational facilities and religious institutions that may include state-licensed day care
facilities serving more than six persons;
(d) Public buildings and facilities greater than 1,000 square feet in area such as water
treatment facilities, wastewater treatment plants, water towers and other similar uses; and
(e) Home occupations not meeting the definition of a “home occupation”, as found in
§ 154.011 of this chapter.
(5) Interim uses. Retail solar electric systems.
(6) District standards. No building or land in the R-2 Multiple-Family Residential District shall
be used, except in conformance with the following:
Zoning 113
(a) Minimum lot area:
1. Double-family residential dwelling: 12,000 square feet per building;
2. Townhomes: 20,000 square feet per building; and
3. Multiple-family dwellings: 35,000 square feet per building.
(b) Density:
1. Minimum of four dwelling units per net acre to a maximum of ten dwelling units
per net acre; and
2. The City Council, at its discretion, may allow additional density up to 16 units per
net acre to achieve city goals for life cycle and affordable housing structure.
(c) Minimum lot width: 150 feet;
(d) Maximum structure-to-lot coverage: 50%;
(e) Maximum structure height: 35 feet;
(f) Minimum front yard setbacks requirements (all structures) from property line:
1. Front yards abutting right-of-way of new minor arterial or collector roadways
constructed after the date of adoption of this chapter: 50 feet;
2. Front yards abutting right-of-way of local streets: 30 feet;
3. Minimum rear yard setback from property line: 30 feet;
4. Minimum side yard setback from property line: 15 feet, plus two feet for every
foot by which the building exceeds 25 feet in height; and
5. Minimum building spacing: if more than one multiple-family building is proposed
for one lot of record, building spacing for the structures shall be equal to one-half the average height of
each structure.
(g) All uses shall comply with the provisions of §§ 154.080 through 154.092 of this
chapter.
(D) B - Business/Commercial District.
(1) Purpose. The B - Business/Commercial District is established to provide areas for business
and mixed residential/commercial uses in the downtown area where apartments are located above
114 New Germany - Land Usage
businesses as designated in the Comprehensive Plan. The B -Business/Commercial District standards are
designed to accommodate retail, commercial and office uses as well as residential uses located above
business establishments.
(2) Permitted uses. Within any B - Business/Commercial District, no structure or land shall
be used, except for one or more of the following uses:
(a) Retail, office or business service uses within an enclosed building;
(b) Residential dwelling units within the same building as a retail, office or business
service use;
(c) Hotels and motels and associated recreational uses for guests;
(d) Restaurants and on-sale liquor establishments within an enclosed building;
(e) Automobile service stations and other retail uses having service bays and/or gas pump
islands;
(f) Automobile repair garages;
(g) Municipal buildings; and
(h) Public parks, athletic fields, playgrounds and open space.
(3) Accessory uses. Within any B - Business/Commercial District, the following uses shall be
permitted accessory uses:
(a) Private garages, off-street parking and loading spaces;
(b) Fences;
(c) Storage, manufacturing and servicing related to a permitted use and occupying no more
than 30% of the gross floor area of the principal structure;
(d) Solar collection and geo-thermal heating and cooling systems used in conjunction with
permitted uses;
(e) Signs as regulated by § 154.090 of this chapter;
(f) Personal receive-only satellite dish antennas, other personal antenna devices and
amateur radio devices; and
(g) Telecommunication facilities that meet the height requirements of this district if freestanding
or may be allowed up to 80 feet in height if located on an existing structure
Zoning 115
(4) Conditional uses. Within the B - Business/Commercial District, no structure or land shall
be used for the following uses, except by conditional use permit and in conformance with the standards
found in § 154.067 of this chapter:
(a) A state licensed day care facility;
(b) Outdoor dining areas associated with restaurants and on-sale liquor establishments;
(c) Uses having a drive-up window; and
(d) Telecommunication facilities that exceed 80 feet in height.
(5) Interim uses. Retail solar electric system.
(6) District standards. No building or land in the B - Business/Commercial District shall be
used, except in conformance with the following:
(a) Maximum structure height: 40 feet;
(b) Side and rear yard setback adjacent to a residential district: ten feet; and
(c) All uses shall comply with the provisions of §§ 154.080 through 154.092 of this
chapter.
(E) I - Industrial District.
(1) Purpose. The I - Industrial District is established to provide areas for industrial uses that
are separate from residential land uses and located adjacent to major road networks as designated in the
Comprehensive Plan. The Industrial District standards are designed to accommodate business, warehouse
and manufacturing uses.
(2) Permitted uses. Within any I - Industrial District, no structure or land shall be used, except
for one or more of the following uses:
(a) Research and development within an enclosed building;
(b) Business service uses and offices within an enclosed building;
(c) Manufacturing, assembly, warehousing, storage and fabricating within an enclosed
building;
(d) Public buildings and facilities such as maintenance facilities, water treatment facilities,
wastewater treatment plants, water towers and other similar uses; and
116 New Germany - Land Usage
(e) Public parks, athletic fields, playgrounds and open space.
(3) Permitted accessory uses. Within any I - Industrial District, the following uses shall be
permitted accessory uses:
(a) Private garages, off-street parking and loading spaces;
(b) Fences;
(c) Solar collection and geo-thermal heating and cooling systems used in conjunction with
permitted uses;
(d) Signs as regulated by § 154.090 of this chapter;
(e) Personal receive-only satellite dish antennas, other personal antenna devices and
amateur radio devices; and
(f) Telecommunication facilities that meet the height requirements of this district if freestanding
or may be allowed up to 80 feet in height if located on an existing structure
(4) Conditional uses. Within any I - Industrial District, no structure or land shall be used for
the following uses, except by conditional use permit and in conformance with the standards found in
§ 154.067 of this chapter:
(a) Telecommunication facilities that exceed 80 feet in height;
(b) Permanent outside storage of materials; and
(c) Adult uses.
(5) Interim uses. Retail and wholesale solar electric system.
(6) District standards. No building or land in the B - Business/Commercial District shall be
used, except in conformance with the following:
(a) Minimum lot area: 30,000 square feet;
(b) Minimum lot width: 100 feet;
(c) Maximum hard surface lot coverage: 85%;
(d) Maximum structure height: 40 feet;
(e) Minimum front yard setbacks requirements (all structures) from property line:
Zoning 117
1. Front yards abutting right-of-way of new minor arterial or collector roadways
constructed after the date of adoption of this chapter: 50 feet; and
2. Front yards abutting right-of-way of local streets: 30 feet.
(f) Minimum setbacks (all structures) from property line:
1. Corner lot: 30 feet;
2. Interior lot side yard: 15 feet; and
3. Rear yard: 30 feet.
(g) All uses shall comply with the provisions of §§ 154.080 through 154.092 of this
chapter.
(F) Planned Unit Development (PUD) District.
(1) Purpose.
(a) The Planned Unit Development (PUD) District is established to allow flexibility in the
design, density and intensity of development within areas served by municipal sewer, water and services.
The PUD District is designed to be utilized in areas that are newly annexed to the city and where mixed
uses require greater flexibility in the application of zoning standards to achieve the goals and policies
of the Comprehensive Plan.
(b) The city will apply the PUD District to new development areas or redevelopment to
allow for a greater variety of uses, varying residential density within the development and phasing of
development and public improvements. Developments that utilize the PUD approach shall demonstrate
high quality and sustainable development practices when compared to the use of the other applicable
zoning districts.
(2) General PUD District standards and requirements.
(a) Dimensional requirements of the city zoning districts may be modified or varied for
a PUD in exchange for higher design standards, site preservation techniques, extraordinary parkland
development, pedestrian circulation, trails linkage to other neighborhoods and community destinations
and other unique development considerations.
(b) Variations from the dimensional standards of the zoning district standards and other
standards of this chapter shall only be approved when it is determined by the City Council that the
variations are commensurate with benefits to the planned neighborhood and overall community. The a
determination shall include, but not be limited to, the following considerations:
118 New Germany - Land Usage
1. Master site planning and creative design in the proposed development of the land
and uses;
2. Variety in housing styles and housing types including provisions for life-cycle and
affordable housing opportunities;
3. Architectural design components and controls for all planned uses and structures;
4. Protection and incorporation of unique natural features into the planned
development;
5. Creation of larger expanses of usable public and private open spaces, recreational
facilities and pedestrian accesses throughout the proposed development;
6. Landscaping for all proposed land uses, public and private parks, major
transportation corridors and transition areas between land uses;
7. Screening of residential uses from major transportation corridors and dissimilar
land uses;
8. Compatibility with the Comprehensive Plan and the goals and policies of the city;
9. Compatibility with existing and potential development patterns and transitions
between land uses within and adjacent to the proposed development; and
10. Consistency with the general intent of this chapter and compliance with §§ 154.080
through 154.092 of this chapter.
(c) The city shall require the following items be satisfied, as determined by the City
Council, for any PUD District:
1. Private homeowner covenants to guarantee adherence to architectural standards,
to implement master planning components of the proposed development and to satisfy required private
and public area maintenance provisions; and
2. Financial participation in off-site improvements required to connect the proposed
development to existing and planned neighborhoods and existing and planned public utility and
transportation infrastructure.
(d) The review and approval of a PUD is a discretionary action by the City Council and
the eligibility of a proposed development as a PUD shall be determined solely by the city.
Zoning 119
(3) Uses and development standards.
(a) Permitted, accessory and conditional uses.
1. Each PUD District shall only be used for the use or uses for which the site is
designated in the Comprehensive Plan; except that, the city may permit up to 25% of the gross floor area
of all buildings in a PUD District to be used for land uses for which the site is not designated in the
Comprehensive Plan if the City Council finds that the use is in the best interests of the city and is
consistent with the requirements of this section.
2. Within residential areas of PUD Districts:
a. All permitted uses and accessory uses of the R-1 Single-Family Residential
District and R-2 Multiple-Family Residential District are allowed; and
b. All uses allowed by conditional use permit within the R-1 Single-Family
Residential District and R-2 Multiple-Family Residential District are allowed by conditional use permit,
subject to the standards of § 154.067 of this chapter.
3. Within commercial areas of PUD Districts:
a. All permitted uses and accessory uses of the B - Business/Commercial District
are allowed in the business areas of the PUD District; and
b. All uses allowed by conditional use permit within the B - Business/
Commercial District are allowed by conditional use permit within the business areas of the PUD District,
subject to the standards of § 154.067 of this chapter.
4. Within industrial areas of PUD Districts:
a. All permitted uses and accessory uses of the I- Industrial District are allowed
in the industrial areas of the PUD District; and
b. All uses allowed by conditional use permit within the I - Industrial District
are allowed by conditional use permit within the industrial areas of the PUD District, subject to the
standards of § 154.067 of this chapter.
(b) Design of development.
1. PUDs shall require compatible street landscaping, street lighting and parking lot
lighting throughout the development. The quality and amount of landscaping, screening and buffering
between dissimilar uses shall be a major component of the PUD master development plan and final site
and building plan reviews.
120 New Germany - Land Usage
2. Architectural features and controls shall be a major component of all PUDs and
all mixed-use PUDs will require compatibility of architectural features between dissimilar uses.
(c) Residential density.
1. Each residential PUD or the residential portion of each mixed-use PUD shall have
a density within the range specified in the Comprehensive Plan for the property.
2. If the property is designated for non-residential use in the Comprehensive Plan,
the appropriate density shall be determined by the City Council based upon the housing and land use
policies of the Comprehensive Plan and the design of the Master Development Plan.
3. An increase in the density allowed by the Comprehensive Plan for the property
for any residential uses shall result in corresponding increase in the amount or quality of the following:
a. Usable open space, recreational amenities and pedestrian ways;
b. Architectural features, housing styles and housing variety;
c. Landscaping, screening and streetscape amenities;
d. Environmental protection and controls; and
e. Site design and development control.
(d) Dimensional standards.
1. The dimensional standards applied to lots, uses and structures within a PUD
District shall be established by the city in the review and approval process, except as follows.
a. The setback for all buildings from the exterior boundary of the PUD District
shall be 30 feet, except if abutting a new collector or arterial street as designated in the Comprehensive
Plan, the setback shall be 50 feet.
b. Building setbacks from internal public or private streets within the PUD shall
be determined by the city based on characteristics of the specific design of the PUD.
c. Parking lots and driving lanes shall be set back at least 20 feet from all
exterior boundary of a PUD District.
2. The city shall have total discretion in establishing dimensional criteria, and
departures from the standards of this chapter shall be based upon the level of site plan detail,
architectural quality and controls, overall master planning, utility and roadway capacity, neighborhood
and community benefit, public safety issues and overall development controls.
Zoning 121
(e) Open space and park requirements.
1. Each residential PUD District or residential area of a mixed-use PUD District shall
provide a minimum of 10% of the gross project area in open space, recreational uses or public recreation
and park uses in accordance with § 153.074 of this code of ordinances.
2. The city shall determine whether open space provisions and recreational amenities
shall be publicly dedicated or privately owned and maintained.
(f) Subdivision and public utilities. The city may modify the design standards for streets,
utilities, public facilities and other standards as established in Ch. 153 of this code of ordinances to the
uniqueness of the PUD; provided, the city finds that strict adherence to the requirements or specifications
is not required to meet the intent of this section or to protect the health, safety or welfare of the residents
of the PUD, the surrounding area or the city as a whole.
(g) Other requirements.
1. Private covenants, restrictions, homeowner association agreements or other
acceptable mechanisms to the city are required for private open space and recreation areas, and specific
improvements on public property, such as landscaped medians or subdivision monuments and design
features within public rights-of-way, that guarantee perpetual private maintenance of the areas and
improvements.
2. Signs shall be restricted to those which are permitted in a sign plan approved by
the city and shall be regulated by permanent covenants.
(h) Variations. Nothing in this division (F)(3) shall be construed to approve or permit
variations in construction materials, quality, Building Codes, Electrical Codes, Plumbing Codes, Fire
Codes, design or construction of public improvements, which in any way suggest substandard or inferior
development or construction.
(4) PUD District review process and procedure.
(a) Review process.
1. All PUD Districts requiring the subdivision of land shall follow the platting
requirements of Ch. 153 of this code of ordinances.
2. Mandatory or discretionary review of the potential environmental effects of the
proposed development may be required prior to the submission of a PUD sketch plan and preliminary
plat.
3. A property shall be rezoned to PUD District by the city concurrent with the
adoption of a master plan for development of the property by the city.
122 New Germany - Land Usage
4. No building or grading permit shall be issued by the city for property that is zoned
PUD District unless a master development plan has been approved for development of the property, and
the applicant has received approval by the city of a final site plan for the development or applicable phase
of development of the property.
(b) Procedure.
1. Sketch plan review.
a. The applicant may submit a sketch plan for review and comment by the
Planning Commission and City Council Prior to submission of a formal application for a master
development plan. Comments made by the Planning Commission and the City Council shall not bind the
city to approve any applications for development of the property.
b. The Planning Commission and City Council shall review the sketch plan after
a complete application has been submitted to the city’s Clerk-Treasurer. The application shall be
accompanied by the following information:
i. The name and address of the owner and applicant (if different) of the
property;
ii. A map depicting the existing physical conditions of the property including
all improvements, existing development, mature tree locations and location of wetlands and any water
feature;
iii. Existing land uses and zoning of properties within 350 feet of the
property; and
iv. General schematic drawings of the proposed development of the property
including approximate building, parking area and road/driveway locations; use, height, bulk and area
of buildings; the number and density of dwelling units; and the location of open space
c. Prior to the Planning Commission meeting, the city’s Clerk-Treasurer shall
mail notice at least ten days prior to the meeting to residents within 350 feet of the property advising of
the date and time of the Commission meeting that the sketch plan review is scheduled.
d. The Planning Commission shall forward its comments regarding the sketch
plan to the City Council within 30 days of the Planning Commission meeting.
e. The City Council shall review the sketch plan and Planning Commission
comments and provide advisory direction to the applicant regarding the sketch plan.
Zoning 123
2. Master development plan and PUD District zoning amendment application and
review.
a. The applicant shall submit an application for the review of a master
development plan and rezoning to the city’s Clerk-Treasurer.
b. The application shall be deemed complete when accompanied by the following
information submitted by the applicant that collectively represents the master development plan:
i. A map depicting the location and characteristics of existing physical
conditions of the property including, but not limited to, all improvements and development, mature trees,
topography at two foot contours, the delineation of wetlands and any water features;
ii. Existing land uses and zoning of properties within 350 feet of the
property;
iii. Proposed land uses and building locations along with the height, bulk and
gross square footage of the uses including the number and size of any dwelling units;
iv. The location and design of proposed parking areas, roadways, access
drives, trails and walkways;
v. Type and square footage of required open space, park and recreational
areas;
vi. Preliminary grading and drainage plan, including water storage areas,
drainage calculations and erosion control measures;
vii. Preliminary landscape plan indicating the species, size and planting
specifications and tree preservation;
viii. A narrative or drawing describing the preliminary exterior elevations of
the proposed buildings (principal and accessory) including the type and color of building materials, floor
plans and overall lighting and signage scheme;
ix. A preliminary plat of the property in conformance with the procedures
and requirements of Ch. 153 of this code of ordinances, unless modified by this section;
x. A narrative describing the development objectives of the project, proposed
development features, all proposed exceptions to or departures from conventional development standards
as defined within this chapter, anticipated development timing or phases, a description of covenants or
other restrictions proposed for the development; and
xi. A traffic impact analysis, if determined to be necessary by the city.
124 New Germany - Land Usage
c. The procedures to review on the master development plan shall occur
concurrently with the review of a rezoning to PUD District and shall follow the same procedures as a
zoning amendment established in § 154.060 of this chapter.
d. The Planning Commission shall base its comments and the City Council shall
base its actions regarding the application for a master development plan and zoning amendment on
consideration of:
i. The effect of the development on the neighborhood and surrounding area
of the city;
ii. The impacts of the development on community facilities including, but
not limited to, adjacent roadways, utilities and parks;
iii. The quality of design of the project and its relationship to adjacent planned
uses;
iv. The compliance of the application with the purpose and requirements of
the PUD District as specified above; and
v. Other such factors as the city finds relevant to the evaluation of the
application.
e. The Planning Commission shall recommend and the City Council shall
approve, approve with modifications, deny or extend action if agreed to by the applicant, the application
for the master development plan and zoning amendment. The City Council shall state the reasons for any
extension of consideration of the application and the anticipated length of the extension in a written
notice to the applicant.
f. The City Council shall state its reasons for approval, approval with
modifications or denial of the application with written notice of the action and reasons provided to the
applicant.
g. If approval or approval with modifications of the application is granted, the
Planning Commission may recommend and City Council may attach reasonable conditions to ensure that
implementation of the master development plan is consistent with the representations made by the
applicant to the City for the project and other conditions deemed necessary and convenient to accomplish
the purposes of this zoning district.
3. Final site plan.
a. Approval of a final site plan by the city is required for each master
development plan or each phase of the master development plan.
Zoning 125
b. A complete final site plan application shall be submitted to the city’s Clerk-
Treasurer, containing the following information:
i. Final development plan details, including grading and drainage, erosion
control, landscaping and required modifications, except for phased developments;
ii. Detailed site and exterior architectural plans for all non-single-family
detached residential uses. The city’s Clerk-Treasurer may require the submission of additional
information necessary to evaluate the final site and building plans with the approved master plan; and
iii. Draft covenants and documents for a homeowners association,
condominium association or other joint maintenance mechanism for review by the city attorney and
approval by the city that includes ownership and membership requirements; organization of the
association; time at which the applicant turns the association over to the members; approximate monthly
or yearly association fee for members; specific listing of items owned in common including such items
as roads, recreational facilities, parking, common open spaces and utilities; and any public areas subject
to association maintenance.
c. The final site and building plan shall be consistent with the approved Master
Plan, except as modified and approved by the city.
d. The applicant may request review and consideration of a combined master
development plan and final site plan by the Planning Commission and City Council by submitting all
information required for both reviews simultaneously to the city in accordance with the procedures
established above.
e. The Planning Commission shall recommend and the City Council shall
approve, approve with modifications or deny the final site plan. The action shall be based upon the
determination that the final site plan is consistent or inconsistent with the approved master development
plan.
(5) Development agreement and financial security.
(a) A development agreement shall be entered into with the city to ensure compliance with
the terms and conditions of an approved master development plan. The development agreement shall
include the uses permitted in the master development plan and all other special conditions and features
of the master development plan. The development agreement may be combined with the development
agreement required for subdivisions as established in Ch. 153 of this code of ordinances to assure
conformance with all ordinance requirements and financial guarantees.
(b) Financial security shall be submitted to the city in a form acceptable to the city attorney
prior to the issuance of any permits by the city to assure that all improvements are constructed consistent
with the master development plan and any conditions placed on the approval of the master development
plan by the City Council.
126 New Germany - Land Usage
1. The financial security may be combined with that required for subdivision
improvements, as established in the development agreement and approved by the City Council.
2. The city may reduce the financial security after completion of specific segments
of the improvements on the PUD District property; provided that, the improvements are installed in a
satisfactory manner as determined by the city.
(6) Amendments.
(a) An amendment to the master development plan shall be required for any proposed
development that does not substantially comply with the master development plan approved by the city.
SUBSTANTIAL COMPLIANCE shall mean:
1. There is no change in use of any areas of the master development plan;
2. There is no change to the phases of development, if a phased master development
plan is approved by the city;
3. The location of buildings, parking areas or roads are generally in the same location
as approved in the master development plan;
4. There is no increase or decrease in the:
a. The number of residential dwelling units by more than 5%; and
b. The gross floor area of non-residential buildings by more than 5% or of any
individual building by more than 10%.
5. The number of stories of any building has not increased;
6. The amount of open space is not altered in such a way as to change its original
design or intended use; or
7. Any change creates non-compliance with any condition attached to the approval
of the master development plan.
(b) Any other amendment may be made approved by the city’s Clerk-Treasurer; however,
the city’s Clerk-Treasurer may request final review and approval of the amendment by the City Council.
(c) The application and review of the amendment to the master development plan requiring
City Council review shall follow the same procedure as for the original review of the master
development plan.
Zoning 127
(7) Term of approval.
(a) If the applicant fails to obtain final site plan review for all or a part of the property
within one year from the date of master development plan and rezoning approval, the City Council may
rezone the property to the original zoning classification at the time of the PUD District rezoning
application or to a zoning classification consistent with the Comprehensive Plan designation for the
property. In the absence of a rezoning, the approved master development plan shall remain the legal
control governing development of the property.
(b) The applicant may request in writing and the City Council may approve an extension
of time for the applicant to obtain final site plan review for all or a part of the property. The request for
extension must be considered by the City Council before one year has elapsed from the date of master
development plan and PUD District rezoning approval.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011; Ord. 100A, passed - -2016; Ord. 100B, passed - -2018)
§ 154.067 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT STANDARDS.
(A) Purpose.
(1) The city has established conditional uses within the zoning districts for uses that typically
possess unique characteristics that have the potential to impact adjacent land uses and city services. The
city has adopted general standards and specific criteria for conditional uses to ensure that their location,
size and design are consistent with the standards, purposes and procedures of this chapter and the
Comprehensive Plan.
(2) In accordance with the provisions of state law and to effect the purpose of this chapter, the
Planning Commission may recommend and the City Council may impose conditions on such uses to
achieve the purpose of this chapter.
(B) General conditional use permit standards.
(1) No conditional use permit shall be granted unless the City Council finds that:
(a) All of the standards contained in this chapter and this chapter will be met;
(b) The use is consistent with goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan;
(c) The use does not have an undue adverse impact on governmental facilities, utilities,
services or existing or proposed improvements;
(d) The use will not negatively impact the use and enjoyment of other properties and uses
in the immediate vicinity;
128 New Germany - Land Usage
(e) The use will not impede planned development and improvement of the property,
including the provision of municipal utilities, storm water drainage, roadways and access; or the planned
development of surrounding properties in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and the standards
of this chapter; and
(f) The use does not have an undue adverse impact on the public health, safety or welfare.
(2) A conditional use shall conform to the following specific standards according to the zoning
district in which it is located.
(a) A - Agricultural District.
1. Religious institutions that may include state-licensed day care facilities serving
more than six persons shall meet the following conditions.
a. No building or structure shall be located within 35 feet of any lot line of an
R-1 Single-Family Residential District, except for buildings, and structures that contain less than 1,000
square feet in area.
b. The use shall have access on a collector or arterial roadway or be designed
to minimize excessive traffic on local residential streets.
c. The parking setbacks shall be the same as required for permitted structures.
d. Outdoor recreation and play areas shall be located a minimum of 20 feet from
properties zoned R-1 Single-Family Residential District.
e. All maintenance-related equipment shall be kept within an enclosed structure.
f. Play areas located adjacent to public right-of-way shall be separated from the
right-of-way by a landscaped yard area of at least 20 feet or a fence that meets the requirements of
§§ 154.080 through 154.092 of this chapter.
g. Landscaping shall be provided that is in keeping with the neighborhood and
provides screening where appropriate.
h. Site plan review approval shall be by the City Council.
2. Public buildings and facilities that are greater than 1,000 square feet in area such
as water treatment facilities, wastewater treatment plants, water towers and other similar uses shall meet
the following conditions.
Zoning 129
a. No building or structure shall be located within 35 feet of any lot line of an
R-1 Single-Family Residential District, except for buildings and structures that contain less than 1,000
square feet in area.
b. The use shall have access on a collector or arterial roadway or be designed
to minimize excessive traffic on local residential streets.
c. The parking setbacks shall be the same as required for permitted structures.
d. All maintenance-related equipment shall be kept within an enclosed structure.
e. Landscaping shall be provided that is in keeping with the neighborhood and
provides screening where appropriate.
f. Site plan review approval shall be by the City Council.
3. Home occupations not meeting the definition of a “home occupation”, as found
in § 154.011 of this chapter shall meet the following conditions:
a. Only limited retail sales activity;
b. No exterior signs;
c. Maximum of one outside employee;
d. Adequate off-street parking is available based on the number of employees and
customers per day;
e. Parking area screened from off site views;
f. No outside storage;
g. Shall not result in significant levels of noise, air or other pollution;
h. Business hours restricted to no earlier than 8:00 a.m. and no later than 9:00
p.m.; and
i. Outside parking of no more than one commercial type vehicle or vehicle
identified for business purposes and meeting the following requirements.
i. The vehicle shall not exceed one and one-half-ton capacity.
ii. The vehicle shall be owned and registered by an occupant of the property
and parked in a paved parking area.
130 New Germany - Land Usage
(b) R-1 - Single-Family Residential District.
1. Double-family residential dwellings shall meet the following conditions:
a. Shall meet the district standards found in Chapter VIII {Zoning Districts),
Section 2, subd. B, subpart 6 of this chapter;
b. Shall meet the parking standards found in Chapter X, (Performance Standards)
of this chapter; and
c. Site plan review approval by the City Council.
2. Educational facilities and religious institutions that may include state-licensed day
care facilities serving more than six persons shall meet the conditions listed in division (B)(1)(a) above
for religious institutions of this section.
3. Public buildings and facilities greater than 1,000 square feet in area, such as water
treatment facilities, wastewater treatment plants, water towers and other similar uses, shall meet the
conditions listed in divisions (B)(1)(b) above.
4. Home occupations not meeting the definition of a “home occupation”, as found
in § 154.011 of this chapter shall meet the conditions listed in division (B)(1)(c) above.
5. Community boathouses shall meet the following conditions:
a. No retail or commercial activity may occur on the premises;
b. If bathrooms or kitchen facilities are constructed within the building, the
building shall be connected to the public sanitary sewer and water system;
c. Sufficient parking shall be provided based on estimated usage of the facility;
d. Storage or use of the community boathouse by persons not residing within the
planned residential community shall be prohibited; and
e. Shall meet the setback requirements for a principal building.
(c) R-2 - Multiple Family Residential District.
1. A state-licensed residential facility serving from seven through 16 persons shall
meet the following conditions.
a. The facility must be in compliance with all applicable state licensing
requirements and City and State Building and Fire Codes.
Zoning 131
b. The facility shall have adequate off-street parking to accommodate one parking
space for each employee on the major shift.
2. A state licensed day care facility serving from 13 through 16 persons shall meet
the following conditions.
a. The facility must be in compliance with all applicable state licensing
requirements and all applicable City and State Building and Fire Codes.
b. The facility shall have adequate off-street parking to accommodate one parking
space for each employee on the major shift.
c. The site shall have loading and drop off points designed to avoid interference
with traffic patterns and pedestrians.
d. Outdoor recreation and play areas shall be located at least 20 feet from
properties zoned R-1 Single-Family Residential District and buffered or screened by appropriate
landscape and/or fencing materials.
e. Play areas located adjacent to public right-of-way shall be separated from the
right-of-way by a landscaped yard area of at least 20 feet or a fence that meets the requirements of
§§ 154.080 through 154.092 of this chapter.
3. Educational facilities and religious institutions that may include state-licensed day
care facilities serving more than six persons shall meet the conditions listed in division (B)(1)(a) above
for religious institutions of this section.
4. Public buildings and facilities greater than 1,000 square feet in area, such as water
treatment facilities, wastewater treatment plants, water towers and other similar uses, shall meet the
conditions listed in division (B)(1)(b) above.
5. Home occupations not meeting the definition of a “home occupation”, as found
in § 154.011 of this chapter shall meet the conditions listed in division (B)(1)(c) above.
(d) B - Business/Commercial District.
1. A state-licensed day care facility shall meet the following conditions.
a. The building shall have access on a collector or arterial roadway or be
designed to minimize excessive traffic on local residential streets.
b. The facility must be in compliance with all applicable state licensing
requirements and all applicable City and State Building and Fire Codes.
132 New Germany - Land Usage
c. The parking setbacks shall be the same as required for permitted structures.
d. Outdoor recreation and play areas shall be located a minimum of 20 feet from
properties zoned R-1 Single-Family Residential District and R-2 Multiple-Family Residential District.
e. All maintenance-related equipment shall be kept within an enclosed structure.
f. Play areas located adjacent to public right-of-way shall be separated from the
right-of-way by a landscaped yard area of at least 20 feet or a fence that meets the requirements of
§§ 154.080 through 154.092 of this chapter.
g. Landscaping shall be provided that is in keeping with the neighborhood and
provides screening where appropriate.
2. Outdoor dining areas associated with restaurants and on-sale liquor establishments
shall meet the following conditions:
a. The design and placement of the outdoor dining area shall comply with the
following:
i. Shall not be located to obstruct parking spaces or replace the number of
required parking spaces;
ii. Shall comply with building setback requirements;
iii. Railings or fencing shall be used to surround the outdoor dining area and
access to the outdoor dining area shall be only through the principal building;
iv. Refuse containers shall be provided and periodically patrolled for litter
pickup; and
v. All exterior lighting shall be directed away from any residential property.
b. Outdoor dining may be allowed between the hours of 11:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.
or as established by the City Council as part of issuance a liquor license;
c. Noise levels from the outdoor dining area shall maintain compliance with this
chapter, city ordinances and state law; and
d. Shall be in compliance with of the provisions of the liquor license issued by
the City Council and state law requirements
3. Uses having a drive-up window shall meet the following conditions:
Zoning 133
a. Shall not be located adjacent to any residential lot lines;
b. Shall be provided with a suitable visual screen from adjacent properties; and
c. Stacking for a minimum of two cars per aisle shall be provided within
applicable parking lot setbacks.
4. Telecommunication facilities that exceed 80 feet in height shall meet the following
conditions:
a. New telecommunications antennas must be co-located on existing structures
in the city, unless it can be documented that it is impractical to co-locate on an existing structure because
of:
i. Technical performance;
ii. System coverage or system capacity;
iii. An existing structure cannot support co-location from a structural
engineering standpoint; or
iv. The lease rate of an existing structure is not “rate reasonable”. Rate
reasonable shall mean that the co-location lease rate is not more than 150% of the co-location lease rate
for towers within ten miles, for which the lease rate information can be obtained. The determination that
co-location on an existing structure is not practical because of technical performance, system coverage
or system capacity shall be supported by findings from a qualified engineer.
b. New telecommunication towers shall be designed and constructed to permit
the future co-location of other commercial wireless telecommunication services.
c. The height of a new telecommunication tower shall not be greater than 150
feet in height, unless the applicant demonstrates to the City Council the need for the increased height.
The reason for the increase in height must be supported by findings from a qualified engineer.
d. Telecommunications tower and antenna design shall meet the following
requirements.
i. Towers and antennas shall be located and designed to blend into the
surrounding environment to the maximum extent possible.
ii. Towers shall be of a monopole design unless it is determined that an
alternative design would be appropriate for the particular site or circumstances.
134 New Germany - Land Usage
iii. All towers shall be painted in a color best determined by the city to blend
into the particular environment.
e. Telecommunications tower setbacks shall meet the following.
i. All towers shall be setback from structures, rights-of-way and property
lines at a distance equal to the height of the towers and antennas.
ii. The setbacks may be reduced to a distance agreed upon by the city, if the
applicant for the tower furnishes a registered engineer’s certification that the tower is designed to
collapse or fall within a distance or zone shorter than the total tower height.
iii. The city may waive or modify setback requirements for antennae proposed
to be co-located on existing towers or structures.
f. Telecommunication towers and antennas shall not be illuminated unless
required by the state or any federal agency.
g. The site area for telecommunications towers and accessory facilities shall be
totally fenced in to discourage access by unauthorized persons. The city shall review and approve or
modify all plans for fencing and security measures.
(e) I - Industrial District.
1. Telecommunication facilities that exceed 80 feet in height shall meet the conditions
listed in division (B)(4)(d) above.
2. Permanent outside storage of materials shall meet the following standards.
a. The materials must be utilized in conjunction with the business occurring on
the property.
b. All outdoor storage areas shall be completely screened from roads or
developed areas with a solid fence or a 20-foot wide landscaped area consisting of coniferous plantings
that are a minimum of six feet in height when planted. The fence or landscaped area shall be maintained
in good condition on a continual basis.
c. No outdoor storage areas shall be located closer than 50 feet to any R-1
Single-Family Residential or R-2 Multiple-Family Residential District.
d. All storage areas open to vehicles must be paved with asphalt surfacing,
crushed rock or other dust-free materials.
Zoning 135
e. No outside storage of maintenance equipment, trucks over one and one-half
tons in weight or stockpiling of materials shall be permitted.
3. Adult uses shall meet all requirements of §§ 154.105 through 154.107 of this
chapter.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011)
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
§ 154.080 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this subchapter is to establish minimum standards to guide development in a manner
that promotes a compatible relationship of uses, minimizes pollution and protects public health and
safety; provided, certain standards are maintained to manage the impacts of the development, design and
use of property. Permitted, conditional use, accessory and interim uses within all zoning districts shall
conform to standards within this subchapter.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011)
§ 154.081 TRAFFIC VISIBILITY.
(A) No wall, fence, structure, tree, shrub, vegetation or other obstruction shall be permitted in any
yard or setback which poses a danger to traffic by obscuring the view from any street or roadway.
(B) Visibility from any street or roadway shall be unobstructed above the height of two and one-half
feet within the triangle described as beginning from a point at the paved edge of the intersection, two
sides of which extend a distance of 30 feet along the edge of each street and the third side being a line
connecting the other sides.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.082 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
(A) A building permit is required for any accessory structures as regulated by the Minnesota State
Building Code, as may be amended from time to time.
(B) No accessory buildings or structures shall be permitted on any lot without a principle building,
except as follows:
(1) Fences, in compliance with § 154.084 of this chapter; and
136 New Germany - Land Usage
(2) A temporary construction office for development of the property provided the temporary
construction office shall be removed immediately following completion of the project.
(C) Setbacks shall be a minimum of five feet from all property lines, or as allowed by the zoning
district.
(D) Accessory structures shall not be used as an occupied dwelling unit.
(E) The maximum size of the combined area of all accessory structures on one lot shall not exceed
1,200 square feet.
(F) No pole shed type buildings containing pole style footings and a dirt floor are permitted in any
zoning district.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.083 SWIMMING POOLS.
(A) No swimming pool shall be constructed, erected, repaired or altered without first obtaining the
necessary building, plumbing and/or electrical permits from the city.
(B) Detailed plans and specifications are required to be submitted with permit application for a
swimming pool. Plans shall include details for site excavation, construction, plumbing, electrical and
fencing. The city’s Building Official shall determine the plan detail necessary to obtain permits for
proposed swimming pool construction.
(C) (1) Swimming pools shall meet all yard setback requirements for the zoning district in which
they are located. No part of the pool or deck shall encroach into the required yard.
(2) Water lines to a swimming pool shall not be located closer than ten feet from any sanitary
sewer line or sanitary sewer system.
(3) Swimming pools shall not be located closer than ten feet from any sanitary sewer line.
(4) Swimming pools and pool equipment, such as filters, pumps and heaters, shall not be
located in any front or side yard, except in the A - Agricultural Zoning District.
(5) Discharge from swimming pools shall not overflow onto any adjacent property and must
meet State Pollution Control Agency discharge standards for chlorinated water.
(6) Security fencing for swimming pools shall meet the following requirements:
Zoning 137
(a) All private swimming pools shall be enclosed with five-foot high security fencing
(chain link or decorative) that discourages climbing and all fence gates shall be equipped with
self-closing and self-latching devices. All gates shall have the latch mounted no less than 54 inches above
the walking surface on either side of the gate.
(b) In the A - Agricultural Zoning District, the requirement for security fencing may be
waived for a private swimming pool; provided, the swimming pool is fitted with an automatic safety
cover. The city shall have complete discretion in determining whether a particular proposed automatic
safety cover is adequate to waive the requirement for security fencing. Manufacturer’s detailed
information including the weight resistance shall be submitted with the pool permit application.
(7) Swimming pool construction, operation and maintenance shall be consistent with all federal,
state and city laws and regulations.
(8) All public swimming pools must meet the requirements of the state’s Department of Health
requirements and any other federal, state and local laws and regulations.
(9) Lighting at all outdoor swimming pools shall be shrouded and downcast to minimize
ambient lighting or direct lighting on adjacent property.
(10) The use of any outdoor swimming pool shall not disturb the peace of neighboring properties
or cause a public nuisance.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.084 FENCES.
(A) No property owner shall construct or relocate a permanent fence on his or her property without
first obtaining a fence permit from the city, in accordance with the following.
(1) The applicant for a permanent fence permit shall submit a site plan to the city’s Clerk-
Treasurer showing the location of the fence and describing the type and method of anchoring the fence
on the property.
(2) The city’s Clerk-Treasurer may require the submission of a survey or other information
with the permanent fence permit application to establish the boundary lines of the property on which the
fence will be located.
(B) Electric and barb wire fencing is not allowed on property in any zoning district, except for
property located within the A - Agricultural District.
138 New Germany - Land Usage
(C) Fencing in all zoning districts shall conform to the following.
(1) No fence shall be permitted on a public right-of-way or boulevard area.
(2) Fences shall be located entirely upon the applicant’s property and the applicant shall be
responsible for maintaining any property located between the fence and his or her property line.
(3) Fences located on any corner lot erected within 30 feet of the intersecting curb lines and
shall comply with § 154.081 of this chapter.
(4) Permanent fences shall be constructed and maintained so that the exposed outer surface shall
be uniformly painted or stained and face abutting property.
(5) Temporary snow fencing may be erected from November 1 to April 1 on an annual basis.
(D) Fencing in R-1 Single-Family Residential and R-2 Multiple-Family Residential Districts.
(1) Fences shall not exceed a maximum height of six feet along the side and rear lot lines
behind the front edge of a house and shall not exceed four feet along the side and front lot lines from the
front edge of a house to the street right-of-way.
(2) A fence shall be setback a minimum of two feet from all property lines.
(E) Fencing in B - Business/Commercial and I - Industrial Districts.
(1) No setback is required for fences, except a minimum setback of two feet from the property
line is required abutting any residential zoning district.
(2) Fences shall not exceed a maximum height of six feet, except if abutting any residential
zoning district, the city may permit a maximum height of eight feet; provided, a building permit is
obtained prior to construction.
(F) Fences shall require a survey with property corner stakes.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.085 SEWER AND WATER FACILITIES.
(A) All new development shall be connected to city sanitary sewer and water facilities.
(B) No wells for the purpose of providing domestic water for human household use shall be drilled,
installed or constructed, and no existing well shall be further developed to provide potable water.
Zoning 139
(C) New wells may be drilled for agricultural use, excluding use for a domestic water supply, in
the A - Agricultural District; provided, a permit is obtained from the state.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.086 GRADING AND EROSION CONTROL.
(A) The purpose of this section is to require the preparation and implementation of grading and
erosion control plans for land-disturbing activity to protect, preserve and maintain public and private
property to the extent possible from the adverse impacts of uncontrolled erosion.
(B) A grading permit is required for all land-disturbing activities, except as provided below:
(1) Minor land-disturbance activities such as home gardens and individuals’ landscaping,
repairs and maintenance work;
(2) Construction, installation and maintenance of public or private utility lines or private
service connections to these utilities, except where more than 10,000 square feet of land is anticipated
to be disturbed, or where more than 50 cubic yards of materials are anticipated to be moved in a
activities;
(3) Tilling, planting or harvesting of agricultural or horticultural crops, except where such
practices have resulted in the deposition of sediment into a natural or artificial water storage or retention
area including public waters;
(4) Preparation of land for individual single-family home construction, unless:
(a) The property is part of planned construction within a subdivision development; or
(b) Ten thousand or more square feet of land is anticipated to be disturbed or where 50 or
more cubic yards of materials are anticipated to be moved in such activities.
(5) Disturbed land areas of less than 10,000 square feet in size from any use or where 50 or
more cubic yards of materials are anticipated to be moved in such activities, except where any wetland
areas or public waters are anticipated to be filled or drained;
(6) Installation of fence, sign, utility poles and other kinds of posts or poles; and
(7) Emergency work to protect life, limb or property and emergency repairs; provided, the land
area disturbed is adequately shaped and stabilized when appropriate in accordance with the requirements
of the city.
(C) A grading and erosion control plan is required as part of an application for a grading permit,
preliminary plat or a building permit for an addition or new construction, if at least 50 cubic yards of
material is moved or material is moved from an area or areas encompassing at least 10,000 square feet.
140 New Germany - Land Usage
(D) No person may undertake, authorize or permit any excavating, grading, filling or other change
in the earth’s topography that violates or is not in compliance with a city-approved grading and erosion
control plan or a required grading permit issued by the city, including the approved plans and all terms
and conditions of the permit.
(E) All grading and erosion control activities requiring a permit shall comply with Ch. 152 of this
code of ordinances, the city’s Storm Water Management Plan and other city, county, state and federal
laws and regulations.
(F) (1) All applications for a permit to conduct a land-disturbing activity shall be accompanied by
a Resource Management Plan, a fee established by the city, and a cash escrow to reimburse the city for
any expenses incurred in the review of the application and grading activity.
(2) No developer shall conduct any land-disturbing activity, unless exempted in division (B)
above, prior to receiving an approved permit from the City Council.
(3) After receipt of a complete application for a grading permit, the city shall review the
application and a Resource Management Plan for compatibility with this chapter, Ch. 152 of this code
of ordinances, the city’s Storm Water Management Plan and other city, county, state and federal laws
and regulations. The city may consult with the City Engineer or other city consultants, the county or
state in the review of the submitted information. If the city determines that the proposed activities are
in compliance with all regulations, the city shall approve the application permit.
(G) The Resource Management Plan must comply with all of the following control measures.
(1) All work must conform to Ch. 152 of this code of ordinances, the city’s Storm Water
Management Plan, county requirements, current State Pollution Control Agency rules regarding
protecting water quality in urban areas and current best management practices.
(2) If permits are required for land-disturbing and water management activities from the county
or the state, those permits must be on file with the city before construction activity begins. Any signs
that are required must be posted in public view.
(3) The work must be scheduled so as to minimize the amount of soil exposed at any one time.
(4) Temporary rock construction driveways may be required wherever vehicles enter and exit
the property.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.087 SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT.
(A) The purpose of this section is to promote, preserve and enhance the water resources within the
city and to protect them from the adverse effects of development or activities by regulating landZoning
141
disturbing or development activities that would have an adverse effect and potentially irreversible impact
on water quality and water quantity.
(B) All new development shall comply with the provisions of Ch. 152 of this code of ordinances,
the city’s Surface Water Management Plan, county, state and federal requirements.
(C) Storm water for new development shall be managed in accordance with the National Urban
Runoff Program standards for the design of new storm water ponds and the state’s Pollution Control
Agency’s Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas to reduce non-point source pollutant loadings in
storm water runoff.
(D) Existing natural drainageways, natural water storage or retention areas and vegetated soil
surfaces should be used to the greatest extent possible to store, filter and retain storm water runoff before
discharge occurs into any public waters.
(E) When natural features and vegetation are not available to handle storm water runoff, constructed
facilities such as diversions, settling basins, skimming devices, dikes and human-made waterways and
ponds may be used. Preference shall be given to designs using surface drainage, vegetation and
infiltration rather than buried pipes and human-made materials and facilities.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.088 WETLAND CONSERVATION.
(A) The purpose of this section is to preserve and protect wetlands within and around the city in
accordance with the requirements of the Wetland Conservation Act, as established in M.S. Ch. 103G,
as may be amended, and the accompanying rules of the state’s Board of Water and Soil Resources
established in Minn. Rules Ch. 8420, as may be amended.
(B) The following regulations shall apply to all wetland areas within the city.
(1) All development within the city shall comply with the requirements of Ch. 152 of this code
of ordinances, the city’s Storm Water Management Plan and county wetland information and
requirements.
(2) Prior to approval of any development affecting wetlands, a grading plan is required that
includes wetland delineations prepared in accordance with the city’s Storm Water Management Plan and
county requirements.
(3) New development around existing wetland areas shall maintain a minimum vegetated buffer
region around the delineated wetland boundary in accordance with the following.
(a) The buffer area shall consist of a “natural” area that will contain undisturbed
vegetation, to the extent reasonable.
142 New Germany - Land Usage
(b) In the event that disturbance of the buffer area is necessary for site grading, the buffer
area shall be restored at a slope no greater than five to one (5:1) and re-seeded with a native seed mix
approved by the city.
(c) The width of the required buffer will be dependent on the wetland value as determined
by the functional value assessment performed at the time of wetland delineation. The functional value
assessment will be reviewed and approved by the county and the city.
(C) (1) The wetland buffers shall be established according to the wetland value, as follows:
Wetland Value Minimum Buffer Width
Low 25 feet
Medium and high 35 feet
Exceptional 50 feet
(2) All newly constructed wetlands shall have a minimum 35-foot wide vegetated buffer region,
regardless of type of wetland replaced.
(3) The buffer region shall consist of a “natural” area with planted materials for vegetated
buffers recommended by the state’s Board of Water and Soil Resources or city-approved seed mix.
(4) The wetland buffer shall not be routinely maintained or mowed by the landowner.
(5) Wetland monument signs stating; “wetland buffer - no mow, no fill” shall be posted along
the buffer boundary at a minimum of every other lot corner.
(6) The following minimum setbacks are established from the edge of the buffer area:
(a) Principal building: 35 feet; and
(b) Accessory building: ten feet.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.089 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
(A) General.
(1) No change of use, tenancy or occupancy of a parcel of land or building, including
construction of a new building or an addition to a building, which requires additional parking spaces,
shall be allowed until additional parking is approved and furnished.
Zoning 143
(2) Existing off-street parking spaces shall not be reduced in numbers unless the number of
remaining parking stalls meets the requirements of this section for the existing use.
(3) Required parking facilities accessory to residential structures in a residentially zoned district
shall not be used for the storage of commercial vehicles, except as permitted by this chapter.
(4) Required off-street parking spaces shall not be utilized for the open storage of materials or
for the storage of vehicles that are inoperable.
(5) Required off-street parking in residential zoning districts shall be on the same lot as the
principal building.
(6) In all residential districts, parking of vehicles shall be prohibited in any portion of the
property, except designated driveways.
(B) Parking setback requirements.
Location B - Business/
Commercial
District
I - Industrial
District
Abutting any residential zoning district lot line 10 feet 20 feet
Across the street from a residential zoning
district
Not applicable 20 feet
Interior, side or rear lot line 5 feet 5 feet
Street right-of-way line 8 feet 10 feet
(C) Dimensional requirements.
(1) The dimension of each parking space shall be not less than nine feet wide and 20 feet in
length and shall be clearly marked.
(2) The minimum required aisle width for accessing parking stalls is as follows:
Angle of Parking Stall Aisle Width
90-degree stall 24-foot aisle width
60-degree stall 18-foot aisle width
45-degree stall 13-foot aisle width
30-degree stall 10-foot aisle width
144 New Germany - Land Usage
(D) Parking space requirements.
(1) Calculating the number of spaces shall be in accordance with the following.
(a) If the number of off-street parking spaces results in a fraction, each fraction of one-half
or more shall constitute another space.
(b) In religious institutions and other places of public assembly in which patrons or
spectators occupy benches, pews or other similar seating facilities, each 24 inches of seating shall be
counted as one seat for the purpose of this section.
(2) Except where joint parking arrangements have been approved by the city, if a structure
contains two or more uses, each use shall be calculated separately in determining the total number of
required off-street parking spaces.
(3) The city may allow reductions in the number of parking spaces constructed on the property
provided a proof of future parking plan showing the location for all minimum required parking spaces
in conformance with applicable setback requirements is submitted and approved by the city. The city may
require the property owner to install additional parking spaces whenever the need arises.
(4) The following minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be provided and
maintained by ownership, easement and/or lease for each respective use:
Automobile repair, service or gas A minimum of 3 outside spaces, plus 2 stations’ spaces for each
enclosed service stall, and 1 space for each 250 square feet of
gross building area used for the sale of goods or services
Educational institutions, elementary and junior
high
1 space for each classroom, plus 1 additional space for each 100
student capacity
Educational institutions, high schools 1 space for each classroom, plus 1 additional space for 5 students
based on design capacity
Hotels and motels 1 space per unit, plus 1 additional space for each 4 units
Licensed day care facility 1 space for each 6 children based on the licensed capacity of the
facility
Manufacturing, assembly, fabricating or
processing
3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 space
for each company vehicle stored on the property
Multiple-family dwellings (apartments and
condominiums)
2 spaces per unit, plus additional spaces shall be provided for
visitor parking based on the specific characteristics of the
development and the anticipated demand for visitor spaces
Zoning 145
Multiple-family housing developments designed
for senior citizens
1 space per unit and the city may require proof of parking of 2
spaces per unit if conversion to general housing appears possible;
the visitor parking requirements for multiple-family dwellings
shall apply
Office buildings or uses, including banks and
other service uses
1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area
Religious institutions, funeral homes and places of
assembly
1 space for each 3 seats based on the design capacity of the main
sanctuary or assembly space
Residences (single-family, double-family and
townhouse dwellings)
2 spaces per unit
Restaurants and on-sale liquor establishments 1 space for every 3 seats
Retail sales 4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor space, less storage
space
Warehousing and storage 3 spaces, plus 1 for each 2,000 square feet of gross floor area
(5) The parking requirement for uses not listed in this subpart may be established by the city
based on the characteristics and information on parking demand for the use.
(E) Drive-up facilities. Businesses containing drive-up facilities, including restaurants and financial
institutions, shall provide a stacking area for vehicles on the site in accordance with the following.
(1) A minimum of three vehicle spaces per staking lane shall be provided.
(2) All stacking lanes shall be entirely on the property and shall be in addition to parking spaces
required for the principal use.
(3) The vehicle stacking area shall not extend beyond the street right-of-way line and shall be
delineated in a manner that vehicles waiting in line will not interfere with, nor obstruct, the primary
driving, parking and pedestrian facilities on the property.
(F) Parking area design.
(1) All parking, loading and driveway areas shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete or
equivalent material approved by the city. The city may require the submittal of a grading and drainage
plan for new parking areas containing more than four spaces for review by the City Engineer. Catch
basins, sumps and underground storm sewers may be required.
(2) Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall be shaded or diffused to
reflect the light away from adjoining property, abutting residential uses and public rights-of-way.
(3) All off-street parking areas shall be designed and constructed with a means of vehicular
access to a public street.
146 New Germany - Land Usage
(4) In the B - Business/Commercial District and I - Industrial District, all off-street parking
areas shall be equipped with curbing to prevent any vehicle from encroaching into the required setback
area and to control drainage.
(G) Driveway requirements.
(1) The distance from a driveway to the intersection of two or more streets shall be not less
than 25 feet.
(2) Curb cuts to local public streets shall require a permit from the city and shall be a minimum
of five feet from the side lot tine in all zoning districts.
(3) Permits for driveways to any county road must be obtained from the county prior to
issuance of any building or grading permits for property that access county roads. A turnaround is
required on driveways that access a county road.
(4) Access driveways for residential dwellings shall not exceed 24 feet in width as measured
along the property line. All other access driveways shall not exceed 30 feet wide as measured along the
property line unless otherwise recommended by the City or County Engineer.
(H) Off-street loading and unloading.
(1) All required loading berths shall be located off-street and shall be located on the same lot
as the building or use to be served.
(2) A loading berth shall not be located less than 25 feet from the intersection of two street
rights-of-way, nor less than 50 feet from residential property unless screened by plantings or a fence.
(3) Loading berths shall not occupy the required front yard setback area.
(4) Any loading berth or access drive shall not be used for storage of goods, inoperable
vehicles or to satisfy the required number of parking spaces for the property.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.090 SIGNS.
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish reasonable regulations to govern the
placement, design and lighting of signs and other related informational devices within the city. The sign
regulations are not intended to restrict, limit or control the content or message of signs. Specifically, the
sign regulations are intended to:
(1) Regulate the number, location, size, type, illumination and other physical characteristics
of signs in order to promote the public health, safety and welfare, and pleasing visual appearance of the
city;
Zoning 147
(2) Maintain, enhance and improve the visual appearance of the city while providing for
effective means of communication, consistent with constitutional guarantees and the city’s goals for
public safety and aesthetics;
(3) To encourage creative and well-designed signs that contribute to the effective use of signs
as a means of communication; and
(4) To protect, conserve, and enhance property values.
(B) General provisions.
(1) Signs existing on the effective date of this chapter that do not conform to the regulations
established in this section are non-conforming and are regulated according to § 154.010 of this chapter.
(2) The following are the setback and height regulations for all permanent signs unless
specifically modified by this section.
(a) The setbacks of all signs shall be the same as the principal building setbacks for the
zoning district in which the sign is located.
(b) The height of all signs shall not exceed the height of the principal building on the
property.
(3) (a) Signs are prohibited within the public right-of-way, except for the following:
1. Public identification, directional or traffic-control signs; and
2. A temporary banner or decoration approved by the city for a period of time not
to exceed 60 days in accordance with state law requirements.
(b) Illuminated flashing signs;
(c) Any sign, device, lamp or light which is so constructed, operated or used that
illumination emanating there from is concentrated or beamed; and
(d) Off-premises signs.
(4) Unpainted signs, broken signs and signs on vacated buildings shall be repaired in
compliance with this chapter or removed from the premises on order of the City Council.
148 New Germany - Land Usage
(C) Sign permits.
(1) No permanent or temporary sign shall be erected, altered, reconstructed, maintained or
moved in the city without first obtaining a permit from the city, except a permit shall not be required for
the following signs:
(a) Signs that do not exceed six square feet;
(b) Signs erected by a governmental agency; and
(c) The changing of the copy on the surface or face of a sign structure.
(2) An application for a permit shall contain the following information:
(a) The name and address of the applicant, owners of the sign and the address at which
the sign is to be placed;
(b) A sign plan that shows the location, setbacks, size, the type (i.e., wall sign, monument
sign and the like) and the sign design; and
(c) A fee as established by the City Council.
(3) The city’s Clerk-Treasurer shall issue a permit within 30 days following the receipt of a
complete application to the city.
(D) Permanent signs.
(1) Within the A - Agricultural, R-1 Single-Family Residential, R-2 Multiple-Family
Residential Districts and the residential portions of PUD - Planned Unit Development Districts, the
following signs are permitted:
(a) One wall sign for each dwelling which shall not exceed two square feet in area per
surface;
(b) One free-standing sign for each permitted or conditional use other than a single-family
detached double-family residential dwelling, home occupation or community boathouse which shall not
exceed 32 square feet in area per surface; and
(c) Symbols, statues, sculptures and integrated architectural features on non-residential
buildings may be illuminated by floodlights; provided, the direct source of light is not visible from the
public right-of-way or adjacent residential property.
(2) Within the B - Business/Commercial, I - Industrial and commercial/industrial portions of
PUD - Planned Unit Development Districts, the following signs are permitted:
Zoning 149
(a) Free-standing signs: one free-standing sign is allowed per lot in accordance with the
following.
1. The maximum height of the sign shall not exceed 15 feet or the height of the
principal building, whichever is greater.
2. The maximum sign area shall not exceed 32 square feet.
3. Signs may be illuminated; provided that, the source of lighting is shielded to
prevent visibility of the light source by translucent material, diffusion or placement to prevent glare.
(b) Wall signs.
1. For single tenant buildings, one wall sign shall be permitted per building, except
for buildings located on a corner lot where one wall sign shall be permitted per road frontage, not to
exceed two wall signs per building.
2. For multi-tenant buildings, one wall sign per tenant space is permitted.
3. Wall signs shall meet the following requirements.
a. A maximum of 10% of the building face or 32 square feet, whichever is less,
may be used for a wall sign.
b. Wall signs shall not project above the roof line.
c. Wall signs may be illuminated provided that the source of lighting is shielded
to prevent visibility of the light source by translucent material, diffusion or placement to prevent glare.
(c) Awning signs.
1. One awning sign shall be allowed per lot; provided, the sign area of the awning
does not exceed eight square feet.
2. The sign area of any awning sign shall reduce, square foot for square foot, the sign
area of any permitted wall signs on the same building face.
(E) Temporary signs.
(1) Temporary signs less than six square feet in area may be displayed for no longer than 30
days for occupied premises and in the case of unoccupied properties, indefinitely until the premises is
occupied.
150 New Germany - Land Usage
(2) Temporary signs more than six square feet in area, but less than 32 square feet in area may
be displayed no longer than 30 days.
(3) Temporary signage for projects under construction within R-2 Multiple-Family Residential,
B - Business/Commercial, I - Industrial and the PUD - Planned Unit Development Districts shall comply
with the following.
(a) One temporary sign no more than 32 square feet in area may be installed at a
construction site for the period of the construction.
(b) The temporary sign must be removed within ten days of issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for the property.
(c) The temporary sign shall be located within the front yard of the property under
construction and shall be setback a minimum of 15 feet from the front lot line..
(F) Signs containing non-commercial speech.
(1) During even numbered years, all signs of any size containing non-commercial speech may
be posted in any number from 46 days before the state primary until ten days following the state general
election.
(2) For a special election, all signs of any size containing non-commercial speech may be
posted in any number between 30 days before and until ten days after a special election.
(3) Signs containing non-commercial speech signs must comply with the fair campaign practices
specified in M.S. Ch. 211B, as may be amended.
(G) Design and maintenance standards.
(1) All signs shall be constructed in accordance with the following:
(a) The Minnesota State Building Code, as applicable to each sign;
(b) All electric signs shall be approved and labeled as conforming to the standards of the
Underwriters’ Laboratories, Inc., the Federal Bureau of Standards or other similar institutions of
recognized standing. All illuminating elements shall be kept in working condition or immediately
repaired or replaced. Signs that are partly illuminated shall meet all electrical requirements for that
portion which is illuminated;
(c) All permanent free-standing signs shall have self-supporting structures erected on and
permanently attached to concrete foundations;
Zoning 151
(d) For wall signs, the wall must be designed for and have sufficient strength to support
the sign; and
(e) Signs shall be constructed to withstand applicable wind loads.
(2) All signs shall be maintained in a safe, presentable and good structural condition at all
times, including the replacement of defective parts, cleaning and other items required for maintenance
of the sign. Vegetation around, in front of, behind and underneath the base of ground signs for distance
of ten feet shall be neatly trimmed and free of weeds and no rubbish or debris that would constitute a fire
or health hazard shall be permitted under or near the sign.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.091 POLLUTION CONTROL AND NUISANCES.
(A) (1) Noises emanating from any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the standards
of the state’s Pollution Control Agency.
(2) Vibrations from all uses established after the effective date of this chapter shall comply with
the following:
(a) Shall be operated in a manner to prevent vibration discernable at any point beyond the
lot line of the property on which such use is located; and
(b) Ground vibration and noise caused by motor vehicles, trains, aircraft operations or
temporary construction or demolition shall be exempt from these regulations.
(B) No use shall produce or emit smoke, dust or particulate matter exceeding applicable regulations
established by the state’s Pollution Control Agency.
(C) No use or operation shall emit a concentration of toxic or noxious matter across the property
line which exceeds applicable regulations of the state’s Pollution Control Agency.
(D) No use shall produce unreasonable or disturbing odors beyond the property line exceeding
applicable regulations established by the state’s Pollution Control Agency.
(E) No use shall produce any unreasonable, disturbing or unnecessary emissions of heat or humidity
beyond the property line which cause material distress, discomfort or injury to persons of ordinary
sensitivity.
(F) No operation that produces radiation and other health hazards shall be conducted which exceeds
the standards established by applicable regulations of the state’s Department of Health.
152 New Germany - Land Usage
(G) All uses shall be subject to the fire prevention requirements of the city and applicable
regulations established by the state’s Pollution Control Agency.
(H) All uses shall be subject to applicable regulations of the city, county, the Metropolitan Council
and state governing discharge of liquid and solid waste material into a public storm or sanitary sewer,
waterway or stream.
(I) The city finds it necessary to provide for the regulation of businesses or commercial enterprises
which operate as massage parlors, saunas, rap parlors, conversation parlors, adult sensitivity groups,
adult encounter groups, escort services, dancing services, hostess services and similar adult uses
operating under different names in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and to guard
against the inception and transmission of disease. The city further finds that commercial enterprises such
as the type described above, and all other similar establishments whose services include sessions offered
to adults, conducted in private by members of the same or the opposite sex and employing personnel with
no specialized training, are susceptible to operating in a manner contravening, subverting or endangering
the morals of the community by being sites of acts of prostitution, illicit sex and occurrences of violent
crimes, thus requiring close inspection, licensing and regulation.
(J) The city finds that control and regulation of commercial enterprises of these types, in view of
the abuses often perpetrated, require intensive police and public health efforts by the city and local
governmental units contracting with the city to provide such services. As a consequent, the concentrated
use of the services in the control detracts from and reduces the level of services.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.092 SOLAR ELECTRIC SYSTEMS.
(A) Solar electric systems require an interim use permit in all zoning districts.
(B) Wholesale solar electric systems shall be limited to the I - Industrial District.
(C) Retail solar electric systems in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District and R-2 Multiple-
Family Residential District shall be limited to roof top systems. Roof top solar electric systems shall be
mounted parallel to the plane of the roof, shall not extend more than one foot above the plane of the roof,
shall not be located any closer than three feet from any side, top or bottom edge of the roof, and shall
not occupy more 75% of the area of the roof plane it is affixed to.
(D) Retail solar electric systems located in the A - Agricultural District, B -Business/Commercial
District and I-Industrial District may include roof top systems and ground mounted systems. Rooftop
systems shall not project more than four feet above the plane of the roof nor be located closer than six
feet from the outer edge of the roof top. Ground mounted systems shall not exceed 15 feet in height,
shall not be located in any required front yard area, shall not be located closer than 15 feet to a side or
Zoning 153
rear yard and shall not be located closer than 100 feet to an existing adjacent residence. Ground mounted
systems shall not exceed 10% lot coverage or 10,000 square feet, whichever is less. Square footage is
calculated by the area encumbered by the outermost measurements of the solar equipment layout.
(E) Wholesale solar electric systems shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from roadways and a
minimum of 50 feet from all property lines. The maximum height of wholesale solar electric system
equipment, structures and accessory appurtenances shall not exceed 15 feet. Wholesale solar electric
systems shall be enclosed by a minimum six-foot high security fence.
(F) Wholesale solar electric systems shall not be lighted, except for shrouded, downcast security
lights on major equipment or storage buildings. Signage shall be limited to equipment labeling, security
warnings and messages, entrance identification and directional signs and a single site identification sign.
No individual sign shall exceed 36 square feet in area or extend more than 15 feet in height.
(G) No solar energy equipment or solar electric systems shall create or cause unreasonable glare
on other property or public roadways. Unreasonable glare shall mean a public safety hazard as
determined by the Board of Supervisors or the appropriate roadway authority.
(H) No solar electric system shall create or constitute a public nuisance, as regulated in this chapter.
(I) Electric power lines within all ground mounted solar electric systems shall be buried
underground.
(J) All solar energy systems, supporting structures or other buildings shall be consistent with
applicable State Building Codes, State Electrical Codes, State Fire Codes and State Plumbing Codes.
(K) All applicable solar energy equipment shall be certified by either the Underwriters Laboratories
(UL) or Canadian Electrical Code (CSA 22.1) or the Solar Rating and Certification Corporation (SRCC)
for thermal systems.
(L) All solar electric systems unused, abandoned or inoperable for more than 12 months shall be
removed by the system owner or the property owner. The property shall be returned to a condition
comparable to that prior to the installation of the solar energy system.
(M) In addition to the site plan review application submittal requirements, solar electric system
applications shall include the following details:
(1) Grading plan;
(2) Location of access roads;
(3) Locations of overhead and underground electric lines;
(4) Dimensions, location and spacing of PV panels;
154 New Germany - Land Usage
(5) Description of the racking method, including fixed or tracking technology;
(6) Description and location of buildings, inverters, transformers, disconnects and combiners
and other structures and equipment;
(7) Typical elevations or photos of sample solar arrays;
(8) Site lighting and signage;
(9) Decommissioning plan and site restoration plan, including financial assurances; and
(10) Fire Department access.
(N) Fencing, landscaping and other screening shall be required for any ground-mounted solar
electric system. Deviations from dimensional standards (including setbacks) may be considered through
public hearing procedures for permitting, based upon mitigation of off-site impacts through fencing,
landscaping, screening or other mitigation measures.
(O) All ground mounted solar electric systems shall prepare a storm water management plan
consistent with the county’s Watershed Management Organization requirements. Any site grading shall
be accompanied by an erosion and sedimentation control plan consistent with best management practices
for control components.
(P) All permit applications for ground-mounted solar electric systems shall include a description
of the vegetation or material under the solar system components and the method of ground care and
vegetative maintenance.
(Ord. 100A, passed - -2016; Ord. 100B, passed - -2018) Penalty, see § 10.99
ADULT USES
§ 154.105 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this subchapter is to make available to the rest of the community and thereby
diminishes the ability of the city to promote the general health, welfare, morals and safety of the
community. The city finds that the regulations of this chapter will protect property values, eliminate or
reduce blight, prevent deterioration of neighborhoods, prevent the exodus of residents and businesses
from city neighborhoods and prevent the increase of crime and juvenile delinquency.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011)
Zoning 155
§ 154.106 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ADULT USE. Includes adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult motion picture rental,
adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult massage parlors, adult steam room/bathhouse/sauna facilities,
adult companionship establishments, adult rap/conversation parlors, adult health/sport clubs, adult
cabarets, adult novelty businesses, adult motion picture arcades, adult modeling studios, adult
hotels/motels, adult body painting studios and other premises, enterprises, establishments, businesses
or places open to some or all members of the public, at or in which there is an emphasis on the
presentation, display, depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas” (as such terms and phrases are defined below) which are capable of being seen by members of
the public.
(1) SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
(a) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus
or female breast(s) below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
(b) Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely
covered.
(2) SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
(a) Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal
copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the
context of a sexual relationship or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship
and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia,
cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty;
(b) Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal or
tumescence;
(c) Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation;
(d) Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast;
(e) Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, clad in undergarments
or in sexually revealing costumes, and who are engaged in activities involving the flagellation, torture,
fettering, binding or other physical restraint of any such persons;
(f) Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually-oriented contact with an animal by
a human being; or
156 New Germany - Land Usage
(g) Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation
ADULT USE - ACCESSORY. A use, business, or establishment having 10% or less of its stock in
trade or floor area allocated to, or 20% or less of its gross receipts derived from movie rentals, magazine
sales or sales of other merchandise in which there is an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas”.
ADULT USE - PRINCIPAL. A use, business or establishment having more than 10% of its stock
in trade or floor area allocated to, or more than 20% of its gross receipts derived from, any adult use.
ADULT USE - BODY PAINTING STUDIO. An establishment or business which provides the
service of applying paint or other substance, whether transparent or non-transparent, to or on the body
of a patron when such body is wholly or partially nude in terms of “specified anatomical areas”.
ADULT USE - BOOKSTORE. A building or portion of a building used for the barter, rental or sale
of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audio tape, videotape or motion picture
file if the building or portion of a building is not open to the public generally, but only to one or more
classes of the public excluding any minor by reason of age and if a substantial or significant portion of
such items are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.
ADULT USE - CABARET. A building or portion of a building used for providing dancing or other
live entertainment, if the building or portion of a building excludes minors by virtue of age and if the
dancing or other live entertainment is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the presentation,
display, depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.
ADULT USE - COMPANIONSHIP ESTABLISHMENT. A companionship establishment, which
excludes minors by reason of age and which provides the service of engaging in or listening to
conversation, talk or discussion between an employee of the establishment, and a customer, if the service
is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas”.
ADULT USE - CONVERSATION/RAP PARLOR. A conversation/rap parlor which excludes
minors by reason of age and which provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk
or discussion, if the service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.
ADULT USE - HEALTH/SPORT CLUB. A health/sport club which excludes minors by reason of
age and if the club is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas”.
ADULT USE - HOTEL OR MOTEL. A hotel or motel from which minors are specifically excluded
from patronage and wherein material in presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
Zoning 157
on matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas”.
ADULT USE - MASSAGE PARLOR, HEALTH CLUB. A massage parlor or health club which
restricts minors by reason of age and which provides the services of massage, if such service is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas”.
ADULT USE - MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A building or portion of a building with
a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material if such building or portion of a building
as a prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of age and if such material is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” for
observation by patrons therein.
ADULT USE - MODELING STUDIO. An establishment whose major business is the provision,
to customers, of figure models who are so provided with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or
sexual gratification to such customers and who engage in “specified sexual activities” or display
“specified anatomical areas” while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured,
photographed or otherwise depicted by the customers.
ADULT USE - MOTION PICTURE ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted or
invited wherein coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled or
operated still or motor picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to
show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed
are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing “specified sexual activities”
or “specified anatomical areas”.
ADULT USE - MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A building or portion of a building with a capacity
of 50 or more persons used for presenting material if the building or portion of a building as a prevailing
practice excludes minors by virtue of age and if the material is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” for observation by patrons
therein.
ADULT USE - NOVELTY BUSINESS. A business which has as a principal activity the sale of
devices which stimulate human genitals or devices which are designed for sexual stimulation.
ADULT USE - SAUNA. A sauna which excludes minors by reason of age and which provides a
steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxation or reducing, utilizing steam
or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided by the sauna is distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.
ADULT USE - STEAM ROOM/BATHHOUSE FACILITY. A building or portion of a building used
for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation
158 New Germany - Land Usage
or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent if the building or portion
of a building restricts minors by reason of age and if the service provided by the steam room/bathhouse
facility is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas”.
EDUCATIONAL FACILITY. A public school as defined in M.S. § 120A.05, as it may be amended
from time to time, or a non-public school or a non-sectarian non-public school, as defined in M.S.
§ 123B.41, as it may be amended from time to time.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. A building or structure, or group of buildings or structures, which
by design and construction are primarily intended for the conducting of organized religious services and
associated accessory uses.
YOUTH FACILITY. A public playground, park, public swimming pool, public library or licensed
day care facility.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011)
§ 154.107 ADULT USES.
(A) Purpose. The nature of adult uses is such that they are recognized as having adverse secondary
characteristics, particularly when they are accessible to minors and located near residential property or
related residential uses such as schools, day care centers, libraries or parks. Furthermore, the nature of
adult uses requires that they not be allowed within certain zoning districts or within minimum distances
from each other or residential uses. Special regulation of adult uses is necessary to ensure that the
adverse secondary effects do not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding property
and lessening of its value.
(B) General. Adult uses, as defined in this subchapter, shall be subject to the following general
provisions.
(1) Adult uses, either principal or accessory, shall be prohibited from locating in any building
which is also utilized for residential purposes.
(2) Adult uses, either principal or accessory, shall be prohibited from locating in any place
which is also used to dispense or consume alcoholic beverages.
(3) An adult use which does not qualify as an accessory use pursuant to division (D) below
shall be classified as an adult use - principal.
Zoning 159
(C) Adult uses - principal.
(1) Adult use - principal shall be located at least 1,000 feet, as measured in a straight line from
the closest point of the property line of the building upon which the adult use-principal is located, from
the property line of:
(a) A licensed day care center;
(b) A public or private educational facility classified as a preschool, or an elementary,
junior high or senior high school;
(c) A public library;
(d) A public park;
(e) Another adult use - principal;
(f) An on-sale liquor establishment;
(g) Any religious institution or related facility or organization; or
(h) Any residential property.
(2) Adult use - principal activities will be allowed only by conditional use permit in the
industrial land use category as specified in the Comprehensive Plan and the I - Industrial District as
specified in this chapter.
(3) Adult use - principal activities, as defined by this chapter, shall be classified as one use.
No two adult uses - principal shall be located in the same building or upon the same property and each
use shall be subject to this chapter.
(4) Adult use - principal shall adhere to the following sign regulations.
(a) Sign messages shall be generic, not graphic in nature and shall only identify the type
of business which is being conducted.
(b) Sign messages shall not contain material classified as advertising.
(c) Signs shall comply with the requirements of size and number for the district in which
they are located.
(5) Adult use - principal shall be limited to 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. for its hours of operation.
A differing time schedule may be approved by the city if it can be satisfactorily demonstrated by the
operator to the city that extended operational hours:
160 New Germany - Land Usage
(a) Will not adversely impact or affect uses or activities within 1,000 feet;
(b) Will not result in increased policing and related service calls; and
(c) Are critical to the operation of the business.
(D) Adult uses - accessory.
(1) Adult use - accessory shall:
(a) Comprise no more than ten percent of the floor area of the establishment in which it
is located.
(b) Comprise no more than 20 percent of the gross receipts of the entire business
operation.
(c) Not involve or include any activity except the sale or rental of merchandise.
(2) Adult use - accessory shall be located at least 1,000 feet, as measured in a straight line from
the closest point of the property line of the building upon which the adult use - principal is located, from
the property line of:
(a) A licensed day care center;
(b) A public or private educational facility classified as a preschool, or an elementary,
junior high or senior high school;
(c) A public library;
(d) A public park;
(e) Another adult use - principal;
(f) An on-sale liquor establishment;
(g) Any religious institution or related facility or organization; or
(h) Any residential property.
(3) Adult use - accessory shall be restricted from and prohibit access to minors by the physical
separation of such items from areas of general public access:
(a) Movie rentals. Display areas shall be restricted from general view and shall be located
within a separate room, the access of which is in clear view and under the control of the persons
responsible for the operation of the business.
Zoning 161
(b) Magazines. Publications classified or qualifying as adult uses shall not be physically
accessible to minors and shall be covered with a wrapper or other means to prevent display of any
material other than the publication title.
(c) Other use. Adult uses - accessory not specifically cited shall comply with the intent of
this section, subject to the approval of the city.
(4) Adult use - accessory shall be prohibited from both internal and external advertising and
signing of adult materials and products.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-15-2011)
162 New Germany - Land Usage