1-2-1
Resolution 2018-046, Adopted March 20, 2018
CHAPTER 1
TITLE 2
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
ORDINANCE NO. 2
(Cite as e.g.)
(SCOTT COUNTY
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE NO. 2
ADMINISTERED BY
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH
1-2-2
Resolution 2018-046, Adopted March 20, 2018
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1.00 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.......................................................................................................... 3
2.00 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS....................................................................................................3
3.00 DEFINITIONS...................................................................................................................................... 4
4.00 GENERAL PROVISIONS.................................................................................................................. 7
5.00 SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITIES......................................................................................10
6.00 OTHER WASTE FACILITIES......................................................................................................... 14
7.00 SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTATION....................................................... 15
8.00 RECYCLING...................................................................................................................................... 20
9.00 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.................................................................................................... 21
10.00 SEVERABILITY............................................................................................................................ 22
11.00 VARIANCES.................................................................................................................................. 22
12.00 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS................................................................................................22
13.00 FEE ON OPERATORS OF DISPOSAL FACILITIES..............................................................22
14.00 SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL PROHIBITION............................................................................. 24
15.00 SOLID WASTE DEPOSIT DISCLOSURE................................................................................ 24
16.00 VOLUME BASED FEES.............................................................................................................. 25
17.00 PROBLEM MATERIALS............................................................................................................. 25
18.00 INDEMNIFICATION AND COST RECOVERY.........................................................................26
19.00 EFFECTIVE DATE........................................................................................................................26
1-2-3
Resolution 2018-046, Adopted March 20, 2018
1.00 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.
1.01 Purpose. An ordinance establishing standards for and regulating the operation of
solid waste management activities, sites and facilities in Scott County, Minnesota;
requiring a license for the establishment and operation of solid waste management
activities, sites and facilities; establishing requirements for certain facilities on a
disposal site, for control of special solid wastes and for fire protection; providing for
an enforcement agency, requirement of financial assurance and penalties for lack of
compliance with these provisions; and requiring a license for persons who provide a
service of collecting and transporting solid waste and recyclables; in order to
promote the health, welfare and safety of the public.
1.02 Authority. This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to Minn. Stat. Chs. 473; 400.08;
115A; 116 and 145.
2.00 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.
2.01 Administrative Procedures. Except to the extent superseded by this Ordinance,
all of the provisions of the Scott County Administrative Procedures Ordinance No.
13 relating to: definitions; license and permit provisions; administration of the
Ordinance; license application and processing; suspensions and revocations;
variances; separability; provisions cumulative; and no consent, shall apply as if fully
set forth herein.
2.02 Administration of Ordinance. The Environmental Health Department shall be
responsible for the administration of this Ordinance. Its duties shall include, but not
be limited to, the following:
A. Review and consider all license applications submitted to the Department for the
operation of solid waste management activities, sites or facilities within the
County, and after consideration, to recommend in writing with documentation to
the County Board that a license be granted or denied.
B. Inspect solid waste management activities, sites and facilities as herein provided
and to investigate complaints of violations of this Ordinance.
C. Recommend, when necessary, to the County Attorney’s Department that legal
proceedings be initiated against licensees of certain solid waste activities, sites
or facilities to compel compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance or to
abate the operation of the same.
D. Encourage and conduct studies, investigations and research relating to aspects
of solid waste management such as methodology, chemical and physical
considerations and engineering.
E. Advise, consult and cooperate with other governmental agencies and the
various offices of Scott County.
1-2-4
Resolution 2018-046, Adopted March 20, 2018
F. Employ qualified personnel to assist County staff in the supervision,
administration and enforcement of this Ordinance.
G. Conduct routine inspections and evaluations of solid waste activities, sites or
facilities in such frequency as to insure compliance with the provisions of this
Ordinance. The licensee shall be provided with written and documented notice
of any violations of this Ordinance, recommendations for their correction and the
date when these violations shall be corrected. The licensee shall be required to
allow free access to the Department, County Board, or to the proper
representative of any other governmental agency at any time for the purpose of
making such inspections as may be necessary to determine compliance with the
requirements of this Ordinance, or any other applicable statute, ordinance or
regulation, or for the purpose of making written and documented notice of any
violations of this Ordinance, recommendations for their correction and the date
when these violations shall be corrected.
2.03 Compliance. No person shall accept, handle or transport solid waste or cause,
permit or allow real or personal property under their control to be used for solid
waste management purposes, except in full compliance with the provisions of this
Ordinance. Compliance with the conditions of this ordinance does not preclude nor
relieve compliance with any other applicable Federal, State or local rule, regulation
or requirement. Whenever two regulatory standards appear to conflict, the more
stringent shall apply. The standards, rules and regulations of the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) shall apply to all solid waste facility licenses and
activities within Scott County.
2.04 Conditions. Violation of any conditions imposed by the County on a license, permit
or variance, shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance and subject to the penalty
provisions set forth in this Ordinance.
2.05 Promotion of Public Health, Safety and General Welfare.
A. For purposes of protecting and providing for public health, safety and welfare,
the County Board may impose additional requirements consistent with the intent
of this Ordinance for the operation of solid waste activities, sites or facilities.
B. Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this Ordinance are either
more restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provision of
this Ordinance or any other applicable law, ordinance, rule and regulation, the
provision which established the higher standards for the promotion and
protection of the public health, safety and general welfare shall prevail.
3.00 DEFINITIONS. The following words and phrases, when used in this Ordinance,
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, shall have the meaning ascribed to
them in this Section.
3.01 “County” is defined as the County of Scott.
3.02 “County Board” is defined as the Scott County Board of Commissioners.
1-2-5
Resolution 2018-046, Adopted March 20, 2018
3.03 “Cover Material” is soil that can be compacted to provide a tight seal, does not
crack when dry and is free of putrescible material.
3.04 “Construction Debris” is defined as waste building materials, packaging, and
rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition of buildings
and roads.
3.05 “Disposal” is defined as the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking, or placing of any waste into or on any land or water so that the waste or
any constituent thereof may enter the environment or be emitted into the air, or
discharged into any waters, including ground waters.
3.06 “Garbage” is defined as discarded material resulting from the handling, processing,
storage, preparation, serving and consuming of food.
3.07 “Gate Yard” is defined as a cubic yard of solid waste as received at the entrance of
a waste facility. Waste facilities weighing and reporting tons of solid waste received
at the entrance shall use the conversion factor of six hundred pounds per cubic yard
(600 lb./yd.) of solid waste received at the entrance when required or authorized by
this Ordinance.
3.08 “Incineration” is defined as the process by which solid wastes are burned for the
purpose of volume and weight reduction in facilities designed for such use.
3.09 “Institutional Housing Facility” is defined as a residential facility which is
specifically designed to accommodate persons with special needs and is not
intended for occupancy by the general public. Such facilities include: nursing
homes, senior housing facilities, hospitals, long term health care facilities,
correctional facilities, employee boarding houses, school dormitories and similar
housing facilities.
3.10 “Licensee” is defined as the person who has been given authority by the County
Board to establish, operate and maintain a solid waste disposal site or facility or
collect or transport solid waste.
3.11 “Mixed Municipal Solid Waste” is defined as garbage, refuse, and other solid
waste from residential, commercial, industrial, and community activities which is
generated and collected in aggregate, but does not include auto hulks, street
sweepings, ash, construction debris, mining waste, sludges, tree and agricultural
wastes, tires, and other materials collected, processed and disposed of as separate
waste streams.
3.12 “Multiple Family Residential Unit” is defined as a residential housing structure
which is comprised of occupant owned, rented or leased completely self contained
residential units such as an apartment complex, mobile home park, townhouse,
residential subdivision, duplex, fourplex or similar type residential dwelling facility
which is taxed in aggregate as commercial residential property.
1-2-6
Resolution 2018-046, Adopted March 20, 2018
3.13 “Person” is defined as any entity, individual, partnership, corporation, or
organization of a private or public nature and any representative thereof.
3.14 “Processing” means the treatment of waste after collection and before disposal.
Processing includes, but is not limited to, reduction, storage, separation, exchange,
resource recovery, physical, chemical, or biological modification, and transfer from
one waste facility to another.
3.15 “Putrescible Material” is defined as solid waste which is capable of becoming
rotten and which may reach a foul state or decay or decomposition.
3.16 “Recyclable Material” is defined as materials that are separated from mixed
municipal solid waste for the purpose of recycling, including paper, glass, plastics,
metals, automobile oil, and batteries. Refuse-derived fuel or other material that is
destroyed by incineration is not a recyclable material.
3.17 “Recycling” means the process of collecting and preparing recyclable materials
and reusing the materials in their original form or using them in manufacturing
processes that do not cause the destruction of recyclable materials in a manner that
precludes further use.
3.18 “Refuse” is defined as putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), and includes garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator ash, incinerator residue,
street cleanings and market and industrial solid wastes.
3.19 “Residential Unit” means a dwelling designed as an occupancy for a single person
or family.
3.20 “Resource Recovery” means the reclamation for sale, use, or reuse of materials,
substances, energy, or other products contained within or derived from waste.
3.21 “Shoreland” is defined as land located within the following distances from the
ordinary high water mark of public waters: a) land within 1,000 feet from the normal
high water mark of a lake, pond, reservoir, impoundment, or flowage; and b) land
within 300 feet of a river or stream or the landward side of flood plain delineated by
ordinance on such a river or stream, whichever is greater.
3.22 “Single Family Residence” means a property which is taxed (homesteaded or
non-homesteaded) as a single residence.
3.23 “Site or Facility” is defined as all real or personal property which is or may be used
for the utilization, processing or final disposal of solid waste and which requires a
license for disposal therein under the provisions of this Ordinance.
3.24 “Sludge Waste” is defined as inorganic waste in a semi-liquid state, excluding toxic
and hazardous waste, but including waste from automobile wash racks and steam
cleaning products, ceramic, pottery and glass wastes, muddied water from laundries
and similar nontoxic materials.
1-2-7
Resolution 2018-046, Adopted March 20, 2018
3.25 “Solid Waste” is defined as garbage, refuse, demolition waste, sludge from a water
supply treatment plant or air containment treatment facility, and other discarded
solid waste materials, and sludges, in solid, semisolid, liquid, or contained gaseous
form, but does not include hazardous waste; animal waste used as fertilizer;
earthen fill, boulders, rock; sewage sludge; solids or dissolved material in domestic
sewage or other pollutants in water resources, such as silt, dissolved or suspended
solids in industrial waste water effluents; or discharges which are point sources
subject to permits under Section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as
amended; dissolved materials in irrigation return flows; or source, special nuclear,
or by-product material as defined by The Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended.
3.26 “Source Separation” means the separation, by the generator, of any material for
the purpose of preventing its introduction into the mixed municipal solid waste
stream.
3.27 “Toxic and Hazardous Wastes” shall have the definition ascribed to Hazardous
Waste in the Scott County Hazardous Waste Management Ordinance No. 12.
3.28 “Transfer Station” is defined as an intermediate solid waste facility in which solid
waste collected from any source is temporarily deposited to await transportation to
another waste facility.
3.29 “Waste Facility” means all property, real or personal, including negative and
positive easements and water and air rights, which is or may be needed or useful
for the processing or disposal of waste, except property for the collection of the
waste and property used primarily for the manufacture of scrap metal or paper.
Waste facility includes but is not limited to transfer stations, processing facilities,
and disposal sites and facilities.
3.30 “Waste Management” is defined as activities which are intended to affect or
control the generation of waste and activities which provide for or control the
collection, processing and disposal of waste.
4.00 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
4.01 Disposal of Solid Waste. No person shall burn, bury nor dispose of solid waste,
nor allow his land or property under his control to be used for intermediate or final
disposal of any solid waste, except at a site or facility for which a license has been
granted by the County Board, unless otherwise provided by this Ordinance.
4.02 Collection and Transportation of Solid Waste. No person shall provide a service
for the collection and transportation of mixed municipal solid waste within Scott
County unless licensed as a hauler as specified in this Ordinance.
4.03 License Required. Any site or facility to be used for any method of solid waste
disposal, not otherwise provided for in this Ordinance, must be licensed by the
County Board before operation may commence. Any hauler that transports or
collects solid waste within Scott County must first be granted a license to do so by
the Department as specified in this Ordinance.
1-2-8
Resolution 2018-046, Adopted March 20, 2018
4.04 Licensing Requirements.
A. License Application. Any site or facility that is required to be licensed as
provided for in this Ordinance shall submit a completed application to the
Department on forms provided by the Department. The site or facility shall
submit to the Department all license application information necessary to obtain
a license. Information necessary to obtain a license shall be set forth on the
application forms as determined by the Department. Applications which are not
complete may be returned to the applicant. An application will be deemed
incomplete if information is omitted, incomplete, inaccurate, or non-compliant, or
if the required fees do not accompany the application.
B. Initial License Application. After receiving an initial application for the operation
of a site or facility, the County Board shall have ninety (90) days to either grant
or deny the license.
C. Renewal License Application. Site and facility license renewal applications must
be submitted to the Department by October 31 of each year. License renewal
applications received after the specified due dates shall be subject to a late fee.
If the site or facility does not submit a license renewal application before the end
of the last approved license period, the license will expire and the site or facility
must terminate all operations or services. The site or facility must reapply for
and receive a license before operations and services may resume. Application
for license renewal shall contain a written statement of any changes in the
information submitted in the last approved license application. The applicant
shall submit an annual report to the Department on forms acceptable to the
Department in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. Failure to
submit such information shall result in grounds for revocation or for declining
renewal of the license by the County Board. If there are no changes, it shall be
so stated in the renewal application.
D. License Amendment. Application for a license amendment shall be made in
writing to the Department thirty (30) calendar days before said changes are to
commence. Application for the license amendment shall include a written
statement of all changes to the last approved license. After receiving an
application for an amended license, the Department shall have thirty (30)
calendar days to either grant or deny the amendment.
E. Incomplete or Non-Conforming Application. If an application for a license is not
complete or otherwise does not conform to the requirements set forth in this
Ordinance, the Department shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the reasons
for non-acceptance and may request that the applicant resubmit, modify, or
otherwise alter the application. The notification required in this section shall be
served upon the applicant by first class mail sent to the mailing address provided
on the application form.
F. License Year. Unless otherwise provided by the County Board, each license
granted pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance shall be in effect from
January 1 through December 31 of each year for sites and facilities..
1-2-9
Resolution 2018-046, Adopted March 20, 2018
G. License and Application Fees. The site or facility shall pay application and
annual license fees as set by resolution of the County Board. No license fees
shall be prorated for a portion of a year and no license fee shall be refunded.
H. Late Fees. Complete applications submitted after the required due dates
specified in this Ordinance shall be subject to the following late fees:
1. One to seven days late - twenty-five percent (25%) late fee;
2. Eight to thirty days late - fifty percent (50%) late fee;
3. Thirty one or more days late - one hundred percent (100%) late fee.
4. Has commenced providing services without a license from the Department -
one hundred percent (100%) late fee.
I. No Bar to Enforcement Action. Payment of the license fee together with
payment of any late payment penalty shall not bar other enforcement action by
the County.
J. License Transfer. All licenses are non-transferable.
4.05 County Review of License Application
A. Failure to Act on a License Application. If the Department does not act on a
completed license renewal application before the end of the last approved
license period, the last approved license shall continue in force until the
Department takes action on the application. The reapplication for a license that
has expired shall be deemed an initial application except that the application
shall also be accompanied by the late fees in accordance with the provisions of
this Ordinance. If the Department fails to act within 60 days of receipt of a
properly completed initial application, or before the end of the last approved
license period, the applicant may request a hearing on the application or
renewal. The request for a hearing shall be governed by the Scott County
Administrative Procedures Ordinance No. 13.
B. Notice of Denial. If the Department denies a license or an amended license to
an applicant, the applicant shall be notified of such denial in writing the reasons
therefor by the Department. A denial shall be without prejudice to the applicant’s
right to an appearance before the County Board or for filing a further application
after revisions are made to meet objections specified as reasons for denial.
4.06 Bond and Certificate of Insurance Requirements. Unless otherwise provided by
the County Board, issuance of any license pursuant to the provisions of this
Ordinance shall be contingent upon the applicant furnishing to the County a bond in
an amount to be set by the County Board and naming the County as oblige with
sufficient sureties duly licensed and authorized to transact corporate surety
business in the State of Minnesota as sureties. The condition of such bond shall be
that if the principal fails to obey any of the requirements or do any of the acts
required by this Ordinance in the operation of the solid waste disposal site or facility,
or if, for any reason, ceases to operate or abandons the solid waste disposal site or
facility, and the County is required to expend any moneys any labor or material to
1-2-10
Resolution 2018-046, Adopted March 20, 2018
restore the site to the condition and requirements as provided by the Ordinance, the
obligor and the sureties on its bond shall reimburse the County for any and all
expenses incurred to remedy the failure of the principal to comply with terms of the
Ordinance, and that the obligor and its sureties will indemnify and save the County
harmless from all losses, costs and charges that may occur to the County because
of any default of the obligor under the terms of his license to operate and the
Ordinance of the County. In addition to the bond to be furnished, the licensee shall
furnish to the County, certificates of insurance in amounts and types to be set by the
County Board.
4.07 License Suspension. Any license granted under the provisions of this Ordinance
may be suspended at any time for any failure to pay the license fee, for
noncompliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, or whenever in the written and
documented opinion of the County Board the continuance of the site or facility
would endanger the health, welfare or safety of the public. The notice of
suspension may be served upon the licensee personally or by leaving the same at
the licensed premises with the person in charge thereof. A license may be revoked
only after the County Board has held a public hearing at which the licensee and
other persons interested in the site or facility shall have the right to be heard. The
date of the hearing shall be set by the County Board and shall not be held earlier
than fifteen (15) calendar days after notice of said hearing was received by the
licensee. At the hearing, any person interested in said site or facility shall have the
right to be heard.
4.08 Inspections. Routine inspection and evaluation of haulers, sites and facilities shall
be made by the Department in such frequency as to insure consistent compliance
by the haulers, sites and facilities with the provisions of this Ordinance. The
licensee shall be provided with written and documented notice of any deficiencies,
recommendations for their correction and the date when the corrections shall be
accomplished. The licensee shall be required to allow free access to the
Department, County Board, or to the proper representative of any other
governmental agency at any time for the purpose of making such inspections as
may be necessary to determine compliance with the requirement of this Ordinance,
or any other applicable statute, ordinance or regulation.
4.09 Residential Service Charge. Every residence within Scott County shall remit to
the Scott County Treasurer a service charge in an amount set by Resolution of the
County Board. The Service Charge shall appear as a special charge on the tax
statement for every residential property within Scott County. Each single-family
residence and each residential unit for multiple-family residential commercially
taxed property shall pay a service charge. The Service Charge shall be due and
payable at the time the regular property taxes are due. Institutional housing
facilities shall be exempt from the Residential Service Charge.
5.00 SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITIES. A solid waste disposal facility shall be
constructed, established, maintained and operated in accordance with the following
provisions.
1-2-11
Resolution 2018-046, Adopted March 20, 2018
5.01 It is unlawful for any person to establish, operate or maintain a solid waste disposal
facility without first being licensed to do so by the County Board. The County Board
may, at its discretion, issue a license for the operation of a solid waste disposal
facility. The license application must be prepared by an engineer registered in
Minnesota and shall include two (2) sets of complete plans, specifications, design
data, ultimate land use plan, proposed operating procedures, and the following
information:
A. The current map or aerial photograph of the area showing land use and zoning
within one-fourth (1/4) mile of the solid waste disposal site. The map or aerial
photograph shall be of sufficient scale to show all homes, buildings, lakes,
ponds, water courses, wetlands, dry runs, rock croppings, roads and other
applicable concerns. Wells shall be identified on the map or aerial photograph,
U.S.G.S. data shall be indicated and a north arrow drawn. A location insert map
shall be included.
B. A plot plan including legal description of the site and immediate adjacent area
showing dimensions, location of soil borings, present and planned pertinent
features including, but not limited to, roads, fencing and cover stockpiles. The
plan of development shall include any proposed excavation, trenching and filling.
The scale of the plot plan should not be greater than two hundred feet per inch.
C. An ultimate land use plan, including intermediate stages, identifying the total and
complete land use. The scale of the ultimate land use plan shall not be greater
than two hundred feet per inch.
D. A report shall accompany the plans indicating:
1. Population and areas expected to be served by the proposed site.
2. Anticipated type, quantity and source of material to be disposed of at the site.
3. Geological formations and ground water elevations to a depth of at least ten
feet (10’) below the proposed excavation and lowest elevation of site,
including the high water table. Such data shall be obtained with soil borings
or by other appropriate means.
4. Source and characteristics of cover material and method of protecting cover
material for winter operation.
5. Area of site in acres.
6. Owner of site.
7. Persons responsible for actual operation and maintenance of the site and
intended operating procedures.
E. Written proof that the local applicable municipal or township government has
considered the establishment of the facility and the results of that consideration.
5.02 Solid waste disposal facilities are prohibited from filling or trenching within shoreland
areas.
5.03 The following shall be established, constructed or provided for at the mixed
municipal solid waste disposal facility:
1-2-12
Resolution 2018-046, Adopted March 20, 2018
A. Sanitary facilities and shelter for site personnel.
B. Litter control devices such as portable fences.
C. Electrical service for operations and repairs.
D. Fire-fighting facilities on site adequate to insure the safety of employees.
E. Emergency first-aid equipment to provide adequate treatment for accidents,
including those resulting from hazardous and toxic wastes.
F. A potable water supply for site personnel.
G. Shelter for maintenance and storage of site equipment.
H. Adequate facilities to insure that no vehicle desiring entry into the site may have
to wait outside the perimeter of the sanitary landfill site.
I. Adequate communication facilities for emergency purposes.
J. The site shall be fenced and a gate shall be provided at the entrance to the site
and kept locked when an attendant is not on duty.
K. An all weather haul road to the unloading area.
L. Equipment sufficient for spreading, compacting and covering options to include
sufficient reserve equipment or arrangements to immediately provide for
equipment during periods of breakdown.
M. At each entrance to the site, the licensee shall erect and maintain a sign stating
the name of the facility, the schedule of days and hours the facility is open to the
public, prices for use of the facility and the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
permit number and penalty for nonconforming dumping. The sign and its
placement shall be subject to approval by the Department.
N. At the County Board’s discretion, a ground and surface water monitoring system
may be required, at the licensee’s expense.
O. Visual screening of the site, as approved by the Department, by use of natural
objects, trees, plants, seeded soil berm, fences or other suitable means.
P. Suitable disposal facilities for individuals who wish to transport and dispose of
their own solid waste.
5.04 Operating Procedures. Any person who has been granted a license by the
County Board to operate a mixed municipal solid waste disposal facility shall comply
with the following:
1-2-13
Resolution 2018-046, Adopted March 20, 2018
A. Open burning of solid waste is prohibited. No scavenging shall be allowed.
Salvaging shall be allowed only upon conditions approved in writing by the
Department. Animal feeding within the site is prohibited.
B. Putrescible wastes shall not be deposited within five feet (5’) above the highest
known water table at the landfill site.
C. A minimum separating distance of twenty feet (20’) shall be maintained between
the disposal operation and the adjacent property line.
D. Unloading of solid waste shall be confined to as small an area as practicable
and surrounded with appropriate facilities to confine possible wind-blown
material within the area. At the conclusion of each day of operation, all windblown
material resulting from the operation shall be collected and returned to the
area by the owner or operator.
E. Solid waste shall be compacted as densely as practicable and covered after
each day of operation with a compacted layer of at least six inches (6”) of
suitable cover material.
F. Surface water drainage shall be diverted around the landfill operating area.
G. Putrescible materials which have reached a foul state of decay or
decomposition, such as spoiled food and animal carcasses, shall be immediately
covered and compacted.
H. Disposal of truck and automobile tires and other special wastes shall be
managed in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
I. Control of vectors, such as rodents and flies, and of odors, dust, wind blown
material and other potential public nuisances shall be the responsibility of the
licensee. Should the Department so prescribe, the licensee shall, at his own
expense, engage an exterminator or pest control agent to inspect the landfill on
at least a monthly basis. A copy of each inspection report shall be sent to the
Department immediately upon its receipt by the licensee.
J. An attendant shall be on duty at the site at all times while it is open for public
use. Unloading of refuse shall be continuously supervised at the working face of
the landfill.
K. The depth of any layers of compacted solid waste in the landfill shall not exceed
eight feet (8’) without being separated by cover material.
L. Within one month after termination of operation of the site, or a major part
thereof, the area shall be covered with at least two feet (2’) of compacted cover
material adequately sloped to allow surface water runoff. No holes or
depressions which might result in collection of surface water shall remain or
exist after such covering.
1-2-14
Resolution 2018-046, Adopted March 20, 2018
M. The finished surface of the filled area shall be covered with adequate topsoil and
seeded with native grasses or other suitable vegetation immediately upon
completion or immediately in the spring on areas terminated during winter
conditions. If necessary, seeded slopes shall be covered with straw or similar
material to prevent erosion.
N. Prior to termination of operation of the site, the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency and the Department shall be notified in order that a site investigation
may be conducted while site personnel are available and before any equipment
is removed from the property. The final condition of the landfill must be
approved by the Department and the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency before
such removal may occur.
O. The licensee shall accept all solid waste offered for disposal during the posted
hours of operation which may be legally and reasonably disposed of at the site.
P. Accurate daily records of site operations shall be maintained. These records
shall contain information pertinent to the site operation. Intake of solid waste in
tons or cubic yards shall be recorded daily in a manner acceptable to the
Department. General areas in which a particular type of solid waste disposal
takes place within the landfill shall be filed. Disposal of hazardous waste is
prohibited. All hazardous wastes generated by the facility operation, or
delivered to the facility by other persons, must be managed in accordance with
Scott County’s Hazardous Waste Management Ordinance No. 12, Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency Rules and special waste management plans approved
as part of any license or permit issued by either Scott County or the State of
Minnesota.
5.05 The licensee of the mixed municipal solid waste disposal facility is responsible for
adequate fire protection on the site. Adequate fire-fighting equipment shall be
available at all times on the site or the licensee shall furnish the Department with
proof of a fire-fighting agreement between the licensee and the local fire protection
agency to immediately acquire its services when needed.
5.06 A detailed description and a plat of the completed mixed municipal solid waste
disposal facility shall be recorded with the Scott County Register of Deeds within
one month after approval of the final condition of the landfill. This description shall
include the general type and location of deposited solid waste, the type and number
of lifts, original and final terrain description and other pertinent characteristics of the
completed sanitary landfill site.
5.07 A construction debris disposal facility shall comply with the provisions of Sections
5.01 and 5.02 and with other applicable provisions of this Ordinance, except for
those provisions specifically waived by the Department, and shall pay the required
fees.
6.00 OTHER WASTE FACILITIES. Any waste facility, other than a solid waste disposal
facility, shall be constructed, established, maintained and operated in accordance
1-2-15
Resolution 2018-046, Adopted March 20, 2018
with the following provisions. Municipal One-Day Collection events shall be exempt
from these provisions.
6.01 A license shall first be obtained from the County Board to construct, establish,
maintain or operate a waste facility. The application and license fee, which shall
accompany the license application, shall be set by resolution of the County Board.
The application for a license shall contain the following information:
A. Location, size and ownership of the land upon which the waste facility will
operate.
B. General description of property use in the immediate vicinity for the waste
facility.
C. Complete plans and specifications and proposed operating procedures of the
waste facility.
D. Owner and persons responsible for actual operation and maintenance of the
waste facility.
6.02 The following shall be established and maintained at the waste facility site:
A. Adequate sanitary facilities and shelter for personnel on the premises.
B. Records approved by the Department indicating the type and quantity of solid
waste accepted, processed or transferred out.
C. The waste facility shall be so equipped, situated, operated and maintained as to
minimize interference with other activities in the area surrounding the site.
6.03 A waste facility licensee shall comply with the following regulations:
A. When stated in and as part of the license, the licensee shall take away all solid
waste, and wash, clean and disinfect the facility at the time of closure.
B. The premises, entrances and exits shall be maintained in a clean, neat and
orderly manner at all times.
C. All incoming and outgoing traffic shall be controlled by the licensee in such a
manner as to provide orderly and safe ingress and egress.
D. All unloading of solid wastes from contributing vehicles shall be conducted in
such a manner as to eliminate odor and litter outside the waste facility.
7.00 SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTATION. This section shall apply
to Haulers who own, operate or lease vehicles for the purpose of collection and
transportation of Mixed Municipal Solid Waste in Scott County and the seven
County Metropolitan Area.
1-2-16
Resolution 2018-046, Adopted March 20, 2018
7.01 Definitions:
A. Base County shall mean the metropolitan County in which a Hauler's office,
records, and vehicles are primarily located. If differing parts of the Hauler's
business are located in more than one Metropolitan County, the Base County
shall be the Metropolitan County in which most of the Hauler's vehicles are
kept, as determined by the Department at the time of licensing. The Base
County for Haulers based in a County not participating in the Regional Hauler
Licensing Program shall be an adjacent Metropolitan County as determined by
the Department.
B. Base License shall mean the License obtained by the Hauler from the Base
County as a precondition to obtaining an Operating License from the County.
C. Counties shall mean one or more counties that are parties to the Regional
Hauler Licensing Joint Powers Agreement.
D. Hauler shall mean any Person, firm, corporation, association, partnership, or
other entity, other than an individual resident hauling his or her household
waste, who collects or transports Mixed Municipal Solid Waste that is generated
in the Counties.
E. Operating County shall mean any of the Counties, including the Base County,
in which the Hauler collects or transports Mixed Municipal Solid Waste.
F. Operating License shall mean the License, issued by an Operating County, to
operate within each Operating County, including in the Base County, in which
the Hauler collects or transports Mixed Municipal Solid Waste and which may
contain specific conditions imposed by the issuing County.
G. Regional Hauler Licensing Board shall mean the joint powers board
established by agreement of the Counties to coordinate the Regional Hauler
Licensing Program.
H. Regional Hauler Licensing Program shall mean the cooperative Hauler
licensing program established by the Regional Hauler Licensing Joint Powers
Agreement by and among the Counties.
7.02 State Rule Adopted: The collection and transportation of Solid Waste shall be
performed in accordance with Solid Waste Rule 7035.0800 which is hereby adopted
by reference as part of this Ordinance.
7.03 License Required: No Hauler shall collect or transport Mixed Municipal Solid Waste
generated in Scott County unless the Hauler has a valid Base License from the
Base County and a valid Scott County Operating License. On the expiration date of
the current License, any activity for which the License is required shall cease.
A. General Licensing Requirements. The following information shall be submitted
to the Department as part of the application process for obtaining a Base and/or
Operating License.
1-2-17
Resolution 2018-046, Adopted March 20, 2018
1. License Application for Base and Operating Licenses. The Hauler shall
submit a completed application to the Base County on forms provided by
the Base County. The Hauler shall submit to the Base County all License
application information necessary to obtain a Base License and all
Operating Licenses. Information necessary to obtain Base and Operating
Licenses shall be set forth on the application forms as determined by the
Department. Applications, which are not complete, may be returned to the
Hauler. An application will be deemed incomplete if information is omitted,
incomplete, inaccurate or non-compliant, or if the required fees do not
accompany the application.
a. License Fees. The Hauler shall pay all License fees to the Base
County for a Base License and all Operating Licenses issued pursuant
to the Regional Hauler Licensing Program. Such License fees and
term shall be established by the Regional Hauler Licensing Board. No
License fee shall be prorated for a portion of a license term and no
License fee shall be refunded.
b. Late Fees. Complete applications received after the due date
established in 7.03 A.1.d. of this Section shall be subject to the
following late fees:
1. One to seven days late - Twenty-five percent (25%) Late Fee
2. Eight to thirty days late - Fifty percent (50%) of the Late Fee
3. More than thirty days late - One hundred percent (100%) Late Fee
c. No Bar to Enforcement Action. Payment of the License fee together
with payment of any late fees shall not bar other enforcement action by
the County.
d. Application Due. Hauler License renewal applications must be
submitted to the Base County by April 30 of the renewal year. A
License renewal application received after April 30 shall be subject to a
late fee.
e. Failure to Act on License Application. If the Base County does not act
on a License renewal application, which is complete and submitted by
June 30, the current Base License and Operating Licenses shall
continue in force until action is taken.
f. License Transfer. All Base Licenses and Operating Licenses are nontransferable.
g. License Term. The Base License shall be issued every two years for
the term of July 1 of the issuing year through June 30 of the second
year, or as otherwise established by the Regional Hauler Licensing
Board.
1-2-18
Resolution 2018-046, Adopted March 20, 2018
h. False Information. Submission of false information shall be deemed a
violation of this Ordinance.
B. Base License Required: A Hauler, which collects or transports Mixed Municipal
Solid Waste generated in the County shall obtain and maintain a Base License
from the Base County. A hauler which collects or transports Mixed Municipal
Solid Waste generated in any of the other Counties shall obtain and maintain a
Base License from the County, if the County is the Hauler's Base County.
1. Vehicles Licensed. All vehicles used by the Hauler for the collection or
transportation of Mixed Municipal Solid Waste generated within the
Counties shall be included in the Hauler's Base License application.
2. Decalcomania. Each vehicle used by a Hauler for the collection or
transportation of Mixed Municipal Solid Waste generated within the
Counties shall be identified by a License decal issued by the Base County
for that vehicle for the current License Term. The Hauler must affix the
decal in a conspicuous place on the left side of the cab of the vehicle or
conveyance which it was issued, as directed by the Department. The
Hauler must maintain the License decal so that it is readily visible and
legible at all times. Any vehicle not bearing the required decal shall be
considered unlicensed. If a vehicle is put into service during the License
Term, the Hauler shall submit the required information for this vehicle to the
Base County and shall not use the vehicle to collect or transport Mixed
Municipal Solid Waste within the Counties until a decal has been issued
and affixed to the new vehicle.
3. Insurance. The Hauler shall obtain and submit certificates of insurance
issued by insurers duly Licensed by the State of Minnesota providing the
following coverage, or a self-insurance plan certified by the Department of
Commerce providing equivalent coverage:
a. Commercial General Liability/Professional Liability with contractual
liability coverage in the amount of the Counties’ tort liability limits set
forth in Minnesota Statute 466.04 and as amended from time to time.
The County, its agents, officers, and employees shall be listed as an
additional insured as it relates to these liabilities; and
b. Automobile liability coverage in the amount of the Counties’ tort liability
limits set forth in Minnesota Statute 466.04 and as amended from time
to time; and
c. Workers Compensation insurance in statutory amount (if applicable).
d. Any additional coverage required by the issuing Base County.
Nothing in this provision shall prohibit a Hauler from providing insurance
with limits higher than the limits provided herein. All such required policies
shall name the Regional Hauler Licensing Board, Anoka, Carver, Dakota,
Hennepin, Ramsey, Scott and Washington Counties as additional insureds.
1-2-19
Resolution 2018-046, Adopted March 20, 2018
All policies and certificates shall be endorsed to require that the insurer
provide at least a sixty (60) day written notice to the County prior to the
effective date of policy cancellation, non-renewal, or material adverse
change in coverage terms. The Hauler shall maintain insurance in
compliance with this paragraph throughout the term of the Base License.
4. License Suspension or Revocation: The Department may suspend or
revoke any Hauler's Base License issued by the County for violation of any
of the requirements set forth in 7.03 B. of this Ordinance or violation of any
Base License conditions.
C. Operating License Required: Any Hauler, which collects or transports Mixed
Municipal Solid Waste in the County must obtain and maintain an Operating
License from the County. A Hauler shall obtain and maintain a Base License
from the Base County in order to be eligible for an Operating License.
1. Standards. The issuance of an Operating License shall be subject to the
provisions of County Solid Waste and Administrative Ordinances and any
other conditions set forth in this Ordinance or established by the County
Board of Commissioners.
2. Vehicles Licensed. All vehicles used by the Hauler for the collection or
transportation of Mixed Municipal Solid Waste within the County shall be
included in the Hauler's Base License application to the Base County
3. Vehicle Decals. The Hauler must affix the decal required by the Base
County in a conspicuous place on the left side of the cab of the vehicle for
which it was issued as directed by the Base County. The Hauler must
maintain the License decal so that it is readily visible and legible at all
times. Any vehicle not bearing the required decal shall be considered
unlicensed.
4. License Suspension or Revocation. The Department may suspend or
revoke any Hauler's Operating License issued by the County for violation of
any of the requirements set forth in Section 7.00 of this Ordinance or
violation of any Operating License conditions. Suspension or revocation of
a Hauler's Base License by the Base County shall constitute sufficient
basis for the summary suspension or revocation of the Hauler's Operating
License issued by the County.
5. Additional Data. The applicant shall submit additional data requested by
the Department regarding the applicant, the business and/or the License
application.
7.4 Conditions: Violation of any condition imposed by the County on a License or
variance shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance and subject to the
enforcement provisions set forth in this Ordinance.
7.5 Interpretation: In their interpretation, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to
be minimum requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any
1-2-20
Resolution 2018-046, Adopted March 20, 2018
other powers or authority granted by Minnesota Statutes or Rules or other
Ordinance.
7.6 Termination or Cancellation of Regional Hauler Licensing Program: Upon
termination of the Regional Hauler Licensing Program or the withdrawal of the
County, any Hauler Licenses in effect at that time shall continue in force until the
end of the current License Term, unless otherwise suspended or revoked.
8.00 RECYCLING. The following provisions are applicable to the collection and
transportation of mixed municipal solid waste (msw) generated in Scott County.
8.01 Recyclable Material Collection. The hauler must provide a service (either directly
or through written subcontract with a person or company approved by the
Department as a condition to the license) to collect four broad categories of
recyclable materials and yard wastes from all single-family residential, and all
multiple-family residential, commercial and industrial customers in Scott County.
Paper and corrugated fiberboard must be collected from commercial, industrial and
institutional customers when requested by the customer. Additional recyclable
materials may be added to this by Resolution of the County Board after the effective
date of this Section. All licensed haulers shall be given 120 days advance notice in
writing of the proposed additional recyclable material(s) and shall be notified in
writing 15 calendar days in advance of the time and date of the County Board
meeting at which time a decision will be rendered. Notice shall be deemed given by
mail via general delivery, to the mailing address identified on the most recent
license application or renewal form on file in the Department.
A. The hauler may specify the type of container their customer must place the
recyclables in. The containers must be provided by the hauler or already
available to a customer at the time this Ordinance provision becomes effective.
B. The hauler must specify the time and day of collection that their customers are
to place their recyclables out on their property for pickup. The hauler must
collect the recyclables within 12 hours of the designated time. The collection
location must be on the customer’s property in a location at or near the regular
solid waste collection site or such other location mutually agreeable to the hauler
and the customer.
C. The hauler may specify how a customer is to place their recyclables out for
collection and how the recyclables are to be prepared. The Department
reserves the right to review and modify the amount of preparation required by
the hauler in consideration of local recyclable market requirements.
D. The hauler must collect recyclables from each customer at least once a month
unless normal solid waste collection service is provided less frequently than
monthly, in which case the frequency of recyclable collection shall be the same
as refuse collection.
E. The hauler is assumed to own the recyclables they have collected and may
market them as they see fit. However, a hauler may not dispose of any
1-2-21
Resolution 2018-046, Adopted March 20, 2018
recyclables in or on the land, nor through incineration unless given prior written
approval to do so by the Department.
F. The hauler must submit an annual report to the Department, on or before
January 31 of each year for the previous calendar year, identifying the weight in
tons of all recyclables and all other disposable solid wastes collected from Scott
County customers (if tonnage is unavailable for disposable solid waste, cubic
yards shall be reported). The annual report must identify the weight of each type
of recyclable collected.
G. The hauler must demonstrate to the Department at the time of license
application and at time of annual license renewal how they will provide both an
incentive to their customers to reduce the amount of waste generated and an
incentive to recycle the materials designated by the County Board. Examples of
compliance with this provision include, but are not limited to, volume based
collection fees and/or credit equal to the reduction in tip fee realized through
removal of the amount a customer is recycling.
H. Municipalities or Townships within Scott County that contract with haulers must
contract only with a hauler who is licensed by Scott County or under the
Regional Hauler Licensing Program. Contracts must also be consistent with the
provisions in this Subsection.
8.02 Opportunity to Recycle.
A. Single-family residential recycling. For all residential generators where the
hauler contracts for services directly with the generator, the hauler shall provide
to the generator the opportunity to recycle (as described in section 8.01 of this
Ordinance).
B. Multi-family residential recycling. The owner/manager of multi-family residential
units shall offer recycling services to their tenants including a convenient location
to store recycled material.
C. Recycling Fee. No mixed municipal solid waste collector shall impose a greater
fee on a resident who recycles than on a resident who does not recycle.
8.03 Anti-Scavenging Provision. Ownership of the separated recyclable materials set
out by a customer for collection by the hauler shall be vested in the hauler servicing
the Person who is recycling. It shall be unlawful and an offense against this
Ordinance for any person other than the hauler or the owner, lessee, or occupant of
a residential dwelling or commercial/industrial business, to pick up said separated
recyclable materials set out for collection. Said person shall obtain written
permission from the Department and from the hauler servicing the accounts where
the recyclables are set out for collection.
9.00 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
1-2-22
Resolution 2018-046, Adopted March 20, 2018
9.01 Misdemeanor. Any person who violates, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
the provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
9.02 Injunction Relief. In the event of a violation or a threat of violation of this
Ordinance, the County may institute appropriate actions or proceedings, including
action to compel performance or other appropriate action requesting injunctive relief
to prevent, restrain, correct or abate any violation or threatened violation of this
Ordinance.
9.03 Venue and Prosecution. The Scott County Attorney’s office shall be authorized to
prosecute violations of any provisions of the Ordinance. All prosecutions of civil
actions brought to enforce this Ordinance shall be venued in Scott County District
Court.
9.04 Department Order. The Department may issue Orders, as may be necessary, for
the enforcement of this Ordinance. Each Order shall state the violation and the
action and time schedule required for compliance.
10.00 SEVERABILITY. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the County Board that
the several provisions of this Ordinance are separable in accordance with the
following: if any court of competent jurisdiction shall rule that any provision of this
Ordinance is invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions of this
Ordinance not specifically included in said judgment.
11.00 VARIANCES. Upon written application by the applicant or operator, the County
Board may grant variances from the requirements of the regulations and standards
prescribed by the Ordinance in order to promote the effective and reasonable
application and enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance. Disposal facilities
in existence at the time of the enactment of this Ordinance, and operation of such
facilities, shall conform to the provisions of this Ordinance no later than one hundred
eighty (180) days after the adoption of the Ordinance, or terminate operations no
later than that date, unless granted a variance for good cause shown under this
Section in writing to continue operations by the County Board. A request for such
variance shall be accompanied with a plan and time schedule for compliance with
the provisions of this Ordinance.
12.00 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS. For purposes of protecting and providing for
public health, safety and welfare, the County Board may impose additional
requirements consistent with the intent of this Ordinance for the operation of solid
waste sites or facilities.
13.00 FEE ON OPERATORS OF DISPOSAL FACILITIES. In accordance with Minnesota
Statutes Chapter 115A.919, there is imposed a fee on operators of facilities which
accept and dispose of mixed municipal solid waste and demolition/construction solid
1-2-23
Resolution 2018-046, Adopted March 20, 2018
waste in the County of Scott. All vehicles transporting solid waste shall be
registered at the entrance of the waste facility.
13.01 Amount of Fee. The fee shall be four dollars ($4.00) per gate yard of solid waste
accepted and disposed of at a facility for mixed municipal solid waste and fifty cents
($0.50) per gate yard of demolition/construction waste accepted and disposed of at
a demolition/construction waste facility located in Scott County. A facility that
weighs the waste accepted and disposed of may compute the fee based on six
hundred (600) pounds of waste being equivalent to one (1) gate yard. An operator
may use either method to compute the fee, and may vary between methods.
However, the fee shall be determined in the same manner as the disposal charge.
Charges for passenger cars and pickup trucks shall be in accordance with the rules
promulgated by the Minnesota Commissioner of Revenue pursuant to the
Metropolitan Landfill Abatement Act and shall be prorated in accordance with the
ratio between the State fee and the County fee.
13.02 Partial Exemption from Fee.
A. Waste residue from energy and resource recovery facilities at which solid waste
is processed for the purposes of extracting, reducing, converting to energy, or
otherwise separating and preparing solid waste for reuse shall be exempt from
one-half the amount of the fee imposed if there is at least an eighty-five percent
(85%) volume reduction in the solid waste processed. To qualify for exemption
under this clause, waste residue must be brought to the facility separately.
B. Exemption for Cover Material and Lining. Materials approved by the Department
for use as lining, or daily or final cover shall be exempt from the fee imposed
under this Section. The generator of such material must obtain written approval
from the Department. The Department may suspend or revoke such approval
upon written notification to the landfill and waste generator if the waste material
is judged by the Department to be unsuitable for lining or cover material or is not
used for the intended purpose at the landfill.
13.03 Returns, Fee Payment and Reporting Requirements.
A. Time for Payment of Fee to Department. The fee imposed by this Section shall
be due and payable by the operator of the facility to the County of Scott monthly,
on or before the twentieth (20th) day of the month immediately following the
month in which the solid waste was received at the facility.
B. Returns. Any operator subject to the fee imposed by this Section shall file a
return prescribed by the Department. The return must be signed by the operator
or person authorized by the operator to do so. The return shall be filed with the
Department on or before the twentieth (20th) day of the month immediately
following the month in which the solid waste was received at the facility and
must be accompanied by payment of the fee.
C. Extensions. The Department may extend for reasonable cause the time for filing
returns and remittance of fees for not more than sixty (60) days. The
Department may require a preliminary return at the time fixed for filing the
1-2-24
Resolution 2018-046, Adopted March 20, 2018
regularly required return and payment of the fee therewith on the basis of such
preliminary return.
D. Reporting Requirements. The monthly return required to be filed shall show: (1)
the number of gate yards of solid waste accepted and disposed of at the facility;
(2) for a facility that weighs waste, the total weight of solid waste accepted and
disposed of at the facility converted to equivalent gate yards of solid waste; (3) if
a facility has accepted and disposed of solid waste exempted from the fee under
Subsection 3, the number of gate yards of solid waste exempt from the fee,
together with verification acceptable to the Department that the waste is exempt
from the fee; (4) the amount of fee due on the return; and (5) such other
information as may be required by the Department and on forms approved by
the Department in order to administer this Section.
E. Failure to File Return. If any operator required to file any return shall fail to do
so within the time prescribed by this Section or shall make, willfully or otherwise,
an incorrect, false or fraudulent return, such operator, upon written notice and
demand, shall immediately file such return or corrected return and at the time
pay any fee due on the basis thereof. If such operator shall fail to file such
return or corrected return, the Department may make for him a return, or
corrected return, from its knowledge and from such information as the
Department can obtain through testimony or otherwise and assess a fee on the
basis thereof, which fee (less any partial payments for the fee covered by such
return) shall be immediately paid upon written notice and demand. Any such
return or assessment made by the Department shall be prima facie correct and
valid and such operator shall have the burden of establishing its incorrectness or
invalidity in any action or proceeding in respect thereto. Nothing in this
paragraph shall preclude the County of Scott from enforcing this section by
pursuing any other remedy authorized by law or ordinance.
F. Records. Every operator of a facility at which mixed municipal solid waste is
accepted and disposed of shall keep adequate and complete records showing
the total gate yards of solid waste accepted and disposed of at the facility for
each day or, if such waste is weighed, the total weight of such solid waste for
each day.
G. Examination of Records. The County or its designated agent shall have the right
to examine records and accounts of the operator required to file a return.
14.00 SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL PROHIBITION. No person shall place processed or
unprocessed solid waste that is generated in Scott County in any location within
Minnesota that does not comply with the minimum requirements for design,
construction, and operation of a solid waste disposal facility under Minnesota Rules
Section 7035.
15.00 SOLID WASTE DEPOSIT DISCLOSURE. Licensed haulers shall comply with the
requirements on Waste Deposit Disclosure as defined in Minnesota Statute Chapter
115A.9302.
1-2-25
Resolution 2018-046, Adopted March 20, 2018
16.00 VOLUME BASED FEES.
16.01 Volume Based Fees. All licensed haulers collecting mixed municipal solid waste
shall offer a pricing system to their customers that increases with the volume or
weight of the waste collected.
A. For all residential collection, haulers shall offer at least two separate pricing
systems based on volumes of waste to their customers.
B. If unlimited or traditional volumes of solid waste are offered for collection, there
shall be at least two other volumes offered and unlimited or traditional volumes
shall be priced higher than the rate for the next lowest volume.
16.02 Base Volume Established. In accordance with Minnesota Statute Chapter
115A.93, Scott County hereby establishes the minimum volume of 38 gallons or
less of mixed municipal solid waste collected. Collection shall be at least one time
per week.
17.00 PROBLEM MATERIALS.
17.01 Waste Tires. Disposal of waste tires in or on the land is prohibited. This does not
prohibit the storage of unprocessed waste tires at a collection or processing facility
permitted by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency or exempted by Minnesota
Statutes Chapter 115A.902 unless otherwise prohibited by local authority.
17.02 Yard Wastes. Yard wastes including garden wastes, leaves, lawn cuttings, weeds,
and prunings shall not be disposed of in mixed municipal solid waste, in a land
disposal facility or in a resource recovery facility except for the purposes of
composting or co-composting.
17.03 Mercury.
A. A person shall not knowingly place mercury or a thermostat, thermometer,
electric switch, appliance or medical or scientific instrument from which the
mercury has not been removed for reuse or recycling in solid waste, a waste
water disposal facility, or in a solid waste land disposal facility.
B. A person shall not knowingly place a fluorescent or high intensity discharge lamp
in solid waste or in a solid waste facility, except a household hazardous waste
collection or recycling facility.
17.04 Telephone Directories. Telephone directories shall not be disposed of in solid
waste, in a solid waste land disposal facility, or at a solid waste processing facility,
except at a recycling facility.
17.05 Motor Vehicle Fluids and Filters. Motor oil, brake fluid, power steering fluid,
transmission fluid, motor oil filters, or antifreeze shall not be disposed of in solid
1-2-26
Resolution 2018-046, Adopted March 20, 2018
waste, or in or on the land or waters of the state. This prohibition does not prevent
motor vehicle fluids and filters from being delivered to a recycling facility.
17.06 Batteries: Prohibition.
A. Rechargeable Batteries. A person may not place in mixed municipal solid waste
rechargeable batteries, a rechargeable battery pack, a product with a nonremovable
rechargeable battery, or a product powered by rechargeable batteries
or rechargeable battery pack unless all batteries or battery packs have been
removed.
B. Lead Acid Batteries. A person may not place a lead acid battery in mixed
municipal solid waste or dispose of a lead acid battery. All lead acid batteries
shall be recycled.
17.07 Major Appliance Recycling. All major appliances generated in Scott County shall
be recycled. Persons who collect, transport or process major appliances shall
ensure that:
A. Any capacitors and ballasts that may contain PCBs shall be removed and
disposed of in accordance with all federal, state and local requirements.
B. All chlorofluorocarbon refrigerant gas shall be removed and captured for
recycling.
C. All metals, including mercury, shall be recovered and reused or recycled.
17.08 Other Wastes. The Scott County Board may, by resolution, prohibit the disposal of
other wastes in a waste facility when alternatives to processing or disposal are
available.
18.00 INDEMNIFICATION AND COST RECOVERY.
18.01 Indemnification. This Ordinance shall not be construed to hold the Department or
the County of Scott or any officer or employee responsible thereof for any damage
to persons or property by reason of the inspection or re-inspection authorized herein
provided, or by reason of the approval or disapproval of equipment or licensing
herein, nor for any action in connection with the inspection or control of solid waste
or refuse or in connection with any other official duties.
18.02 Civil Action or Cost as Special Tax. If a person fails to comply with the provisions
of this Ordinance, the County may recover costs incurred for corrective action to
abate a threat to public health in a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction,
or at the discretion of the County Board, the costs may be certified to the County
Auditor as a special tax against the real property.
19.00 EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after
its passage and publication according to law.
SCOTT COUNTY
ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 3
Adopted by Scott County Board May 22, 2001, Effective May 23, 2001
Comprehensive Revision Adopted by Scott County Board January 12, 2010,
Effective January 20, 2010
Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance will be posted on the County web site at
www.co.scott.mn.us
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Amendments
AMENDMENTS
Amended by Scott County Board October 12, 2010, Effective October 12, 2010
Amend Chapter 6, Stormwater Management, Erosion Control, and Wetlands
Amended by Scott County Board February 1, 2011, Effective February 1, 2011
Amend Chapter 1, Title and Application; Chapter 4 General Provisions; Chapter
9 Animals, Stables and Feedlots; Chapter 16 Land Use Descriptions and
Standards; Chapter 20 General Zoning District; and Chapter 70 Shoreland
District
Amended by Scott County Board May 3, 2011, Effective May 3, 2011
Amend Chapter 4, General Provisions, Lot and Yard Requirements
Amended by Scott County Board April 10, 2012, Effective April 10, 2012
Amend Chapter 2: Administration, 2-2 Board of Adjustment and 2-3 Variances;
Chapter 5, Traffic, Parking, Access, and Loading; and Chapter 6, Stormwater
Management, Erosion Control and Wetlands.
Amended by Scott County Board February 5, 2013, Effective February 5, 2013
Amend Chapter 9: Animals, Stables and Feedlots; and Chapter 12: Energy
Systems.
Amended by Scott County Board February 4, 2014, Effective February 4, 2014
Amend Chapter 11: Signs; and Chapter 16: Land Use Descriptions and
Standards.
Amended by Scott County Board April 1, 2014, Effective April 1, 2014
Amend Scott County Zoning Ordinance No. 3: Chapter 1-7 Definitions; Chapter
4-3-2 Dwelling Units Prohibited; Chapter 4-3-9 Accessory Buildings and
Structures; Chapter 9-2 Limited Livestock Raising; Chapter 10-2 Mining
Administration; Chapter 16-2 Allowed Uses, Definitions, and Standards.
Amended by Scott County Board April 7, 2015, Effective April 7, 2015
Amend Chapter 6: Stormwater Management, Erosion Control, and Wetlands; and
Chapter 9: Animals, Stables and Feedlots.
Amended by Scott County Board November 17, 2015, Effective November 17, 2015
Amend Chapter 12: Energy Systems (Wind and Solar)
Amended by Scott County Board February 2, 2016, Effective February 2, 2016
Amend to Add Chapter 21: Official Map
Amended by Scott County Board April 5, 2016, Effective April 5, 2016
Amend Chapter 70: Shoreland District – 70-8-2 Access to Public Waters
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Table of Contents
Amended by Scott County Board June 21, 2016, Effective June 21, 2016
Amend to Add Chapter 16-2 Farm Wineries & Vineyards
Amended by Scott County Board March 7, 2017, Effective March 7, 2017
Amend Chapter 12: Energy Systems (Wind and Solar)
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Table of Contents
CHAPTER 1: TITLE AND APPLICATION
1-1 TITLE
1-2 PURPOSE
1-3 APPLICATION
1-4 AUTHORITY
1-5 COMPREHENSIVE REVISION
1-6 APPLICATION OF RULES
1-7 DEFINITIONS
CHAPTER 2: ADMINISTRATION
2-1 PLANNING DEPARTMENT
2-2 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
2-3 VARIANCES
2-4 PLANNING ADVISORY COMMISSION
2-5 ZONING AMENDMENTS
2-6 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
2-7 INTERIM USE PERMIT
2-8 ADMINISTRATIVE PERMITS/CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
2-9 BUILDING PERMITS
2-10 SITE PLAN REVIEW
2-11 FEES
2-12 FINANCIAL GUARANTEE
2-13 ENFORCEMENT
CHAPTER 3: NON-CONFORMING LOTS, BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES
3-1 PURPOSE
3-2 LEGAL NON-CONFORMING LOTS (LOT OF RECORD)
3-3 LEGAL NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES
3-4 LEGAL NON-CONFORMING USES
CHAPTER 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
4-1 PURPOSE
4-2 LOT AND YARD REQUIREMENTS
4-3 BUILDING PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
4-4 SCREENING AND LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
4-5 EXTERIOR LIGHTING STANDARDS
4-6 NUISANCE STANDARDS
4-7 OUTDOOR STORAGE STANDARDS
CHAPTER 5: TRAFFIC, PARKING, ACCESS, AND LOADING
5-1 PARKING
5-2 SITE ACCESS
5-3 TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT
5-4 OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING AREAS
CHAPTER 6: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT, EROSION CONTROL, AND WETLANDS
6-1 PURPOSE
ARTICLE A. ADMINISTRATION
6A-1 PURPOSE
6A-2 GRADING PERMITS REQUIRED
6A-3 GRADING PERMIT INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS
6A-3-1 Resource Management Plan
6A-3-2 Erosion and Sediment Control Plan
6A-3-3 Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan
6A-4 REVIEW OF GRADING PERMITS
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Table of Contents
6A-5 APPROVAL OF GRADING PERMIT; PERMIT ISSUANCE; FINANCIAL GUARANTEE
6A-6 DENIAL OF GRADING PERMIT
6A-7 INSPECTION
6A-8 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
6A-9 RESTORATION REQUIRED
6A-10 MAINTENANCE OF PERMANENT MEASURES
ARTICLE B. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS
6B-1 PURPOSE
6B-2 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
ARTICLE C. EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL STANDARDS
6C-1 PURPOSE
6C-2 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
ARTICLE D. WETLAND CONSERVATION
6D-1 PURPOSE
6D-2 LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNIT (LGU)
6D-3 REGULATION
6D-4 CRITERIA
6D-5 WETLANDS, DNR PROTECTED
ARTICLE E. FLOODPLAIN ALTERATIONS
6E-1 PURPOSE
6E-2 REGULATION
6E-3 CRITERIA
ARTICLE F. BLUFF STANDARDS
6F-1 PURPOSE
6F-2 REGULATION
ARTICLE G. WATERSHED STANDARDS
6G-1 PURPOSE
6G-2 REGULATION
6G-3 CRITERIA
ARTICLE H. ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION
6H-1 PURPOSE
6H-2 DEFINITIONS
6H-3 APPLICABILITY
6H-4 PROHIBITION OF ILLEGAL DISCHARGES
6H-5 PROHIBITION OF ILLICIT CONNECTIONS
6H-6 VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
CHAPTER 7: SPECIALTY HOUSING
7-1 PURPOSE
7-2 BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS
7-3 MOBILE HOMES
7-4 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS
CHAPTER 8: HOME OCCUPATIONS AND HOME EXTENDED BUSINESSES
8-1 HOME OCCUPATIONS
8-2 HOME EXTENDED BUSINESSES
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Table of Contents
CHAPTER 9: ANIMALS, STABLES, AND FEEDLOTS
9-1 PURPOSE
9-2 LIMITED LIVESTOCK GRAZING
9-3 STABLES
9-4 FEEDLOTS
CHAPTER 10: MINING
10-1 PURPOSE
10-2 ADMINISTRATION
10-3 INFORMATION REQUIRED
10-4 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
10-5 LAND RECLAMATION
CHAPTER 11: SIGNS
11-1 PURPOSE
11-2 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ALL ZONING DISTRICTS
11-3 SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS
11-4 SIGNS PERMITTED IN AGRICULTURAL, RURAL RESIDENTIAL, RESIDENTIAL SUBURBAN, AND
URBAN RESERVE DISTRICTS
11-5 SIGNS PERMITTED IN COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
11-6 PROHIBITED SIGNS
11-7 ADVERTISING SIGNS/BILLBOARDS
11-8 SIGN REMOVAL
11-9 SIGN MAINTENANCE
11-10 OBSOLETE SIGNS
11-11 UNSAFE OR DANGEROUS SIGNS
11-12 ADMINISTRATION/SIGN PERMITS
11-13 CALCULATING SIGN AREA
CHAPTER 12: ENERGY SYSTEMS (WIND AND SOLAR)
12-1 PURPOSE AND INTENT
12-2 DEFINITIONS
12-3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS - WECS
12-4 REQUIRED PERMITS - WECS
12-5 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS - WECS
12-6 ADDITIONAL SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL WECS
12-7 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
12-8 SETBACKS - WIND TURBINES
12-9 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS – COMMUNITY SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
12-10 REQUIRED PERMITS – COMMUNITY SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
12-11 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS – COMMUNITY SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
CHAPTER 13: WIRELESS COMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
13-1 PURPOSE
13-2 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
13-3 REQUIRED PERMITS
13-4 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
13-5 NON-INTERFERENCE
13-6 REMOVAL OF ABANDONED OR UNUSED TOWERS OR PORTIONS OF TOWERS
13-7 CO-LOCATION REQUIREMENTS
13-8 LIGHTS AND OTHER ATTACHMENTS
13-9 NEW TOWER REQUIREMENTS
13-10 EXISTING AND DAMAGED TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
13-11 TEMPORARY MOBILE CELL SITES
13-12 REQUIRED SETBACKS
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Table of Contents
CHAPTER 14: SEXUALLY ORIENTED USES
14-1 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE
14-2 ADULT USE DEFINITIONS
14-3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
14-4 SEXUALLY ORIENTED USES - PRINCIPAL
14-5 SEXUALLY ORIENTED USES - ACCESSORY
CHAPTER 15: LARGE ASSEMBLIES
15-1 PURPOSE
15-2 PERMIT REQUIRED
15-3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
15-4 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
15-5 LOCAL APPROVAL
15-6 REVOCATION OF PERMIT
CHAPTER 16: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS
16-1 PURPOSE
16-2 ALLOWED USES, DEFINITIONS, AND STANDARDS
16-3 OPEN SPACE OUTLOTS
16-4 NATURAL AREA CONSERVATION EASEMENTS
CHAPTERS 17-19: RESERVED
CHAPTER 20: GENERAL ZONING DISTRICT PROVISIONS
20-1 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
20-1-1 Agricultural/Rural Districts
20-1-2 Urban Reserve Districts
20-1-3 Residential Districts
20-1-4 Commercial Districts
20-1-5 Industrial Districts
20-1-6 Overlay Districts
20-2 ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
20-2-1 Appeals
20-2-2 Road Vacation
20-2-3 Rights-of-Way
20-2-4 Water Areas
20-3 ZONING MAP
20-4 USES TABLE
CHAPTER 21: OFFICIAL MAP
21-1 PURPOSE
21-2 ALLOWED USES, DEFINITIONS, AND STANDARDS
21-3 OPEN SPACE OUTLOTS
21-4 NATURAL AREA CONSERVATION EASEMENTS
21-5 PURPOSE
21-6 ALLOWED USES, DEFINITIONS, AND STANDARDS
21-7 OPEN SPACE OUTLOTS
21-8 NATURAL AREA CONSERVATION EASEMENTS
21-9 PURPOSE
CHAPTERS 22-24: RESERVED
CHAPTER 25: A-1, AGRICULTURAL PRESERVATION DISTRICT
25-1 PURPOSE
25-2 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, INTERIM, ADMINSTRATIVE, AND ACCESSORY USES
25-3 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Table of Contents
CHAPTER 26: A-2, AGRICULTURAL WOODLANDS DISTRICT
26-1 PURPOSE
26-2 APPLICATION
26-3 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, INTERIM, ADMINSTRATIVE, AND ACCESSORY USES
26-4 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
CHAPTER 27: A-3, AGRICULTURAL PRESERVATION DENSITY DISTRICT
27-1 PURPOSE
27-2 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, INTERIM, ADMINSTRATIVE, AND ACCESSORY USES
27-3 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
27-4 OPEN SPACE STANDARDS
CHAPTERS 28-29: RESERVED
CHAPTER 30: UER, URBAN EXPANSION RESERVE DISTRICT
30-1 PURPOSE
30-2 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, INTERIM, ADMINSTRATIVE, AND ACCESSORY USES
30-3 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
CHAPTER 31: UER-C, URBAN EXPANSION RESERVE CLUSTER DISTRICT
31-1 PURPOSE
31-2 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, INTERIM, ADMINSTRATIVE, AND ACCESSORY USES
31-3 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
31-4 OPEN SPACE STANDARDS
CHAPTER 32: UBR, URBAN BUSINESS RESERVE DISTRICT
32-1 PURPOSE
32-2 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, INTERIM, ADMINSTRATIVE, AND ACCESSORY USES
32-3 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
CHAPTER 33: UTR, URBAN TRANSITION RESERVE DISTRICT
33-1 PURPOSE
33-2 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, INTERIM, ADMINSTRATIVE, AND ACCESSORY USES
33-3 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
CHAPTER 34: UTR-C, URBAN TRANSITION RESERVE CLUSTER DISTRICT
34-1 PURPOSE
34-2 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, INTERIM, ADMINSTRATIVE, AND ACCESSORY USES
34-3 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
34-4 OPEN SPACE STANDARDS
CHAPTERS 35-39: RESERVED
CHAPTER 40: RR-1, RURAL RESIDENTIAL RESERVE DISTRICT
40-1 PURPOSE
40-2 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, INTERIM, ADMINSTRATIVE, AND ACCESSORY USES
40-3 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
CHAPTER 41: RR-1C, RURAL RESIDENTIAL RESERVE CLUSTER DISTRICT
41-1 PURPOSE
41-2 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, INTERIM, ADMINSTRATIVE, AND ACCESSORY USES
41-3 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
41-4 OPEN SPACE STANDARDS
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Table of Contents
CHAPTER 42: RR-2, RURAL RESIDENTIAL SINGLE FAMILY DISTRICT
42-1 PURPOSE
42-2 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, INTERIM, ADMINSTRATIVE, AND ACCESSORY USES
42-3 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
42-4 OPEN SPACE STANDARDS
CHAPTER 43: RR-3, RESIDENTIAL SUBURBAN SINGLE FAMILY DISTRICT
43-1 PURPOSE
43-2 P PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, INTERIM, ADMINSTRATIVE, AND ACCESSORY USES
43-3 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
CHAPTERS 44-49: RESERVED
CHAPTER 50: C-1, GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
50-1 PURPOSE
50-2 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, INTERIM, ADMINSTRATIVE, AND ACCESSORY USES
50-3 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
CHAPTERS 51-59: RESERVED
CHAPTER 60: I-1, RURAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
60-1 PURPOSE
60-2 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, INTERIM, ADMINSTRATIVE, AND ACCESSORY USES
60-3 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
CHAPTERS 61-69: RESERVED
CHAPTER 70: SL, SHORELAND DISTRICT
70-1 PURPOSE
70-2 JURISDICTION
70-3 COMPLIANCE
70-4 APPLICATION OF RULES
70-5 ADMINISTRATION
70-6 SHORELAND CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM AND LAND USE DISTRICTS
70-7 LAND USE DISTRICT DESCRIPTIONS
70-8 ZONING AND WATER SUPPLY/SANITARY PROVISIONS
70-9 NONCONFORMITIES
70-10 SUBDIVISION/PLATTING PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 71: FP, FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT
71-1 PURPOSE
71-2 JURISDICTION
71-3 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION
71-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS
71-5 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
71-6 FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW)
71-7 FLOOD FRINGE DISTRICT (FF)
71-8 GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT
71-9 SUBDIVISIONS
71-10 PUBLIC UTILITIES, RAILROADS, ROADS, AND BRIDGES
71-11 ADMINISTRATION
71-12 NONCONFORMING USES
71-13 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION
71-14 AMENDMENTS
CHAPTERS 72-79: RESERVED
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Table of Contents
CHAPTER 80: OSD, OPEN SPACE DESIGN DEVELOPMENT
80-1 PURPOSE
80-2 APPLICABILITY
80-3 APPLICATION
80-4 USES
80-5 DENSITY BONUS
80-6 OPEN SPACE STANDARDS
80-7 HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION
80-8 OPEN SPACE DESIGN DEVELOPMENT
80-9 RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
80-10 BUILD OUT PLAN (GHOST PLAT)
CHAPTER 81: PUD, PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
81-1 PURPOSE AND INTENT
81-2 GENERAL STANDARDS
81-3 COORDINATION WITH OTHER REGULATIONS
81-4 PROCEDURE FOR PROCESSING A PUD
81-5 DEVELOPMENT REVIEW TEAM
81-6 PUD CONCEPT PLAN
81-7 PUD GENERAL PLAN
81-8 PUD FINAL PLAN
81-9 USES
81-10 PUBLIC VALUE INCENTIVE PROGRAM
81-11 AMENDMENTS/REVIEW
CHAPTERS 82-89: RESERVED
CHAPTER 90: EFFECTIVE DATE
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 1 Title and Application
CHAPTER 1: TITLE AND APPLICATION
1-1 TITLE
This Ordinance, which is the January 20, 2010 comprehensive revision of the Scott
County Zoning Ordinance No. 3, shall be known, cited and referred to as the Scott
County Zoning Ordinance; and will be referred to herein as the Ordinance.
1-2 PURPOSE
This Ordinance is adopted for the purposes of:
1. Promoting the public health, safety, and general welfare.
2. Providing for orderly development of land for agricultural, residential,
commercial, industrial, recreational and public land uses.
3. Protecting and preserving the natural environment of the County.
4. Protecting and preserving agricultural land uses.
5. Encouraging the protection of historic and aesthetic resources in the
County.
6. Providing for the conservation of natural resources, water resources, and
energy resources.
7. Minimizing congestion in the public rights-of-way.
8. Preventing overcrowding of land and undue concentration of structures by
regulating land use, building construction, yard and setbacks.
9. Providing for the administration of this Ordinance.
10. Defining the powers and duties of the County staff, Board of Adjustment
and Appeals, the Planning Advisory Commission and County Board in
relation to this Ordinance.
11. Promoting cooperation between the County and Townships in the
administration of this Ordinance.
1-3 APPLICATION
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 1 Title and Application
1. Jurisdiction. The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to all lands
within the unincorporated areas of Scott County, except as provided for in
an orderly annexation agreement.
2. Relation to the County Comprehensive Plan. Pursuant to Minnesota
Statutes 394.24, as may be amended and County policy, the County’s
adopted Comprehensive Plan, as amended, shall serve as the basis upon
which land use and development shall be regulated. This Ordinance shall
not conflict with and shall be based upon and implement the County’s
Comprehensive Plan.
3. Standard, Requirement. Where the conditions imposed by any provision
of this Ordinance are either more or less restrictive than comparable
conditions imposed by other ordinance, rule or regulation of the County or
Township, the ordinance, rule or regulation which imposes the more
restrictive condition, standard, or requirement shall prevail.
4. Conformity with this Ordinance.
a. No building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged,
constructed, moved or altered, and no building, structure or land
shall be used for any purpose or in any manner which is not in
conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance and without a
building permit being issued.
b. No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance shall
be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements
set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this
Ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements
established by this Ordinance.
5. Building Compliance. Except as herein provided, no building, structure or
premises shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building permit shall
be issued that does not conform to the requirements of this Ordinance.
6. Monuments. For the purpose of this Ordinance, all international, federal,
state, county, and other official monuments, benchmarks, triangulation
points, and stations shall be preserved in their precise locations; and it
shall be the responsibility of the applicant to insure that these markers are
maintained in good condition during and following construction and
development. All section, one-quarter section and one-sixteenth section
corners shall be duly described and tied.
7. Uses Not Provided for Within Zoning Districts. Whenever in any zoning
district a use is neither specifically permitted nor denied, the use shall be
considered prohibited. In such cases, the County Board, Township Board,
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 1 Title and Application
or the Planning Advisory Commission, on their own initiative or upon
request, may conduct a study to determine if the use is acceptable and if
so, what zoning district would be most appropriate and the determination
as to conditions and standards relating to development on the use. The
County Board, Planning Advisory Commission or property owner, upon
receipt of the study shall, if appropriate, initiate an amendment to this
Zoning Ordinance to provide for the particular use under consideration or
shall find that the use is not compatible for development within the County.
8. Separability. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the County that
the several provisions of this Ordinance are separable in accordance with
the following:
a. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of
this Ordinance to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other
provisions of this Ordinance not specifically included in said
judgment.
b. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the
application of any provision of this Ordinance to a particular
property, building, or other structure, such judgment shall not affect
the application of said provision to any other property, building, or
structure not specifically included in said judgment.
9. Errors. When integrating amendments into this Ordinance, the Planning
Manager and County Attorney may correct manifest grammatical,
punctuation, and spelling errors; change reference numbers to conform
with sections, subsections, chapters and ordinances; substitute figures for
written words and vice versa; substitute dates for the words “the effective
date of this ordinance”’ and perform like actions to ensure a uniform code
of ordinances without altering the meaning of the ordinances enacted.
1-4 AUTHORITY
This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Minnesota Statutes,
Section 394.21 to 394.37 and 375.40.
1-5 COMPREHENSIVE REVISION
The County Board intends this Ordinance to be a comprehensive revision to Scott
County Zoning Ordinance No. 3. Any act done, offense committed, rights accruing or
accrued, liability, or penalty incurred or imposed prior to the effective date of this
Ordinance is not affected by its enactment.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 1 Title and Application
1-6 APPLICATION OF RULES
The language contained in this Ordinance shall be interpreted in accordance with the
following rules as applicable:
1. The singular includes the plural and the plural the singular.
2. The present includes the past and future tenses, and the future tense
includes the present tense.
3. The word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive.
4. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders.
5. In the event of conflicting provisions, the more restrictive shall apply.
6. The provisions of this Ordinance shall be construed and interpreted to give
full force and effect to its intent and purposes.
7. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of health,
safety, and welfare.
8. Except as this Ordinance specifically provides, no structure or land shall
be used or occupied for any purpose or in any manner which is not in
conformity with this Ordinance.
9. Meanings of words, unless otherwise defined herein, shall have the
meaning given in other applicable Scott County Ordinances, State
Statutes and Rules, and federal laws.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 1 Title and Application
1-7 DEFINITIONS
The following words or terms, whenever they occur in this Ordinance, are defined as
follows:
Accessory Dwelling Unit - An additional, self-contained dwelling unit that is
secondary to the Single Family Dwelling. Accessory dwelling units are
commonly referred to as “Granny Flats”, “Secondary Units”, or “Mother In-Law
Apartments.”
Accessory Dwelling Unit, Attached - A type of accessory dwelling unit that is
created by converting part of, or by building a separate dwelling unit into a Single
Family Dwelling or above an attached garage.
Accessory Dwelling Unit, Detached - A type of accessory dwelling unit that is
created by converting part of, or by building a separate dwelling unit into a
detached accessory structure of a Single Family Dwelling.
Accessory Structure - A structure of secondary or subordinate use to the
principal structure, located on the same lot.
Accessory Use - A use subordinate to and serving the principal use on the same
lot, which is compatible with and customarily incidental to the principal use.
Active Solar System - A solar energy system that requires external mechanical
power to move the collected heat.
Agricultural Products – Includes, but is not limited to, crops; fruits; cider;
vegetables; floriculture; herbs; livestock and livestock products (cattle, sheep,
hogs, horses, poultry, ostriches, emus, farmed deer, farmed buffalo, milk, eggs,
fur, etc.); Christmas trees, and maple sap.
Agricultural Products, Value-Added – Means the enhancement or improvement
of the overall value of an agricultural commodity or of an animal or plant product
to a higher value. The enhancement or improvement includes, but is not limited
to, marketing, agricultural processing, baking, transforming, canning, or
packaging.
Antenna Related:
1. Antenna - Any structure or device used for the purpose of receiving or
transmitting electromagnetic waves, including, but not limited to,
directional antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes, satellite dishes,
and omni-directional antennas, such as whip antennas.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 1 Title and Application
2. Co-location - Placement of two or more wireless telecommunication
devices on a single tower or other structure.
3. Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Services - Licensed commercial
wireless telecommunication services including, but not limited to, cellular,
personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio
(SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging, and similar
services that are marketed to the general public.
4. Mast - That portion of the outside tower system to which the antenna is
attached, and the support of extension required to elevate the antenna to
a height deemed necessary for adequate operation.
5. Private Land - Land that is not public land as defined in this Ordinance.
6. Public Land - Land owned or operated by a governmental entity.
7. Public Utility Uses - For the purposes of this Ordinance, commercial
wireless telecommunication service facilities shall not be considered as
public utility uses, and are defined separately.
8. Satellite Dish - An antenna device used for transmitting or receiving
electromagnetic waves, but which incorporates a reflective surface that is
solid, open mesh, or bar figured and is in the shape of a shallow dish,
cone or horn.
9. Temporary Cell Site - A fully transportable tower, antenna, and
accompanying equipment used on a temporary basis in the case of
equipment failure, testing of the system, or interim period after permits are
approved and before construction is completed.
10. Tower - Any ground or roof mounted pole, spire or structure, or
combination thereof higher than thirty-five (35) feet, to which an antenna is
attached and all supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, and masts,
intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an antenna, or to serve as
an antenna.
11. Tower Accessory Building - A structure incidental to a tower or antenna
site housing the necessary receiving, transmitting, or switching equipment.
Applicant - The owner, their agent or person having legal control, ownership
and/or interest in land for which the provisions of this Ordinance are being
considered or reviewed.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 1 Title and Application
Assembly - Any public gathering of 250 or more individuals at any location at any
single time for the purpose of musical, racing, political, promotional, or social
entertainment or other similar type of activity, but shall not apply to:
1. Any permanent place of worship, stadium, athletic field, arena, auditorium,
coliseum or government-sponsored events including meetings, polling and
other assemblies.
2. Gatherings or activities permitted or licensed by other State laws or
regulations of the County of Scott, including the State Parks System and
the Scott County and Three Rivers Regional Park System.
3. Activities by persons operating under other permit or license issued by
other state agency or the County. Other permit or license for purposes of
this subdivision, does not include a permit or license issued by the
Minnesota Department of Health.
4. Family celebratory gathering taking place entirely upon the premises of a
family member.
Assembly Area - The area within which the assembly activities are to take place.
Basement - Any floor level below the first story in a building, except that a floor
level in a building having only one floor level shall be classified as a basement
unless such floor level qualifies as a first story, and as defined in the State
Building Code.
Best Management Practices (BMPs) - Best management practices as described
in current Minnesota Pollution Control Agency’s manual and other sources as
approved by the County.
Bluff - A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff, or embankment having the
following characteristics (an area with an average slope of less than eighteen
(18) percent over a distance for fifty (50) feet or more shall not be considered
part of the bluff):
1. The slope rises at least twenty five (25) feet.
2. The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to the top of the bluff
averages thirty (30) percent or greater.
Bluff Impact Zone - A bluff and land located within twenty (20) feet from the top of
a bluff.
Bluff, Toe - The lower point of a fifty (50) foot segment with an average slope
exceeding eighteen (18) percent.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 1 Title and Application
Bluff, Top - The higher point of a fifty (50) foot segment with an average slope
exceeding eighteen (18) percent.
Board of Adjustment - The Scott County Board of Adjustment established by this
Ordinance.
Buffer - The use of land, topography, difference in elevation, space, fences or
landscape plantings to screen or partially screen a use or property from another
use or property or to shield or mitigate noise, lights, or other impacts.
Buffer Yard - A strip of land utilized to screen or partially screen a use or property
from another use or property or to shield or mitigate noise, lights, or other
impacts.
Buildable Land - Non-hydric land having a size and configuration capable of
supporting a principal and accessory buildings, with an approved domestic waste
water treatment system and potable water system.
Building - Any structure having a roof which may provide shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals or property of any kind. When any portion thereof is completely
separated from every other part thereof by area separation, each portion of such
building shall be deemed as a separate building.
Building Height - The vertical distance between the highest adjoining ground
level at the building or ten feet above the lowest ground level, whichever is lower,
and the highest point of a flat roof or average height of the highest gable of a
pitched or hipped roof.
Building Line - A line parallel to the street right-of-way line, and ordinary high
water level, if applicable, at its closest point to any story level of a building and
representing the minimum distance which all or part of the building is set back
from said right-of-way line, or ordinary high water level.
Building Official - The officer or other designated authority charged with the
administration and enforcement of the State Building Code, or his duly authorized
representative.
Building Setback - See "Setback".
Business - Any occupation, employment or enterprise wherein merchandise or
associated equipment is exhibited, stored or sold, or where services are offered
for compensation.
Carport - An automobile shelter having one (1) or more sides open.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 1 Title and Application
Certificate of Compliance - See "Section 2-8".
Certificate of Survey - A land survey prepared by a land surveyor registered in
the State of Minnesota with a certification that the information on the land survey
is accurate.
Cluster Development - The development pattern and technique whereby
structures are arranged in closely related groups to make the most efficient use
of the natural amenities of the land.
Commercial Use - The principal use of land or buildings for the sale, lease,
rental, or trade of products, goods and services.
Common Open Space - Any open space including parks, nature areas,
playgrounds, trails and recreational buildings and structures, which is intended
for use by, and is an integral part of, a development and is not owned on an
individual basis by each owner of a dwelling unit.
Community Water and Sewer Systems - Utility systems serving more than one
building or lot.
Comprehensive Plan - The Scott County Comprehensive Plan, as amended.
Conditional Use - A use which may not generally be appropriate in a specified
zoning district, but may be permitted with appropriate restrictions upon a finding
that; certain conditions as stated in the Ordinance exist, the use conforms to the
Comprehensive Plan, and the use is compatible with the existing neighborhood.
Conservation Easement - A legal agreement creating an interest in real property
created in a manner to impose limitations or affirmative obligations regarding the
use of property including the retention, protection, and maintenance of open
space.
Conveyance System - Any path, including but not limited to, ditches, streams,
overland flow channels, and storm sewer systems, traveled by water as it passes
through the watershed.
Conveyor, Lateral - Any system that provides drainage for local areas that do not
have natural or artificial water storage or retention areas or natural channels.
“Lateral conveyors” outlet into natural or artificial water storage or retention areas
or outlet directly into “outflow conveyors.”
Conveyor, Outflow - Any system, including but not limited to, streams and other
natural channels, that forms the outlet for a natural or artificial water storage or
retention area of any landlocked depression where the accumulated runoff from
extreme storm events would pose risk of injury or property damage.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 1 Title and Application
County - Scott County, Minnesota.
County Board - Scott County Board of Commissioners.
County Vision - The Scott County Vision as outlined in the Scott County
Comprehensive Plan, as amended.
Crop Production – The use of land for the purpose of producing an agricultural
crop, including but not limited to corn, soybeans, small grains, alfalfa, hay, and
landscape plants.
Crop Tilling - Land capable of being cultivated and producing a crop (i.e. corn,
soybean, alfalfa, nursery, etc.). This would not include areas where there are
houses, sheds, barns, feedlots, roads, woodland, wetland or water bodies.
Deck - A horizontal, unenclosed platform, with or without attached railings, seats
or other features, attached or functionally related to a principal use.
Deed Restriction/Title Restriction - A stipulation recorded on the property
deed/title stating that the property be used or not be used for a particular purpose
or purposes.
Direct Sunlight - Sunlight unobstructed by any improvement or tree within the
Solar Access Space.
District - See "Zoning District".
Dwelling, Single Family - A dwelling unit designed exclusively for and occupied
exclusively by one (1) family.
Dwelling Unit - A residential building or portion thereof intended for occupancy by
one (1) or more persons with facilities for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
Easement - The right to use the land of another owner for a specified use. An
easement may be granted for the purpose of constructing and maintaining
walkways, roadways, individual sewage treatment systems, utilities, drainage,
driveway, and other uses.
Equine - Horses, ponies, mules or burros.
Erosion - Any process that moves soil along or away from the surface of the land
by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. Excessive erosion occurs when either
or both of the following conditions exist:
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 1 Title and Application
1. Estimated average annual rate of soil erosion for a particular parcel of land
resulting from sheet and rill erosion or wind erosion is greater than the soil
loss tolerance for any of the soil series comprising that particular parcel of
land.
2. Evidence of active gully erosion.
Exterior Storage (includes open storage) - The storage of goods, materials,
equipment, manufactured products and similar items not fully enclosed by a
building.
Eye Level View - For the purposes of this Ordinance, eye level view will be
measured six (6) feet above the grade of the site to be screened.
Family - An individual; or two or more persons related by blood, marriage or
adoption living together; or not more than four persons not so related living
together; as a housekeeping unit in a single dwelling unit.
Farm - See "Agricultural Use" in Chapter 16.
Filter Strip - A linear strip of land along a lake, wetland, river, creek, or
stormwater ponding area where vegetation is established and maintained as a
means to slow the velocity of stormwater drainage and to filter sediment and
pollutants from the stormwater.
Floodplain Related:
1. Equal Degree of Encroachment - A method of determining the location of
floodway boundaries so that floodplain lands on both sides of a stream are
capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.
2. Flood - A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the
stage of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry
areas.
3. Flood Frequency - The frequency for which it is expected that a specific
flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
4. Flood Fringe - That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway.
Flood fringe is synonymous with the term "floodway fringe" used in the
Flood Insurance Study for Scott County.
5. Floodplain - The beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or
watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional
flood.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 1 Title and Application
6. Flood-Proofing - A combination of structural provisions, changes, or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for
the reduction or elimination of flood damages.
7. Floodway - The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse
and those portions of the adjoining floodplain which are reasonably
required to carry or store the regional flood discharge.
8. Obstruction - Any dam, wall, wharf, dock, pier, embankment, levee, dike,
pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert,
building, wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along,
across, or projecting into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory
floodplain which may impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of
water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such
water.
9. Reach - A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment
of a stream or river influenced by a natural or man-made obstruction. In
an urban area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive
bridge crossings would most typically constitute a reach.
10. Regional Flood - A flood which is representative of large floods known to
have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of
what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude
of the 100-year recurrence interval. Regional flood is synonymous with
the term "base flood" used in the Flood Insurance Study.
11. Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation - The Regulatory Flood Protection
Elevation shall be an elevation no lower than one (1) foot above the
elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused
by encroachments on the floodplain that result from designation of a
floodway.
Floor Area, Finished - The sum of the finished areas of all floors of the building
measured from the exterior walls.
Floor Plan - A schematic representation of the anticipated utilization of the floor
area within a building or structure, but not necessarily as detailed as construction
plans.
Frontage - That boundary of a lot which abuts a publicly maintained road.
Garage, Private - An accessory structure or accessory portion of the principal
structure which is intended for and used to store personal vehicles.
Garage, Repair - See "Motor Vehicle Repair Garage".
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 1 Title and Application
Garage, Storage - A structure used for the storage of commercial or industrial
equipment or material.
Grade - An underlying surface such as earth or a walking surface.
Habitable Space – A space in a building for living, sleeping, eating, or cooking.
Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces and similar areas
are not considered habitable spaces.
Historic Monuments - A device erected to permanently mark the location and
provide information regarding a historic event, structure, or occupancy.
Hardship - As is defined in Minnesota Statues, Chapter 394.
Hydric Soil - For the purposes of this Ordinance, hydric soils shall include:
1. Hydric soils as shown on the Scott County Geographic Information
System (GIS); or
2. Land inside of the 100 year floodplain area, as determined by the County,
using two (2) foot contour surveys of relevant areas; or
3. A field delineation of the hydric soils by a Registered Soil Scientist
following the criteria found in the United States Army Corps of Engineers
Wetland Delineation Manual (1987 Manual) or the Natural Resource
Conservation Service publication Field Indicators of Hydric Soils in the
United States.
Impervious - An artificial or natural surface that is highly resistant to infiltration by
water. It includes surfaces such as compacted sand or clay as well as most
conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots, and other similar
structures.
Industrial Use - The use of land or buildings for the production, manufacture,
warehousing, storage, or transfer of goods, products, commodities or other
wholesale items.
Infirmed - Being of such state of mind or body as to require assistance in
maintaining oneself.
Intensive Vegetation Clearing - The complete removal of trees or shrubs in a
contiguous patch, strip, row or block.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 1 Title and Application
Interim Use - A temporary use of property until a particular date, until the
occurrence of a particular event, or until the use is no longer allowed by zoning
regulations.
Land Disturbing Activities - Any change of the land surface including, but not
limited to, removing vegetation cover, excavating, filling, and grading.
Land Reclamation - The improvement of land by hauling in material and/or regrading
the land.
Landscaping - Planting of trees, grass, ground cover, shrubs, and screening,
including the use of rock and timbers.
Land Use Permit - A permit for the relocation, construction or alteration of an
agricultural building.
Lighting Related:
1. Cutoff - The point at which all light rays emitted by a lamp, light source or
luminare are completely eliminated at a specific angle above the ground.
2. Cutoff Angle - The angle formed by a line drawn from the direction of light
rays at the light source and a line perpendicular to the ground from the
light source above which no light is emitted.
3. Cutoff Type Luminare - A luminare with elements such as shields,
reflectors, or refractor panels which direct and cut off the light at a cutoff
angle that is less than ninety (90) degrees.
4. Flashing Light - A light source which is not constant in intensity or color at
all times while in use.
5. Foot Candle - A unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points of
which are one (1) foot from a uniform point source of one (1) candle.
6. Light Source - A single artificial point source of luminescence that emits
measurable radiant energy in or near the visible spectrum.
7. Lighting Standards - A pole made of a wood, metal or other material which
is affixed to the ground and utilized for the sole purpose of mounting light
fixtures.
8. Luminare - A complete lighting unit consisting of a light source and all
necessary mechanical, electrical and decorative parts.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 1 Title and Application
9. Outdoor Lighting - Any light source or collection of light sources, located
outside a building, including but not limited to, light sources attached to
any part of a structure, located on the surface of the ground or located on
freestanding poles.
10. Outdoor Light Fixture - Outdoor electrically powered illuminating devices,
outdoor lighting or reflective surfaces, lamps and similar devices,
permanently installed or portable, used for illumination or advertisement.
The fixture includes the hardware that houses the illumination source and
to which the illumination source is attached including, but not limited to,
the hardware casing. Such devices shall include, but are not limited to,
search, spot, and flood lights, for:
a. Buildings and structures.
b. Recreational areas.
c. Parking lot lighting.
d. Landscaping lighting.
e. Signs.
f. Street lighting.
g. Product display area lighting.
h. Building overhangs and open canopies.
11. Security Lighting - Outdoor lighting fixtures installed exclusively as a
measure to reduce the possible occurrence of a crime on the property.
12. Shielding - A technique or method of construction permanently covering
the top and sides of a light source by a material which restricts the light
emitted to be projected below an imaginary horizontal plane passing
through the light fixture.
13. Spillage - Any reflection, glare or other artificial light that emits onto any
adjoining property or right-of-way and is above a defined maximum
illumination.
Lot - A parcel of land designated by metes and bounds, registered land survey,
or other accepted means and separated from other parcels or portions by said
description for the purpose of sale, lease, or separation thereof. In all cases, a
road shall be considered a property line.
Lot of Record - See "Lot, Legal Nonconforming".
Lot, Corner - A lot situated at the junction of, and abutting on two (2) or more
intersecting streets. On a corner lot, both streets shall be deemed front lot lines
for the application of this Ordinance.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 1 Title and Application
Lot, Legal Non-Conforming - Any lot that legally existed prior to the adoption date
of this Ordinance, which fails to meet the current required lot size, width, or does
not have the required frontage on a publicly maintained road.
Lot, Illegal Non-Conforming - A non-conforming lot that did not legally exist prior
to the adoption date of this Ordinance, and is a violation of this Ordinance.
Lot Area - The area of a lot in a horizontal plane bounded by the lot lines.
Lot Coverage - The area of a lot occupied by impervious material, including but
not limited to, buildings, paved surfaces, class V, crushed asphalt, concrete, or
rock, and driveways.
Lot Depth - The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear
lot line of a lot.
Lot Line - The property line bounding a lot except that where any portion of a lot
extends into the public right-of-ways, the lot line shall be deemed to be the
boundary of said public right-of-way.
Lot Line, Front - That boundary of a lot which abuts a publicly maintained street,
and in the case of a corner lot both lot lines abutting streets shall be considered
front lot lines. The remaining lot lines shall be considered side lot lines.
Lot Line, Rear - That boundary of a lot which is opposite the front lot line. If the
rear line is less than ten (10) feet in length, or if the lot forms a point at the rear,
the rear lot line shall be a line ten (10) feet in length within the lot, parallel to, and
at the maximum distance from the front lot line.
Lot Line, Side - Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
Lot, Through - A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines abutting two (2)
substantially parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot, both
streets shall be deemed front lines for the application of this Ordinance.
Lot Width - The minimum required horizontal distance between the side lot lines
measured at right angles to the lot depth, at the front setback line, and at the
setback line from the OWHL for riparian shoreland lots. For cul-de-sac lots, lot
width shall mean the minimum required horizontal distance between the side lot
lines, measured along a straight line at the midpoint of the front setback line.
Manufactured Dwelling - A dwelling unit which is of closed construction and
which is made or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation, or
assembly and installation, on the building site.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 1 Title and Application
Metes and Bounds - A method of property description by means of their direction
and distance from an identifiable point of beginning.
Mobile Home - A dwelling unit designed for transportation after fabrication on
public highways on its own wheels or using a trailer or flatbed, and arriving at the
site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling unit completely constructed and
ready for occupancy, except for incidental unpacking operations and the
connection to utilities.
Moved Structure - See "Structure, Moved"
Natural and Artificial Water Storage and Retention Areas - Any natural or
artificial lake, pond, surface water storage area, or wetland that has the potential
to temporarily retain surface water runoff for the purpose of runoff water
management or water quality management.
Non-Conformity - Any legal use, structure or parcel of land already in existence,
recorded or authorized before the adoption of official controls or amendments
thereto that would not have been permitted to become established under the
terms of the official controls as now written, if the official controls had been in
effect prior to the date it was established, recorded or authorized.
Off-Site Impacts - Any observable detrimental effect, damage, or result to
adjoining lands, bodies of water, watercourses, or wetlands or the atmosphere
due to excessive erosion and sedimentation.
Official Control - Legislatively defined and enacted policies, standards, precise
detailed maps, and other criteria, all of which control the physical development of
the County, or any part thereof, or any detail thereof, and the means of
translating into ordinances all or part of the general objectives of the
Comprehensive Plan. Such official controls may include, but are not limited to
ordinances establishing zoning, subdivision controls, site plan regulations,
sanitary codes, building codes, and official maps.
Official County Map - A map adopted in accordance with the provisions of
Minnesota State Statute 394.
Opaque - As applied to a fence or wall, at least eighty percent (80%) of the view
from the opposite side is blocked, when observed from a point perpendicular to
the opaque material, fence, or wall.
Open Space - Open areas, including parks, nature areas, playgrounds, and trails.
Operational Plan - A narrative description of the type of proposed activity on the
site and a description of the daily function of that activity.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 1 Title and Application
Ordinance - The Scott County Zoning Ordinance No. 3.
Ordinary High Water Level - The boundary of public waters and wetlands, and
shall be an elevation delineating the highest water level which has been
maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape,
commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from predominantly
aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. For watercourses, the ordinary high water
level is the elevation of the top of the bank of the channel. For reservoirs and
flowage, the ordinary high water level is the operating elevation of the normal
summer pool.
Outdoor Storage - The location of any equipment, goods, materials, junk, debris,
motor vehicle (not intended for sale), or any other item outside of a completely
enclosed building.
Overlay Zoning District - Regulations imposed in addition to those found in the
underlying zoning district, in order to address particular topographic or
development concerns.
Owner - Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust or any
other legal entity having proprietary interest in the land.
Owner-Occupancy - A property owner, as reflected in title records, who makes
his or her legal residence at a given lot, as evidenced by voter registration,
vehicle registration, or similar means and actually resides at a given lot more
than six (6) months out of any given year.
Parking Space - A surfaced and permanently maintained area on privately or
publicly owned property either within or outside of a building of sufficient size to
store one (1) standard vehicle.
Passive Solar Energy System - A solar energy system that uses natural and
architectural components to collect and store solar energy without using any
external mechanical power.
Pastures - Areas where grass or other sod-forming vegetation is grown for the
purpose of Pasturing.
Pasturing – The grazing of animals in an area of land where the residence time
and concentration of animals is such that no less than 80% living or residual
vegetative cover is maintained at all times, except that up to 10% of the total
pasture area may have coverage less than 80% for supplemental feeding and or
watering purposes. Tree and shrub canopy may be counted at a ratio of one half
to one towards meeting the minimum vegetative cover requirements. Percent
cover shall be determined by the Scott Soil and Water Conservation District
using standard transect-line and aerial photo interpretation methodologies.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 1 Title and Application
Pedestrian Way - A public or private right-of-way across or within a block
intended to be used by pedestrians.
Performance Standard - The minimum criteria applicable to all land uses and
procedures of the Zoning Ordinance.
Planned Unit Development - A type of development characterized by a unified
site design for a number of dwelling units or dwelling sites on a parcel, whether
for sale, rent, or lease; also usually involving clustering of these units or sites to
provide areas of common open space, density increases, and a mix of structure
types and land uses; and whereby internal site design standard deviations from
this Ordinance may be allowed to improve site design and operation. Where
appropriate this development control advocates: (1) a mixture of land uses, (2)
the clustering of residential land uses providing common and public open space,
and (3) increased administrative discretion to a local professional planning staff
and the setting aside of present land use regulations and rigid plat approval
processes.
Planning Advisory Commission - The Scott County Planning Advisory
Commission established by this Ordinance.
Planning Department - The Scott County department charged with the
enforcement of this Ordinance.
Principal Use/Building - The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from
subordinate or accessory uses. A “principal use” may be either permitted,
interim, conditional, or allowed by administrative permit.
Productive Acreage - An area of land used for Crop Production or Pasturing,
measured in acres. Lawns and other landscaped areas may be included as
Productive Acreage provided they will be used for Crop Production or Pasturing
purposes, as attested to in an affidavit signed by the applicant. Lands that are
not currently used for Pasturing may be included as Productive Acreage provide:
a) the minimum living and residual vegetative cover requirements under the
Pasturing definition is maintained, and b) the land is not enrolled in a
conservation program that prohibits it from being used for cropping, grazing
and/or animal waste disposal. Wetlands and areas being grazed but which do
not meet the minimum living and residential vegetative cover requirements for
the Pasturing definition (i.e. feedlots) shall not qualify as Productive Acreage.
Property Line - The legal boundaries of a parcel of property.
Protective Covenant - A restriction of the use placed upon the property by a
present or former owner and recorded in the Office of the Recorder or the
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 1 Title and Application
Registrar of Titles. The County will not be responsible to enforce private
protective covenants.
Protected Waters - Any waters of the State as defined in Minnesota Statutes ,
however, no lake, pond or flowage of less than ten (10) acres in size and no river
or stream having a total drainage area less than two (2) square miles shall be
regulated for the purposes of Shoreland regulations.
Public Land and Open Space - Land owned or operated by municipal, school
district, county, state or other governmental units or special districts.
Public Right-of-Way - The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, cartway, bicycle lane and public sidewalk in which the County, Township
or municipality has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel
purposes and utility easements of the County. A public right-of-way does not
include the airwaves above a right-of-way with regard to cellular or other nonwire
telecommunications or broadcast service. The lands described by an
easement, deed, dedication, title, law or occupation of a road, highway, street,
cartway, bicycle lane, or sidewalk are included as right-of-way.
Public Waters - Any “public waters” as defined in Minnesota Statutes Section
103G.005, subdivision 15.
Recreation Area, Public - Includes uses that are commonly provided for the
public at parks and playgrounds, such as swing sets and slides, picnic tables,
ball fields, which are owned and operated by a unit of government for the
purpose of providing recreation.
Recreational Use, Indoor - Includes all uses such as bowling alleys, roller and ice
skating rinks, driving ranges, health clubs and game courts that are privately or
publicly owned and operated with the intention of earning profit by providing
entertainment and/or recreational opportunities for the public.
Regional Flood - A flood which is representative of large floods known to have
occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can be
expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year
recurrence interval.
Registered Land Survey - A survey map of registered land designed to simplify a
complicated metes and bounds description, designating the same into a tract or
tracts of Registered Land Survey Number.
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation - A point not less than one (1) foot above
the water surface profile associated with the regional flood, plus any increases in
flood heights attributable to encroachments on the floodplain. It is the elevation
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 1 Title and Application
to which uses regulated by this Ordinance are required to be elevated or flood
proofed.
Resource Management Plan - A document containing the requirements of
Section 6A3-1 of this Ordinance.
Road - See "Street."
Runoff - The portion of rainfall on an area that does not soak into the soil or
become trapped in depressions and is discharged from the area on the land
surface either in sheet or channelized flow.
Salvage, Agricultural /Industrial Equipment or Parts - Equipment or parts not
currently being used for the purpose of farming or business activities.
Salvage Vehicle - Any unlicensed or inoperable motor vehicle.
Sanitary System - Pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, and force main and all
other construction, devices, appliances or appurtenances used for conducting
sewage or industrial waste or other wastes to a point of ultimate disposal.
Sediment - The solid mineral or organic material that is in suspension, is being
transported, or has been moved from its original location by erosion and has
been deposited at another location.
Sedimentation - The depositing of soil material that has been moved from its site
or origin by wind, water, or gravity.
Selective Cutting - The removal of single scattered trees.
Semi-Public Use - The use of land by a private, non-profit organization to provide
a public service that is ordinarily open to some persons outside the regular
constituency of the organization.
Sensitive Resource Management - The preservation and management of areas
unsuitable for development in their natural state due to constraints such as
shallow soils over ground water or bedrock, highly erosive or expansive soils,
steep slopes, susceptibility to flooding or occurrence of flora or fauna in need of
special protection.
Setback - The minimum horizontal distance between a structure, individual
sewage treatment system, or other facility, and a road, road right-of-way,
property line, top of bluff, or the ordinary high water level of a lake, stream, river,
or other protected water.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 1 Title and Application
Setback, Windbreak - The distance from the street right-of-way to the street side
edge of a growth of trees or shrubs serving to break the force of the wind.
Sewage - Any water-carried domestic waste, exclusive of footing and roof
drainage of any residence, industry, agricultural or commercial establishment,
whether treated or untreated including the liquid wastes produced by bathing,
laundry and culinary operation, and from toilets and floor drains associated with
these sources. Raw sewage is sewage which has not been subjected to any
treatment process.
Sewage Treatment System - A septic tank and soil absorption system or other
individual or cluster type sewage treatment system as described and regulated in
Section 8-6-14 of this Ordinance and the Scott County Individual Sewage
Treatment System Ordinance No. 4.
Shore Impact Zone - Land located between the ordinary high water level of a
public water and a line parallel to it at a setback of fifty (50) percent of the
structure setback.
Shoreland - Land located within the following distances from public waters: One
thousand (1000) feet from the ordinary high water level of a lake, pond or
flowage; and three hundred (300) feet from a river or stream, or the landward
extent of a floodplain designated in Chapter 71 of this Ordinance on such a river
or stream, whichever is greater. The limits of shoreland may be reduced
whenever the waters involved are bounded by topographic divides which extend
landward from the water for lesser distances and when approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources.
Shoreland Alteration - Grading and filling in shoreland areas or any alteration of
the natural topography where the slope of the land is toward a public water or a
watercourse leading to a public water.
Significant Historic Site - Any archaeological site, standing structure or other
property that meets the criteria for eligibility to the National Register of Historic
Places or is listed in the State Register of Historic Sites, or is determined to be an
unplatted cemetery that falls under the provisions of Minnesota State Statutes. A
historic site meets these criteria if it is presently listed on either register or if it is
determined to meet the qualifications for listing after review by the Minnesota
State Archaeologist or the Director of the Minnesota Historical Society. All
unplatted cemeteries are automatically considered to be significant historic sites.
Significant Natural Features - Any site containing natural features including steep
topography, wetlands, watercourses, woodland areas, lakes, or rivers that are
represented as a pre-settlement condition in Scott County.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 1 Title and Application
Soil Loss Tolerance - The maximum average annual rate of soil loss from sheet
and the erosion of wind erosion, expressed in tons per acre per year, that is
allowed in order to indefinitely sustain the productive capacity of soil to produce
food and fiber.
Soil Survey - A graphic and narrative inventory of existing soil types contained on
a site.
Solar Access Space - That airspace above all lots within the Zoning District
necessary to prevent any improvement, vegetation or tree located on said lots
from casting a shadow upon any solar collector located within said zone greater
than the shadow case by a hypothetical vertical wall ten (10) feet high located
along the property lines of said lots between hours of 9:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m.,
Central Standard Time on December 21. This Ordinance shall not apply to any
improvement or tree which casts a shadow upon a solar collector at the time of
the installation of said collector, or to vegetation existing at the time of installation
of said solar collector.
Solar Collector - A device, or combination of devices, structure, or part of a
device or structure that transforms direct solar energy into thermal, chemical or
electrical energy and that contributes significantly to a structure's energy supply.
Solar Energy - Radiant energy (direct, diffuse, and reflected) received from the
sun.
Solar Energy System - A complete design or assembly consisting of a solar
energy collector, an energy storage facility (where used), and components to the
distribution of transformed energy (to the extent they cannot be used jointly with
a conventional energy system). To qualify as a solar energy system, the system
must be permanently located for not less than ninety (90) days in any calendar
year beginning with the first calendar year after completion of construction.
Solar Skyspace - The space between a solar energy collector and the sun which
must be free of obstructions that shade the collector to an extent which precludes
its cost-effective operation.
Solar Skyspace Easement - A right, expressed as an easement, covenant,
condition, or other property interest in any deed or other instrument executed by
or on behalf of any landowner, which protects the solar skyspace of an actual,
proposed, or designated solar energy collector at a described location by
forbidding or limiting activities or land uses that with access to solar energy. The
solar skyspace must be described as the three-dimensional space in which
obstruction is prohibited or limited, or as the times of day during which direct
sunlight to the solar collector may not be obstructed, or as a combination of the
two methods.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 1 Title and Application
Solar Structure - A structure designed to utilize solar energy as an alternative for,
or supplement to, a conventional energy system.
Steep Slope - Land where agricultural activity or development is either not
recommended or described as poorly suited due to slope steepness and the
site's soil characteristics, as mapped and described in the Scott County Soil
Survey or other technical reports, unless appropriate design and construction
techniques and farming practices are used in accordance with the provisions of
this Ordinance. Where specific information is not available, steep slopes are
lands having average slopes over twelve (12) percent, as measured over
horizontal distances of fifty (50) feet or more, that are not bluffs.
Stormwater Retention Area - An area designed by a licensed professional and
approved by the County to retain water to control the flow of stormwater.
Street - A right-of-way affording primary access by pedestrians and vehicles to
abutting properties, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare,
parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, court, way, trail or however
otherwise designated. Ingress and egress easements shall not be considered
streets. The following designations shall be used as defined in the Scott County
Transportation Plan:
1. Principal Arterial - Principal arterials consist primarily of Interstate
highways and other freeways or expressways, most of them owned and
operated by Mn/DOT, with some under the jurisdiction of counties or
cities. The emphasis of principal arterials is on mobility rather than land
access. Among other functions, they connect the region with other areas
in the state and other states. Principal arterials also connect the metro
centers to major commercial concentrations. Principal Arterials provide for
the longest trips in the region and express bus service.
2. Minor Arterial - Highways which serve medium to short trips and provide
access to the principal arterial. They interconnect concentrations of
commercial or industrial land uses and connect cities and towns of the
region to each other and to similar places outside the region. The
emphasis is on mobility rather than land access.
3. Collector - Streets that carry traffic from local streets to major and minor
arterials, including the principal entrance streets of a residential
subdivision and streets used for circulation between neighborhoods.
4. Local - Streets which are used principally for access to abutting properties,
especially residential properties.
5. Cul-De-Sac - A local street having one end open to traffic and the other
end permanently terminated by a vehicular turn-around.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 1 Title and Application
6. Service or Frontage - A local street which is parallel and adjacent to a
highway or an arterial street and which provides access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.
7. Connector - A specific type of road identified in the Rural Residential
Service Area Detailed Area Plan (DAP) that is intended to help distribute
traffic through the DAP study area, providing accessibility to the adjoining
collectors and minor arterials from local roads. Additionally, these roads
will improve connectivity throughout each township for the purposes of
better traffic flow, emergency vehicle access and flexibility during
construction which requires detours.
Street Width - The width of the right-of-way, measured at right angles to the
centerline of the street.
Story - That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor
and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall
be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost
floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level directly above a
basement, cellar or unused under-floor space is more than six (6) feet above
grade as defined herein for more than fifty (50) percent of the total perimeter or is
more than twelve (12) feet above grade as defined herein at any point, such
basement, cellar or unused above-floor space shall be considered a story.
Structural Alteration - Any change, other than incidental repairs, which would
prolong or modify the life of the supporting members of a building, such as
bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or foundations.
Structure - Anything constructed, the use of which requires more or less
permanent location on the ground; or attached to something having a permanent
location on the ground.
Structure, Illegal Nonconforming - A structure which did not legally exist prior to
the adoption of this Ordinance, and does not conform with the current ordinance
requirements for the district in which it is located.
Structure, Legal Nonconforming - A structure which legally existed prior to the
adoption date of this Ordinance, but which is not in compliance with the
requirements of this Ordinance for the district in which the structure is located.
Structure, Moved - Any structure which is moved into or moved within the
County.
Structure, Principal - The main building on a parcel of land.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 1 Title and Application
Subdivision - The creation of one or more lots under the provisions of the Scott
County Land Subdivision Ordinance #7.
Surface Water-Oriented Commercial Use - The use of land for commercial
purposes, where access to and use of a surface water feature is an integral part
of the normal operation of business. Day parks and campgrounds are examples
of such use.
Surfaced - A road, driveway, approach, or parking lot which consists of gravel,
crushed rock, lime rock, bituminous surface, concrete surface, or other similar
material.
SWCD - The Scott Soil and Water Conservation District.
Title Restriction - See Deed Restriction.
Tower - A structure as defined in the Uniform Building Code.
Township Transportation Map - A detailed map developed by the Township
showing existing and proposed road corridors.
Toxic and Hazardous Wastes - As defined in Scott County Hazardous Waste
Management Ordinance.
Truck Stop - A motor fuel station devoted principally to the needs of semitractor/
trailer units and trucks, and which may include eating and/or sleeping
facilities, but not to include a motel or a hotel.
Use - The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is designated,
arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied, utilized or maintained.
Use, Accessory - See "Accessory Use".
Use, Conditional - See "Conditional Use".
Use, Illegal Nonconforming - Any use of a property or structure which did not
legally exist prior to the adoption date of this Ordinance as a permitted or
conditional use in the zoning district in which the use is located, and is not
allowed as a permitted, conditional, or interim use under this Ordinance in the
district in which the use is located.
Use, Legal Nonconforming - Any use of a property or structure which legally
existed in the district in which the use is located prior to the adoption date of this
Ordinance, but which is not allowed as a permitted, conditional, or interim use
under this Ordinance in the district in which the use is located.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 1 Title and Application
Use, Permitted - A public or private use of land or structures which of itself
conforms with the purposes, objectives, requirements, regulations and
performance standards of the district in which it is located.
Use, Principal - The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from
subordinate or accessory uses. A "principal use" may be either a permitted or
conditional use.
Variance - A modification or variation of the provisions of this Ordinance. A
variance shall not be granted allowing a use prohibited in the district in which the
structure, use and lot are located.
Waterway - A natural or constructed channel that carries a flow of water.
Wetland - Lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the
water table is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by shallow
water. For purposes of this definition, wetlands must have the following three
attributes:
1. Have a predominance of hydric soils; and
2. Are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions; and
3. Under normal circumstances support a prevalence of such vegetation.
Wetland (DNR Protected) - All type 3, 4, and 5 wetlands as defined in United
States Fish and Wildlife Service Circular No. 39 (1971 edition), not protected by
Chapter 70 of this Ordinance, included within the definition of public waters, that
are ten (10) or more acres in size in unincorporated areas of 2.5 or more acres in
incorporated areas.
Yard - An open space on a lot surrounding a structure, which is unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except by landscaping or an eave not
exceeding two (2) feet in width.
1. Yard, Front - The yard extending the width of the lot from the front lot line
to the building setback line.
2. Yard, Rear - The yard extending the width of the lot extending from the
rear lot line to the rear yard setback line.
3. Yard, Side - The yard extending along the side lot line between the front
and rear yards, extending perpendicularly from the side lot line to the side
yard setback line.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 1 Title and Application
Zoning Amendment - A change authorized by the County either in the allowed
use within a district or in the boundaries of a district.
Zoning District - An area or areas within the County for which the regulations and
requirements governing use are uniform as defined by this Ordinance.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 2 Administration
CHAPTER 2: ADMINISTRATION
2-1 PLANNING DEPARTMENT
The Planning Department, in partnership with the Township Boards, shall perform the
following duties:
1. Administer and enforce this Ordinance.
2. Maintain permanent and current records of this Ordinance, including but
not limited to maps, amendments, variances, conditional uses, and interim
use permits.
3. Receive, file and forward all applications for appeals, amendments,
variances, conditional uses, interim uses, or other matters to the
designated official bodies.
4. Institute in the name of the County any appropriate actions or proceedings
to prevent, to restrain, to correct, or to abate a violation or threatened
violation.
5. Provide and maintain public information relative to matters arising out of
this Ordinance.
6. Conduct inspections of land, buildings, or structures at reasonable times,
determine compliance with and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance.
7. Issue permits as required by this Ordinance.
2-2 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
2-2-1 Creation and Membership
A Board of Adjustment shall be appointed by the County Board. The Board of
Adjustment shall consist of seven (7) members; one (1) member shall be selected by
each County Commissioner and two (2) members, to be eligible at large, shall be
appointed by the County Board as a whole. No acting township supervisor, municipal
mayor or municipal council member shall serve on the Board of Adjustment. At least
four (4) members of the Board of Adjustment shall be a resident of a township located
within the County. Additionally, at least one (1) member of the Board of Adjustment
shall be a member of the Scott County Planning Advisory Commission.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 2 Administration
Members may be appointed for up to a three (3) year term beginning January 1 of each
year. Terms of office for members of the Board of Adjustment shall be in accordance
with the limitations of service on county boards and committees as set by Resolution of
the County Board.
No elected officer of the County or any employee of the County shall serve as a
member of the Board of Adjustment. The members of the Board of Adjustment may be
paid compensation in an amount determined by the County Board and may be paid
their necessary expenses in attending meetings of the Board and in their conduct of the
business of the Board.
The Board of Adjustment shall annually elect a Chair and Vice-Chair from among its
members and it shall appoint a Secretary who need not be a member of the Board. It
shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business. Such rules may include provisions
for the giving of oaths to witnesses and the filing of written briefs by the parties. The
Board shall provide a public record of its proceedings which shall include the minutes of
its meetings, its findings and the action taken on each matter heard by it, including the
final order.
Any questions of whether a particular issue involves a conflict of interest sufficient to
disqualify a Board member from voting thereon, shall be decided by majority vote of all
Board members present except the member who is being challenged. Meetings of the
Board of Adjustment shall be held at the call of the Chair and at such other times as the
Board in its rules of procedure may specify.
The County Board may call for the removal of any Board of Adjustment member for
non-performance of duty or misconduct in office. Should any vacancy occur among
members of the Board of Adjustment by reason of resignation, disability, death, or
otherwise, the Planning Department shall notify the County Administrator immediately.
Any filled vacancy shall be for the remainder of the term.
2-2-2 Duties and Responsibilities
The Board of Adjustment shall act upon all questions as they may arise in the
administration of this Ordinance, including the interpretation of zoning maps, and it shall
hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirements, decision, or
determination made by any administrative official charged with enforcing the Ordinance.
Such appeal may be made by any person, firm, or corporation aggrieved; or by any
officer, department, board of a town, municipality, county or state.
Hearings by the Board of Adjustment shall be held within such time and upon such
notice to interested parties as is provided in its adopted rules of procedure and in
conformance with state law. The Board of Adjustment shall establish criteria necessary
in its rules or procedure for filing an application for a variance or an appeal. Legal
notice shall be published in the official newspaper of the County at least ten (10) days
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 2 Administration
prior to the hearing. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from unless the Board of Adjustment to whom the appeal is taken certifies that
by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would cause imminent peril to life or
property.
The Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the
order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and to that end shall have
all powers of the officer to whom the appeal was taken and direct the issuance of a
permit. The reasons for the Board's decision shall be stated in writing.
The Board of Adjustment shall have the exclusive power to order issuance of variances
from the requirements of any official control including restrictions placed on
non-conformities. Variances shall only be permitted when they are in harmony with the
general purpose and intent of the official control and when the variances are consistent
with the Comprehensive Plan. Variances may be granted when the applicant for the
variance establishes that there are practical difficulties in complying with the official
control. “Practical difficulties” as used in connection with the granting of a variance,
means that the property owner proposes to use the property in a reasonable manner
not permitted by an official control; the plight of the landowner is due to circumstances
unique to the property not created by the landowner; and the variance, if granted will not
alter the essential character of the locality. Economic considerations alone do not
constitute practical difficulties. Practical difficulties include, but are not limited to,
inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems. Variances shall be
granted for earth sheltered construction as defined in Minnesota State Statute 216C.06,
subdivision 14, when in harmony with the official controls. No variance may be granted
that would allow any use that is not allowed in the zoning district in which the subject
property is located. The Board of Adjustment may impose conditions in the granting of
variances. A condition must be directly related to and must bear a rough proportionality
to the impact created by the variance.
2-3 VARIANCES
2-3-1 Criteria for Granting Variances
A variance from the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance may be issued to provide relief
to the landowner in those zones where the Ordinance imposes practical difficulties to
the property owner in the reasonable use of this land. No use variances may be issued.
A Variance may be granted only if the following practical difficulties exist:
1. Granting of the variance will not be in conflict with the Comprehensive
Plan.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 2 Administration
2. Exceptional, unique, or extraordinary circumstances apply to the property
which do not generally apply to other properties in the same zoning district
or vicinity, and result from lot size or shape, topography, or other
circumstances over which the owners of property since the enactment of
this Ordinance have had no control.
3. The literal interpretation of the provisions of this Ordinance would deprive
the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same
district under the terms of this Ordinance.
4. That the special conditions or circumstances do not result from the actions
of the applicant.
5. That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any
special privilege that is denied by this Ordinance to owners of other lands,
structures or buildings in the same district.
6. The variance requested is the minimum variance which would alleviate the
practical difficulty.
7. The variance would not be materially detrimental or will not essentially
alter the character of the property in the same zoning district.
8. Economic considerations alone do not constitute practical difficulties.
2-3-2 Procedure
1. Pre-Application Meeting. Prior to submission of a variance application, the
property owner may submit a concept plan and meet with the Planning
Department and Township representatives to discuss the variance
application. Through the pre-application, the Planning Department will
summarize the informational requirements and issues related to the
specific variance request. A second pre-application meeting may be
conducted if deemed warranted to assist the applicant in preparing their
application.
2. The property owner applying for a variance shall submit to the Planning
Department a completed variance application stating the practical
difficulties that are present, and provide all other information required by
the Planning Department. The application shall be completed when the
applicant has complied with the following requirements:
a. A written and/or graphic description of the variance request
including an explanation of compliance with Section 2-3-1 of this
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 2 Administration
Ordinance. The application shall include a site plan consistent with
Section 2-10-3 of this Ordinance.
b. Supporting information described by the Planning Department
during the pre-application meeting and required in other sections of
this Ordinance.
c. Applications must be accompanied by a fee established by the
County Board.
3. The Planning Department, upon receipt of the application, shall notify the
applicant in writing within fifteen (15) County business days or as
amended by Minnesota Statutes Chapter 15.99 if the application is found
to be incomplete.
4. Upon receipt of a complete application, the Planning Department shall
prepare a report and refer the application to the Scott County Board of
Adjustment and the appropriate Township Board for consideration.
5. The application shall be reviewed by Township Board. A written
recommendation for application approval or denial from the Township
Board may be forwarded to the Planning Department. The Township
recommendations received by the Planning Department will be forwarded
to the Board of Adjustment for their consideration of the application at a
public hearing.
6. The Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing on the request.
Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the official newspaper
designated by the County Board at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
In unincorporated areas, the property owners of record within five hundred
(500) feet of the subject property shall be notified in writing of the
proposed variance. Where the subject site adjoins an incorporated area,
the County shall mail written notification of the proposed variance to
property owners within the incorporated area located within three hundred
fifty (350) feet of the subject site. Timing of the mailed notice shall be the
same as that for the published notice. The failure to give mailed notice to
individual property owners or defects in the notice shall not invalidate the
proceedings, provided a bona fide attempt to comply has been made.
7. The applicant or his representative shall appear before the Board of
Adjustment in order to answer questions concerning the proposed
variance.
8. The Board of Adjustment and Planning Department shall have the
authority to request additional information from the applicant concerning a
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 2 Administration
variance. Said information is to be declared necessary to establish
performance conditions in relation to all pertinent sections of this
Ordinance. Failure of the applicant to supply all necessary supportive
information may be grounds for denial of the request.
9. The Board of Adjustment shall act upon the request within the time
permitted by Minnesota Statutes 15.99, as amended.
10. A certified copy of any order issued by the Board of Adjustment acting
upon an appeal from an order, requirement, or decision or determination
by an administrative official, or a request for a variance, shall be filed with
the Office of the County Recorder or Registrar of Titles. The order issued
by the Board of Adjustment shall include the legal description of the
property involved. The Planning Department shall be responsible for the
document recording requirements of this Section and shall maintain
records of the variance request.
11. All decisions by the Board of Adjustment in granting variances or hearing
appeals from any administrative order, requirement, decision, or
determination shall be final, except that any aggrieved person or persons,
or any department, board or commission of the jurisdiction or of the state
shall have the right to appeal within thirty (30) days, after receipt of notice
of the decision, to the District Court in Scott County on questions of law
and fact.
12. A variance shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance if the
variance is not utilized. No application for a variance shall be resubmitted
for a period of six (6) months from the date of an order of denial.
13. If necessary, an extension of a variance shall be requested in writing and
filed with the Planning Department at least thirty (30) days before the
expiration date of the original variance. The request for extension shall
state facts showing a good faith attempt to utilize the variance in the
allowed one (1) year. Upon receipt of a request for variance extension,
Planning Department shall review the request and make a decision to
grant or deny the extension based on the information submitted. At staff's
discretion, the request may be referred to the Board of Adjustment. The
applicant shall be informed of the decision within the time permitted by
State Law. No extension shall be for more than one (1) year, after which if
the variance is not utilized the variance would become void. In no case
shall more than one variance extension be approved for an individual
variance request.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 2 Administration
2-4 PLANNING ADVISORY COMMISSION
2-4-1 Creation and Membership
A Planning Advisory Commission shall be appointed by the County Board. The
Planning Advisory Commission shall consist of seven (7) members; one (1) member
shall be selected by each County Commissioner and two (2) members, to be eligible at
large, shall be appointed by the County Board as a whole. A member of the Scott
County Board of Commissioners shall serve as an ex-officio member to provide for
continuity between the Planning Advisory Commission and the County Board.
As required by state law, at least two (2) members shall be residents of the portion of
the county outside the corporate limits of municipalities. Members may be appointed for
up to three (3) year terms beginning January 1st of each year. Terms of office for
members of the Planning Advisory Commission shall be in accordance with the
limitations of service on county boards and committees as set by Resolution of the
County Board.
No acting township supervisor, municipal mayor or municipal council member shall
serve on the Planning Advisory Commission. The members of the Commission, other
than members of the Board of County Commissioners may be compensated in an
amount determined by the County Board. All Commission members including the
County Commissioners may be paid their necessary expenses in attending meetings of
the Commission.
The Planning Advisory Commission shall elect a Chair, Vice-chair and Secretary from
among its members and cooperate with the Planning Department and other employees
of the County in preparing, and recommending to the County Board for adoption, a
Comprehensive Plan and recommendations for plan execution in the form of official
contracts and other measures, and amendments.
The County Board may call for the removal of a Planning Advisory Commission member
for non-performance of duty or misconduct in office. Should any vacancy occur among
members of the Planning Advisory Commission by reason of resignation, disability,
death or otherwise, the Planning Department shall notify the County Administrator
immediately. Any filled vacancy shall be for the expired term.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 2 Administration
2-4-2 Duties and Responsibilities
The Planning Advisory Commission shall review all applications for conditional use
permits, interim use permits, plans for subdivisions of land, and amendments, and
report to the County Board. The Planning Advisory Commission is also responsible for
holding all public hearings as required by State Statute. The Planning Advisory
Commission may upon the request of the County Board, review any comprehensive
plans and official controls and any plans for public land acquisition and development
sent to the County for that purpose by any local unit of government or any state or
federal agency and shall report in writing to the County Board.
2-5 ZONING AMENDMENTS
2-5-1 Criteria for Granting Zoning Amendments
The Township Boards of Supervisors may propose, and the County Board of
Commissioners may adopt amendments to the Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Maps in
relation both to land uses within a particular district or to the location of the district lines.
Such amendments shall not be issued indiscriminately, but shall only be used as a
means to reflect changes in the goals and policies of the County as reflected in the
policies, plans or changes in conditions in the County.
Any amendment to the Zoning Ordinance or zoning map shall be evaluated based on,
but not limited to, the following criteria:
1. The proposed action has been considered in relation to the specific
policies and provisions of and has been found to be consistent with the
official County Comprehensive Plan.
2. The proposed use is or will be compatible with present and future land
uses of the area.
3. The proposed use conforms to all performance standards contained in this
Ordinance.
4. The proposed use can be accommodated with existing and planned public
services and will not overburden the County or Township’s service
capacity.
5. Traffic generation by the proposed use is within capabilities of streets
serving the property.
Any change in the Zoning Ordinance shall be in compliance with the Scott County
Comprehensive Plan.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 2 Administration
2-5-2 Procedure
1. An amendment to the text of the Ordinance or Zoning Maps may be
initiated by the County Board of Commissioners, the Planning Advisory
Commission, Town Boards or by application of a property owner. Any
amendment not initiated by the Planning Advisory Commission shall be
referred to the Planning Advisory Commission for review and may not be
acted upon by the County Board until it has received the Planning
Advisory Commission recommendation.
2. Pre-Application Meeting. Prior to submission of a zoning amendment
application, the property owner may submit a concept plan and meet with
the Planning Department and Township representatives to discuss the
zoning amendment application. Through the pre-application, the Planning
Department will summarize the informational requirements and issues
related to the specific zoning amendment request.
3. The property owner applying for a zoning amendment shall submit to the
Planning Department a completed zoning amendment application, and
provide all other information required by the Planning Department. The
application shall be completed when the applicant has complied with the
following requirements:
a. A written and/or graphic description of the zoning amendment
request including an explanation of compliance with Section 2-5-1
of this Ordinance. The application shall include a site plan
consistent with Section 2-10-3 of this Ordinance.
b. Supporting information described by the Planning Department
during the pre-application meeting and required in other sections of
this Ordinance.
c. Applications must be accompanied by a fee established by the
County Board.
4. The Planning Department, upon receipt of the application, shall notify the
applicant in writing within fifteen (15) County business days or as
amended by Minnesota Statutes Chapter 15.99 if the application is found
to be incomplete.
5. Upon receipt of a complete application, the Planning Department shall
prepare a report and refer the application to the Planning Advisory
Commission and the appropriate Township Board for consideration.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 2 Administration
6. The application shall be reviewed by Township Board. A written
recommendation for application approval or denial from the Township
Board may be forwarded to the Planning Department. The Township
recommendations received by the Planning Department will be forwarded
to the Planning Advisory Commission for their consideration of the
application at a public hearing.
7. A public hearing on the application shall be held by the Planning Advisory
Commission after the completed request for the zoning amendment has
been received. Notice of said hearing shall be published in the official
newspaper as designated by the County Board. Written notice of public
hearings on the proposed amendment shall be sent at least ten (10) days
before the hearing date. For amendments of general applications (zoning
text amendments) throughout the County, notice shall be sent to the
governing bodies of all Townships and municipalities located within the
County. For amendments having a specific geographic application
(zoning map amendments), notice shall be sent to the governing bodies of
townships and municipalities located within two (2) miles of the property in
question within the County. In unincorporated areas, the property owners
of record within one-half (1/2) mile of the subject property shall be notified
in writing of the proposed zoning amendment. Where the subject site
adjoins an incorporated area, the County shall mail written notification of
the proposed zoning amendment to property owners within the
incorporated area located within three hundred fifty (350) feet of the
subject site. Timing of the mailed notice shall be the same as that for the
published notice. The failure to give mailed notice to individual property
owners or defects in the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings,
provided a bona fide attempt to comply has been made.
8. The applicant or his representative shall appear before the Planning
Advisory Commission in order to answer questions concerning the
proposed amendment request.
9. The Planning Advisory Commission and Planning Department shall have
the authority to request additional information from the applicant
concerning a zoning amendment. Said information is to be declared
necessary to establish performance conditions in relation to all pertinent
sections of this Ordinance. Failure of the applicant to supply all necessary
supportive information may be grounds for denial of the request.
10. Following the hearing, the Planning Advisory Commission shall make a
report to the County Board recommending approval, modified approval or
disapproval of the proposed amendment.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 2 Administration
11. The County Board must take action on a completed application following
referral by the Planning Advisory Commission within the time permitted by
Minnesota Statutes 15.99, as amended. The person making the
application shall be notified of the action taken.
12. No application of a property owner for an amendment to the text of this
Ordinance or the Zoning Maps shall be considered by the Planning
Advisory Commission within a one (1) year period following denial of such
request, except the Planning Advisory Commission may permit a new
application, if in the opinion of the Planning Advisory Commission, new
evidence or a change of circumstances warrant it.
13. A certified copy of any zoning amendment shall be filed with the Office of
the County Recorder or Registrar of Titles. The zoning amendment shall
include the legal description of the property involved. The Planning
Department shall be responsible for the document recording requirements
of this Section and shall maintain records of amendments to the text, the
Zoning Map of the Ordinance and of the zoning amendment request.
2-6 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
2-6-1 Criteria for Granting Conditional Use Permits
Conditional uses may be approved, by the County Board, upon a showing by the
applicant that standards and criteria stated in the Ordinance will be satisfied. Such
standards and criteria shall include both general requirements for all conditional uses
and, insofar as practicable, requirements specific to each designated conditional use.
In granting a conditional use permit, the County Board shall consider the effect of the
proposed use upon the health, safety, and general welfare of occupants of surrounding
lands. Among other things, the Planning Advisory Commission and County Board shall
make the following findings where applicable:
1. The use will not create an excessive burden on public facilities and utilities
which serve or are proposed to serve the area.
2. The use will be sufficiently compatible with, or separated by sufficient
distance from, or screened from adjacent agricultural or residential land
uses so that there will be no deterrence to the use or development of
adjacent land and uses.
3. Each structure or improvement is so designed and constructed that it is
not unsightly in appearance to the extent that it will hinder the orderly and
harmonious development of the district wherein proposed.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 2 Administration
4. The use is consistent with the purposes of the Ordinance and the
purposes of the zoning district in which the applicant intends to locate the
proposed use.
5. The use is not in conflict with the Comprehensive Plan of Scott County.
6. Adequate measures have been taken to provide ingress and egress so
designed as to minimize traffic congestion, provide adequate access to
public roads, and provide sufficient on-site parking.
7. Adequate water supply, individual sewage treatment system facilities,
erosion control and stormwater management are provided in accordance
with applicable standards.
8. All buildings/structures must meet the intent of the State Building Code
and/or fire codes.
2-6-2 Additional Conditions
In permitting a new conditional use permit or alteration upon review of an existing
conditional use permit, the Planning Advisory Commission may recommend and County
Board may impose, in addition to these standards and requirements expressly specified
by this Ordinance, additional conditions which the Commission County Board considers
necessary to protect the interests of the surrounding area or the County as a whole.
These conditions may include but are not limited to the following:
1. Increasing the required lot size or yard dimension.
2. Limiting the height, size, location, and exterior materials of buildings.
3. Controlling the location and number of vehicle access points, and
standards for access and egress for the site.
4. Increasing the number of required off-street parking spaces.
5. Limiting the number, size, location or lighting of signs.
6. Requiring stormwater management, fencing, screening, landscaping,
erosion control or other facilities to protect adjacent or nearby property.
7. Designating sites for open space.
8. Limiting outside storage areas.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 2 Administration
9. Limiting the number of vehicles and/or employees associated with a
business operation.
10. A financial guarantee consistent with Section 2-12 of this Ordinance.
11. Periodic inspections of the premises and use as authorized by the County
or Township.
2-6-3 Procedure
1. Pre-Application Meeting. Prior to submission of a conditional use permit
application, the property owner may submit a concept plan and meet with
the Planning Department and Township representatives to discuss the
conditional use permit application. Through the pre-application, the
Planning Department will summarize the informational requirements and
issues related to the specific conditional use permit request. A second
pre-application meeting may be conducted if deemed warranted to assist
the applicants in preparing their application.
2. The property owner applying for a conditional use permit shall submit to
the Planning Department a completed conditional use permit application,
and provide all other information required by the Planning Department.
The application shall be completed when the applicant has complied with
the following requirements:
a. A written and/or graphic description of the conditional use permit
request including an explanation of compliance with Section 2-6-1
of this Ordinance. The application shall include a site plan
consistent with Section 2-10-3 of this Ordinance.
b. Supporting information described by the Planning Department
during the pre-application meeting and required in other sections of
this Ordinance. The Planning Department may request the
applicant to provide documentation that describes the conditional
use’s potential effects or impacts on public facilities, utilities and
services including but not limited to:
(1) Streets.
(2) Law enforcement.
(3) Ambulance/emergency services.
(4) Fire protection.
(5) County/Township administration.
(6) Schools.
(7) Utilities.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 2 Administration
c. Applications must be accompanied by a fee established by the
County Board.
3. The Planning Department, upon receipt of the application, shall notify the
applicant in writing within fifteen (15) County business days or as
amended by Minnesota Statutes Chapter 15.99 if the application is found
to be incomplete.
4. Upon receipt of a complete application, the Planning Department shall
prepare a report and refer the application to the Planning Advisory
Commission and the appropriate Township Board for consideration.
5. The application shall be reviewed by Township Board. A written
recommendation for application approval or denial from the Township
Board may be forwarded to the Planning Department. The Township
recommendations received by the Planning Department will be forwarded
to the Planning Advisory Commission for their consideration of the
application at a public hearing.
6. The Planning Advisory Commission shall hold a public hearing on the
proposal. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the official
newspaper designated by the County Board at least ten (10) days prior to
the hearing. Notice of the hearing shall also be submitted to the governing
bodies of all townships and municipalities within two (2) miles of the
property under consideration located within the County. In unincorporated
areas of the County, property owners of record within one quarter (1/4)
mile of the affected property, or the ten (10) properties nearest to the
affected property, whichever provides the greatest number of property
owners, shall be notified in writing of the public hearing on the request for
a conditional use permit. Where the subject site adjoins an incorporated
area, the County shall mail written notification of the proposed conditional
use permit to property owners within the incorporated area located within
three hundred fifty (350) feet of the subject site. Timing of the mailed
notice shall be the same as that for the published notice. The failure to
give mailed notice to individual property owners or defects in the notice
shall not invalidate the proceedings, provided a bona fide attempt to
comply has been made.
7. The applicant or his representative shall appear before the Planning
Advisory Commission in order to answer questions concerning the
proposed conditional use permit.
8. The Planning Advisory Commission and Planning Department shall have
the authority to request additional information from the applicant
concerning a conditional use permit. Said information is to be declared
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 2 Administration
necessary to establish performance conditions in relation to all pertinent
sections of this Ordinance. Failure of the applicant to supply all necessary
supportive information may be grounds for denial of the request.
9. The recommendations of the Planning Advisory Commission shall be
forwarded to the County Board for consideration. The County Board shall
take action on the application within the time permitted by Minnesota
Statutes 15.99, as may be amended. If it grants the conditional use
permit, the County Board may impose conditions it considers necessary to
protect the public health, safety and welfare.
10. An amended conditional use permit with major changes shall be
administered in the manner required for a new conditional use permit. An
amended conditional use permit with minor changes shall be administered
in the manner of an Administrative Permit per Section 2-8. Amended
conditional use permits include requests for changes in conditions. Major
changes include, but are not limited to, hours of operation, number of
employees, expansion of structures and/or premises greater than twentyfive
(25) percent of the building footprint or site, and operational
modifications resulting in increased external activities and traffic, and the
like.
11. A conditional use permit shall expire one (1) year from the date of
issuance if the permit is not utilized. Once expired, or, once the County is
notified that the permit is no longer active or valid, the Planning
Department shall, after a 30-day notice to the permit holder or current
property owner, file a notice of termination in the Office of the County
Recorder.
12. No application for a conditional use permit shall be resubmitted for a
period of six (6) months from the date of an order of denial of such
request, except the Planning Advisory Commission may permit a new
application, if in the opinion of the Planning Advisory Commission, new
evidence or a change of circumstances warrant it.
13. In the event that any of the conditions set forth in a permit are violated, the
County Board shall have the authority to revoke the conditional use
permit.
14. A certified copy of any conditional use permit shall be filed with the Office
of the County Recorder or Registrar of Titles. The conditional use permit
shall include the legal description of the property involved. The Planning
Department shall be responsible for the document recording requirements
of this Section and shall maintain records of the conditional use permit
request.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 2 Administration
15. A conditional use permit may be transferred administratively to a new
property owner if the use is not changed and the conditions remain the
same.
2-7 INTERIM USE PERMITS
2-7-1 Criteria for Granting Interim Use Permits
The County may authorize an interim use of a property by means of an interim use
permit. These interim uses may be utilized in a temporary manner as approved by the
County Board. In reviewing the interim use permit application, the County will establish
a specific date or event that will terminate the use of the property. In granting an interim
use permit, the County Board shall consider the effect of the proposed use upon the
health, safety, and general welfare of occupants of surrounding lands. Among other
things, the Planning Advisory Commission and County Board shall make the following
findings where applicable:
1. The use will not create a burden on public facilities and utilities which
serve or are proposed to serve the area.
2. The use will be sufficiently compatible with, or separated by sufficient
distance from, or screened from adjacent agricultural or residential land
uses so that there will be no deterrence to the use or development of
adjacent land and uses.
3. If improvements are made, they shall be so designed and constructed that
they are not unsightly in appearance to the extent that it will hinder the
orderly and harmonious development of the district wherein proposed.
4. Adequate measures have been taken to provide ingress and egress so
designed as to minimize traffic congestion, provide adequate access to
public roads, and provide on-site parking.
5. Adequate water supply, individual sewage treatment system facilities,
erosion control and stormwater management are provided in accordance
with applicable standards.
6. All buildings/structures must meet the intent of the State Building Code
and/or fire codes.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 2 Administration
2-7-2 Additional Conditions
In permitting an interim use permit, the Planning Advisory Commission may recommend
and County Board may impose, in addition to these standards and requirements
expressly specified by this Ordinance, additional conditions which the County Board
considers necessary to protect the interests of the surrounding area or the County as a
whole. These conditions may include but are not limited to the following:
1. Increasing the required lot size or yard dimension.
2. Limiting the height, size, location, or exterior materials of buildings.
3. Controlling the location and number of vehicle access points, and
standards for access and egress for the site.
4. Increasing the number of required off-street parking spaces.
5. Limiting the number, size, location or lighting of signs.
6. Requiring diking, fencing, screening, landscaping or other facilities to
protect adjacent or nearby property.
7. The County Board may specify a time period or event that may terminate
an interim use permit and will be a condition of the interim use permit.
8. The County Board may limit the new structural investment on the site to a
specific dollar amount.
9. Limiting the number of vehicles and/or employees associated with the
business operation.
10. A financial guarantee consistent with Section 2-12 of this Ordinance to
assure compliance.
11. Periodic inspection of the premises and the use by individuals as
authorized by the County or Township.
2-7-3 Procedure
1. Pre-Application Meeting. Prior to submission of an interim use permit
application, the property owner may submit a concept plan and meet with
the Planning Department to discuss the interim use permit application.
Through the pre-application, the Planning Department and Township
representatives will summarize the informational requirements and issues
related to the specific interim use permit request. A second preScott
County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 2 Administration
application meeting may be conducted to assist the applicant in the
preparation of their application.
2. The property owner applying for an interim use permit shall submit to the
Planning Department a completed interim use permit application, and
provide all other information required by the Planning Department. The
application shall be completed when the applicant has complied with the
following requirements:
a. A written and/or graphic description of the interim use permit
request including an explanation of compliance with Section 2-7-1
of this Ordinance. The application shall include a site plan
consistent with Section 2-10-3 of this Ordinance.
b. Supporting information described by the Planning Department
during the pre-application meeting and required in other sections of
this Ordinance. The Planning Department may request the
applicant to provide documentation that describes the interim use’s
potential effects or impacts on public facilities, utilities, and services
including but not limited to:
(1) Streets.
(2) Law enforcement.
(3) Ambulance/emergency services.
(4) Fire protection.
(5) County/Township administration.
(6) Schools.
(7) Utilities.
c. Applications must be accompanied by a fee established by the
County Board.
3. The Planning Department, upon receipt of the application, shall notify the
applicant in writing within fifteen (15) County business days or as
amended by Minnesota Statutes Chapter 15.99 if the application is found
to be incomplete.
4. Upon receipt of a complete application, the Planning Department shall
prepare a report and refer the application to the Scott County Planning
Advisory Commission and the appropriate Township Board for
consideration.
5. The application shall be reviewed by Township Board. A written
recommendation for application approval or denial from the Township
Board may be forwarded to the Planning Department. The Township
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 2 Administration
recommendations received by the Planning Department will be forwarded
to the Planning Advisory Commission for their consideration of the
application at a public hearing
6. The Planning Advisory Commission shall hold a public hearing on the
proposal. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the official
newspaper designated by the County Board at least ten (10) days prior to
the hearing. Notice of the hearing shall also be submitted to the governing
bodies of all townships and municipalities within two (2) miles of the
property under consideration located within the County. In unincorporated
areas of the County, property owners of record within one-quarter (1/4)
mile of the affected property, or the ten (10) properties nearest to the
affected property, whichever provides the greatest number of property
owners, shall be notified in writing of the public hearing on the request for
an interim use permit. Where the subject site adjoins an incorporated
area, the County shall mail written notification of the proposed interim use
permit to property owners within the incorporated located within three
hundred fifty (350) feet of the subject site. Timing of the mailed notice
shall be the same as that for the published notice. The failure to give
mailed notice to individual property owners or defects in the notice shall
not invalidate the proceedings, provided a bona fide attempt to comply has
been made.
7. The applicant or his representative shall appear before the Planning
Advisory Commission in order to answer questions concerning the
proposed interim use permit.
8. The Planning Advisory Commission and Planning Department shall have
the authority to request additional information from the applicant
concerning an interim use permit. Said information is to be declared
necessary to establish performance conditions in relation to all pertinent
sections of this Ordinance. Failure of the applicant to supply all necessary
supportive information may be grounds for denial of the request.
9. The recommendations of the Planning Advisory Commission shall be
forwarded to the County Board for consideration. The County Board shall
take action on the application within the time permitted by Minnesota
Statutes 15.99, as amended. If it grants the interim use permit, the
County Board may impose conditions it considers necessary to protect the
public health, safety and welfare, and such conditions may include
requiring the applicant to provide a security, and setting a time limit for the
use to exist or operate. Such conditions will be administratively reviewed
annually within the period of the interim use permit and if violated, the
County Board may order the revocation of the permit as provided for in
Section 2-7-3.13.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 2 Administration
10. The interim use permit shall be issued to a specific applicant for a specific
use. If the operator/owner or the use changes, the interim use permit shall
become void.
11. An amended interim use permit with major changes shall be administered
in the manner required for a new interim use permit. An amended interim
use permit with minor changes shall be administered in the manner of an
Administrative Permit per Section 2-8. Amended interim use permits
include requests for changes in conditions. Major changes include, but
are not limited to, hours of operation, number of employees, expansion of
structures and/or premises greater than twenty-five (25) percent of the
building footprint or site, and operational modifications resulting in
increased external activities and traffic, and the like.
12. An interim use permit shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance if
the permit is not utilized. Once expired due to inactivity within the first year
or due to specifications listed in the condition of the interim use permit, or,
once the County is notified that the permit is no longer active or valid, the
Planning Department shall, after a 30-day notice to the permit holder or
current property owner, file a notice of termination in the Office of the
County Recorder.
13. No application for an interim use permit shall be resubmitted for a period
of six (6) months from the date of an order of denial of the request, except
the Planning Advisory Commission may permit a new application, if in the
opinion of the Planning Advisory Commission, new evidence or a change
of circumstances warrant it.
14. In the event that any of the conditions set forth in a permit are violated, the
County Board shall have the authority to revoke the interim use permit.
15. A copy of any interim use permit shall be filed with the Office of the County
Recorder or Registrar of Titles. The interim use permit shall include the
legal description of the property involved. The Planning Department shall
be responsible for the document recording requirements of this Section
and shall maintain records of the interim use permit request.
16. The Planning Department will review the interim use permit periodically.
At the time designated for the interim use permit to expire, the Planning
Department will conduct an inspection of the site. If the Planning
Department finds that the use is still compatible, and is not creating an
adverse affect on the surrounding area, the applicant may apply for an
extension of the interim use. A reapplication for an interim use permit
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 2 Administration
shall be administered in the same manner as the original interim use
permit.
2-8 ADMINISTRATIVE PERMITS/CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
2-8-1 Purpose
The purpose of this Section is to establish regulations and procedures for the
processing and consideration of activities allowed by administrative permit, certificate of
compliance, and of matters requiring the approval of the Planning Department with the
goal of protecting the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the County.
2-8-2 Applications Qualifying for Administrative Review
The applications which may be approved by administrative permit include administrative
uses, sign permits, building permits, accessory structures, temporary uses, zoning
certificates of compliance, minor changes to conditional use or interim use permits, lot
line adjustments, administrative subdivisions, resource management plans, grading
permits, provided they comply with all sections of this Ordinance.
2-8-3 Criteria for Granting an Administrative Permit or Certificate of Compliance
Administrative permit or certificate of compliance may be granted upon the applicant
demonstrating that all applicable standards and criteria stated in this Ordinance will be
satisfied. Among other things, the Planning Department shall make the following
findings where applicable:
1. The proposed use is not in conflict with the Comprehensive Plan of Scott
County.
2. The proposed use is consistent with the purpose of this Ordinance and the
purpose of the zoning district in which the applicant intends to locate the
proposed use.
3. The proposed use satisfies the design standards and criteria of this
Ordinance.
4. The proposed use has been described in sufficient detail to enable County
review and has been given approval and is not subject to any additional
reviews or permits by other jurisdictions or State Agencies and is not
subject to a mandatory environmental review as defined in Minnesota
Statutes Chapter 4410.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 2 Administration
5. Adequate measures have been taken to provide ingress and egress so
designed as to minimize traffic congestion, provide adequate access to
public roads, and provide sufficient on-site parking.
2-8-4 Procedure
1. Pre-Application Meeting. Prior to submission of an administrative permit
application, the property owner may meet with the Planning Department to
discuss the administrative permit application. Through the pre-application,
the Planning Department will summarize the informational requirements
and issues related to the specific administrative permit request.
2. The property owner applying for an administrative permit shall submit to
the Planning Department a completed administrative use permit
application and provide all other information required by the Planning
Department. The application shall be completed when the applicant has
complied with the following requirements:
a. A written and/or graphic description of an administrative permit
request including the applicable information outlined in Section 2-
10-3 of this Ordinance.
b. Supporting information described by the Planning Department
during the pre-application meeting and required in other sections of
this Ordinance.
c. Applications must be accompanied by a fee established by the
County Board.
3. The Planning Department, upon receipt of the application, shall notify the
applicant in writing within fifteen (15) County business days or as
amended by Minnesota Statutes Chapter 15.99 if the application is found
to be incomplete.
4. The Planning Department shall make a determination on approval or
denial of the administrative permit, within the time permitted by Minnesota
Statutes 15.99, as amended.
5. A written permit shall be issued to the applicant when a determination of
compliance has been made. Specific conditions to assure compliance
with applicable evaluation criteria, codes, ordinances, and the standards
of this Ordinance shall be attached to the permit.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 2 Administration
6. A written denial of the permit shall be issued to the applicant when a
determination of non-compliance with applicable codes, ordinances, and
the standards in this paragraph has been made.
7. Unresolved disputes as to administrative application of the requirements
of this paragraph shall be subject to appeal to the Board of Adjustments
as outlined in Section 2.3 of this Ordinance.
2-9 BUILDING PERMITS
For the purposes of enforcing this Ordinance and the Minnesota State Building Code,
no building or structure regulated by this Ordinance or the Minnesota State Building
Code shall be erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved,
removed, converted or demolished unless a separate permit for each building or
structure has first been obtained from the Building Official.
1. Persons requesting a building permit shall submit all information required,
and a completed application, and all applicable forms to the Building
Inspection and Environmental Health Departments.
2. No site preparation work, including rough grading, driveway construction,
footing construction, or other physical changes to the site shall occur prior
to the issuance of the building permit, unless authorized and permitted in
writing by the Planning Department or Building Official.
2-10 SITE PLAN REVIEW
2-10-1 Purpose
A site plan shall be required with the submission of the zoning applications of Chapter 2
of this Ordinance. This information represents minimum submission requirements
unless items are waived by the Planning Department.
2-10-2 Exceptions
The following uses may be exempted from the site plan requirements of this Section of
the Ordinance:
1. Agricultural uses.
2. Single family detached dwellings on parcels of ten (10) or more acres.
3. Residential accessory buildings.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 2 Administration
2-10-3 Requirements
The information required for zoning applications generally consists of the following
items, and shall be submitted unless waived by the Planning Department following a
pre-application meeting.
1. Concept Plan Information. Prior to the formulation of a site plan,
applicants may present a concept plan to the Planning Department prior to
filing of a formal application. The concept plan will include the following
information.
a. Property location map illustrating the site location relative to
adjoining properties and streets.
b. Scaled drawing (engineering scale only) illustrating property
boundaries using Scott County’s GIS data base.
c. General location of existing and proposed structures including
signs.
d. Tentative access, circulation and street arrangements, both public
and private.
e. Amenities to be provided such as recreational areas, open space,
walkways, landscaping, etc.
f. General location of parking areas.
g. Proposed on-site sanitary sewer, water and storm drainage.
h. Natural features, drainageways, wetland, and woodlands.
i. Size and locations of all building pads.
2. Site Plan Information.
a. Site boundaries, buildings, structures and other improvements shall
be identified on-site with a current certificate of survey, prepared
and signed by a Minnesota licensed land surveyor, depicting the
following:
(1) Scale of plan (engineering scale only).
(2) North point indication.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 2 Administration
(3) Existing boundaries with lot dimension and area.
(4) Existing site improvements.
(5) All encroachments.
(6) Easements of record.
(7) Legal description of the property.
(8) Ponds, lakes, springs, rivers, wetlands, 100 year flood
elevations or other waterways bordering on or running
through the subject property.
b. A site plan utilizing a copy of the current certificate of survey as a
base for the site in question, depicting the following:
(1) Name and address of developer/owner.
(2) Name and address of architect/designer.
(3) Date of plan preparation.
(4) Dates and description of all revisions.
(5) Name of project or development.
(6) All proposed improvements, including:
(a) Required and proposed setbacks.
(b) Location, setback and dimensions of all proposed
buildings and structures.
(c) Location of all adjacent buildings located within one
hundred (100) feet of the exterior boundaries of the
property in question.
(d) Location, number, dimensions, and setbacks of
proposed parking spaces and drive aisles.
(e) Location, number, and dimensions of proposed
loading spaces.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 2 Administration
(f) Location, width, and setbacks of all curb cuts and
driveways.
(g) Vehicular circulation.
(h) Location and type of all proposed lighting, including
details of all proposed fixtures.
(i) Provisions for storage and disposal of waste,
garbage, and recyclables, including details for
screening exterior trash/recycling enclosures.
(j) On-site well location.
(k) On-site individual sewer treatment system. Primary
and alternative sites must be identified.
c. Grading, drainage and erosion control plan, utilizing a copy of the
current certificate of survey as a base for the site in question,
prepared and signed by a Minnesota licensed engineer, depicting
the following:
(1) Existing contours at two (2) foot intervals (may be prepared
by a Minnesota licensed surveyor).
(2) Proposed grade elevations at two (2) foot maximum
intervals.
(3) Drainage plan, including the configuration of drainage areas
and calculations consistent with Chapter 6 of this Ordinance.
(4) Storm sewer, catch basins, invert elevations, type of
castings, and type of materials.
(5) Spot elevations (may be prepared by a Minnesota licensed
surveyor).
(6) Proposed driveway grades.
(7) Surface water ponding and treatment areas.
(8) Erosion control measures.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 2 Administration
(9) Where land disturbing activities are occurring as identified in
Chapter 6 of this Ordinance, applicable information outlined
in Section 6A-3 shall be required.
(10) Location, type, and square footage of impervious surface.
d. Landscape, screening and buffering plan, utilizing a copy of the
grading, drainage and erosion control plan as a base for the site in
question, depicting the following:
(1) Planting schedule (table) containing:
(a) Symbols.
(b) Quantities.
(c) Common names.
(d) Botanical names.
(e) Sizes of plant material.
(f) Root specification (bare root, balled and burlapped,
potted, etc.).
(g) Special planting instructions.
(2) Location, type and size of all existing significant trees to be
removed or preserved in accordance with the Scott County
Subdivision Ordinance, as amended, if applicable.
(3) Planting detail (show all species to scale at normal mature
crown diameter or spread for local hardiness zone).
(4) Typical sections with details of landscape islands, planter
beds, and foundation plantings with identification of materials
used.
(5) Note indicating how disturbed soil areas will be restored
through the use of sodding, seeding, or other techniques.
(6) Coverage plan for underground irrigation system, if any.
(7) Where landscape or man-made materials are used to
provide screening from adjacent and neighboring properties,
a cross-through section shall be provided showing the
perspective of the site from the neighboring property at the
property line elevation.
e. Other plans and information as required by the Planning
Department including, but not limited to:
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 2 Administration
(1) Architectural elevations of all principal and accessory
buildings.
(2) “Typical” floor plan and “typical” room plan drawn to scale
with a summary of square footage for each use or activity.
(3) Fire protection plan.
(4) Lighting plan and photometric plan.
(5) Nuisance mitigation plan (related to noise, odors, glare, dust,
or similar nuisance issues).
(6) The type, color, and materials used in all external surfaces.
2-11 FEES
The application fees for all permits shall be established by the County Board by
Resolution. The County Board may periodically review and revise all or portions of the
fee schedule. The acceptance of all zoning applications and issuance of permits shall
not occur until a complete application has been filed and the appropriate fee has been
paid. Zoning applications must be accompanied by a fee and a non-interest bearing
escrow deposit. The fee and escrow deposit will be established from time-to-time by
resolution of the County Board. The escrow deposit is required to cover all costs
incurred for staff and consultants; time directly related to processing applications,
preparation of studies, and any other cost incurred with processing zoning applications.
2-12 FINANCIAL GUARANTEE
1. Upon approval of a development application described in Chapter 2 of this
Ordinance, the County shall be provided with a financial guarantee in the
form or a letter of credit or cash escrow approved prior to the issuing of
building permits or initiation of work on the proposed improvements or
development. Said security shall guarantee conformance and compliance
with the conditions of the application approval and County ordinance
provisions. The letter of credit or surety must meet the approval of the
County as to form and issuing bank. A letter of credit furnished to the
County shall automatically renew on January 31, of each calendar year.
The letter of credit shall be irrevocable, and shall provide for forty-five (45)
days written notice to the County of any change, amendment, or termination.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 2 Administration
2. The security shall be in the amount equal to the one hundred twenty-five
(125) percent of the County's estimated cost of labor and materials for the
proposed improvements or development.
3. The County shall hold the security until completion of the proposed
improvements or development and a certificate of compliance with the
application conditions and County ordinance provisions has been issued
by the Planning Department.
4. Failure to comply with the conditions of the application approval and
County ordinances, provisions shall result in forfeiture of the security in
whole or in part depending upon the degree of non-compliance and at the
discretion of the County Community Development Director.
5. Whenever a performance guarantee is imposed by the County, the
applicant shall be required to enter into a performance agreement with the
County. This agreement is to provide authorization to the County to utilize
the posted security for the enforcement of County ordinances and
conditions of approval to mandate the completion of stipulated work
should the applicant fail to meet the terms and conditions of the
performance agreement. Said agreement shall hold harmless the County
for completion of the work and address other matters as may be
determined by the County Attorney.
2-13 ENFORCEMENT
1. Violations. The violation of any provision of this Ordinance or the violation
of the conditions or provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this
Ordinance shall be a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, the
violator shall be subject to fine or imprisonment or both, as set forth in
Minnesota Statutes, plus in either case, the cost of prosecution.
2. Penalties. Unless otherwise provided, each act of violation and every day
on which such violation occurs or continues constitutes a separate
offense.
3. Application to County Personnel. The failure of any officer or employee of
the county to perform any official duty imposed by this Ordinance shall not
subject the officer or employee to a penalty imposed for violation unless a
penalty is specifically provided for such failure.
4. The Director of Scott Community Development Division or his/her selected
designee, shall have the authority to issue citations to a person or entity
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 2 Administration
that violates, fails to comply with, or assists, authorizes or permits violation
of any provision of this Ordinance.
5. Any violation of this Ordinance for which a citation has been issued shall
constitute sufficient grounds for denial of any application required by this
Ordinance or revocation of a permit that is related to the violation.
6. Injunction. In the event of a violation or the threatened violation of any
provision of this Ordinance, or any provision or condition of a permit
issued pursuant to this Ordinance, the county in addition to other remedies
may institute appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent, restrain,
correct, or abate such violation or threatened violation.
7. Nothing in this Section shall prevent the County from taking such other
actions as are permitted under law, and the penalties provided here shall
be cumulative.
Scott County Non-Conforming Lots,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 3 Buildings, Structures and Uses
CHAPTER 3: NON-CONFORMING LOTS, BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES
AND USES
3-1 PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this Ordinance to provide for the regulation of non-conforming lots,
buildings, structures and uses and to specify those requirements, circumstances, and
conditions under which non-conforming buildings, structures and uses will be operated
and maintained. This Zoning Ordinance establishes separate districts, each of which is
an appropriate area for the location of uses which are permitted in that district. It is
necessary and consistent with the establishment of these districts that non-conforming
lots, buildings, structures and uses not be permitted to continue without restriction.
Furthermore, it is the intent of this Ordinance that all non-conforming uses shall be
eventually brought into conformity.
3-2 LEGAL NON-CONFORMING LOTS (LOT OF RECORD)
1. Any parcel or lot which legally existed prior to the adoption date of this
Ordinance, but which fails to meet the current required lot size, width of
the zoning district, or does not have the required frontage on a publicly
maintained road, may be utilized in compliance with all other ordinance
requirements subject to the following provisions:
a. The dimensions or area of a legal nonconforming lot may be altered
provided that no alteration shall be permitted that would render the
lot further in non-compliance with the Ordinance requirements.
Legal non-conforming lot (s) may exchange property, relocate the
boundary line between them, provided no additional parcels or lots
are created. Exchanges between legal non-conforming lots may
reduce the area non-conformity of one non-conforming lot provided
the other lot area is increased by the same area, no dimensions on
either resultant properties are in a greater non-conformity, and both
resultant properties meet and conform to provisions b through d in
this Section.
b. Legal non-conforming lots of record intended for residential,
commercial, industrial or institutional development or expansion
shall have sufficient lot area and configuration, except as provided
for within Chapter 70-9, to meet all State Building Codes and fire
codes and to provide for individual sewage treatment systems in
accordance with Scott County Individual Sewage Treatment
System Ordinance No. 4, as amended, or connect to a public
Scott County Non-Conforming Lots,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 3 Buildings, Structures and Uses
sewer, and satisfy all required building setbacks, and other
performance standards of this Ordinance without variance.
c. Where legal non-conforming lots of record cannot meet the lot area
standards of Section 3-2-1.b above, two (2) or more contiguous
legal non-conforming lots which are in common ownership, the lots
shall be combined into a single lot for zoning purposes to meet
minimum lot area standards of Section 3-2-1.b of this Ordinance. If
possible the lots shall be combined under one (1) Tax Parcel
Identification Number (P.I.D.).
d. Two (2) or more parcels required to be considered one parcel for
zoning purposes by the Planning Department shall be consolidated
or combined to form a single parcel. The combination or
consolidation shall be accomplished through the filing of the
appropriate deed or contract for deed transferring interest in all of
the parcels to be merged, i.e., a deed by the property owner(s) [the
grantor(s)] deeding to herself or himself [the grantee(s)] setting
forth the legal descriptions of all said parcels required to be
consolidated. The resulting single parcel shall be consolidated
under one (1) tax parcel identification number if permitted by the
County Taxation Department. A written request by the property
owners to combine the parcels under one (1) parcel identification
number may be required by the County Taxation Department at the
time the consolidating deed is to be recorded. A note shall be
placed on the deed as follows: “this is one parcel for zoning
purposes.”
2. A parcel of land which contains an existing single family home in all
agricultural, commercial, industrial, rural residential, residential suburban,
urban expansion, and urban business reserve and residential districts on
the effective date of this Ordinance, and does not meet the minimum lot
size, lot dimensions or have sufficient publicly maintained road frontage,
shall be considered a legal nonconforming lot, subject to the provisions a
through c above in this Section.
3-3 LEGAL NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES
Any structure which legally existed prior to the adoption date of this Ordinance, but
which is not in compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance for the district in
which the structure exists, may be utilized subject to the following provisions:
1. A legal non-conforming structure which is only nonconforming due to an
encroachment into a required setback may be enlarged in compliance with
all other ordinance requirements provided that:
Scott County Non-Conforming Lots,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 3 Buildings, Structures and Uses
a. The expansion will not decrease the distance between the structure
and the applicable lot line or ordinary high water level.
b. A legal nonconforming structure may be expanded or enlarged up
to fifty (50) percent of the total square footage of the structure
existing on the effective date of this Ordinance, subject to
compliance with all applicable setbacks and building dimension
regulations in the district. All expansions shall be calculated on an
accumulative basis to determine maximum expansion size of a
non-conforming structure.
c. Aside from the existing non-conforming setback, the site and
building shall comply with the performance standards of this
Ordinance.
2. Residential and non-residential structures.
a. For residential legal non-conforming structures, if the nonconformity
or occupancy of a legal non-conforming structure is
discontinued for more than one year, or the structure is damaged
by any cause to the extent of fifty (50) percent or more of its current
market value as determined by the County Assessor and no
building permit has been applied for within 180 days of when the
structure was damaged, it shall be removed, and any construction
thereafter shall be in compliance with the provisions of this
Ordinance. If a building permit has been applied for within 180 days
of when the structure was damaged, reasonable conditions may be
placed upon the building permit in order to mitigate any newly
created impacts on adjacent properties.
b. For non-residential legal non-conforming structures, if the nonconformity
or occupancy of a legal non-conforming structure is
discontinued for more than one year, or the structure is damaged
by any cause to the extent of fifty (50) percent or more of its current
market value as determined by the County Assessor, it shall be
removed, and any construction thereafter shall be in compliance
with the provisions of this Ordinance.
3. Maintenance of legal non-conforming structures is subject to the following:
a. Residential legal non-conforming structures may be continued,
including repair, replacement, restoration, maintenance, or
improvements, but shall not enlarge or intensify the use of the
structure except as defined in provision 1. in this Section.
Scott County Non-Conforming Lots,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 3 Buildings, Structures and Uses
b. For non-residential structures, normal maintenance of a legal nonconforming
structure is permitted. Maintenance may include
necessary non-structural repairs and incidental alterations which do
not enlarge or intensify the use of the structure.
4. No parcel of land or portion thereof shall be subdivided if such action
results in buildings and/or uses becoming non-conforming, or increasing
an existing non-conformity, regarding minimum lot size, lot coverage, lot
dimensions, maximum accessory structure building area, or having
sufficient publicly maintained road frontage. Buildings and structures that
are legally existing and located on a parcel of land proposed to be
subdivided, shall also be evaluated as part of the subdivision process
regarding the use, extent of non-conformity, and general
condition/appearance.
3-4 LEGAL NON-CONFORMING USES
Any use which legally existed prior to the adoption date of this Ordinance, but which is
not a permitted use under the current Ordinance, may be allowed to continue subject to
the following provisions:
1. When a lawful, non-conforming use of any structure or parcel of land in
any district has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter
be changed to any non-conforming use.
2. A lawful, non-conforming use of a structure or parcel of land may be
changed to lessen the non-conformity of use. Once a non-conforming
structure or parcel of land has been changed, it shall not thereafter be so
altered to increase the non-conformity.
3. A non-conforming use which has been discontinued for a period of twelve
(12) or more months shall not be reestablished, and any further use shall
be in compliance with the regulations of this Ordinance.
4. Residential and non-residential uses.
a. A residential structure that is a legal non-conforming use, or which
contains a legal non-conforming use, is damaged by any cause to
the extent of fifty (50) percent or more of its current market value as
determined by the County Assessor and no building permit has
been applied for within 180 days of when the structure was
damaged, it shall be removed, and any construction thereafter shall
be in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. If a building
permit has been applied for within 180 days of when the structure
was damaged, reasonable conditions may be placed upon the
Scott County Non-Conforming Lots,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 3 Buildings, Structures and Uses
building permit in order to mitigate any newly created impacts on
adjacent properties.
b. If a non-residential structure that is a legal non-conforming use or
which contains a legal non-conforming use is damaged by any
cause to the extent of fifty (50) percent or more of its current market
value as determined by the County Assessor, it shall be removed,
and any construction thereafter shall be in compliance with the
provisions of this Ordinance.
5. Maintenance of a building or other structure containing or used by a legal
non-conforming use is subject to the following:
a. Structures of a residential legal non-conforming use may be
continued, including repair, replacement, restoration, maintenance,
or improvements, but shall not enlarge or intensify the legal nonconforming
use of the structure except as defined in provision 7. in
this Section.
b. Structures of a non-residential legal non-conforming use shall be
permitted normal maintenance. Maintenance may include
necessary non-structural repairs and incidental alterations which do
not enlarge or intensify the legal non-conforming use of the
structure.
6. An existing legal non-conforming single family residential use may be
enlarged in compliance with all other ordinance requirements provided
that:
a. The enlargement does not result in a new/replacement principle
structure or the creation of additional dwelling units/residences on a
parcel of property.
b. A legal non-conforming single family residential use may be
expanded or enlarged up to thirty (30) percent of the total square
footage of the principle structure existing on the effective date of
this Ordinance, subject to compliance with all applicable setbacks
and building dimension regulations in the district. All expansions
shall be calculated on an accumulative basis to determine
maximum expansion size of a principle single family nonconforming
structure.
c. Accessory structures may be added or replaced on legal
nonconforming single family residential lots with an existing
principle structure provided the proposed accessory building meet
all applicable district performance standards identified by chapter 4-
7 of this Ordinance.
Scott County Non-Conforming Lots,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 3 Buildings, Structures and Uses
7. In the event a change in the zoning classification for a district renders a
use non-conforming as a result of such change, the use shall be permitted
to continue subject to provisions 1 through 7 above in this Section.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 4 General Provisions
CHAPTER 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
4-1 PURPOSE
All uses and structures permitted pursuant to this Ordinance shall conform to the
General Provisions set forth in this Ordinance, which are the minimum standards
necessary to comply with the intent and purposes of this Ordinance. The performance
standards established in this Ordinance are designed to encourage a high standard of
development by providing assurance that neighboring land uses will be compatible.
Before any permit is approved, the Planning Department shall determine whether the
proposed use will conform to the General Provisions. An applicant or landowner shall
supply data necessary to demonstrate such conformance, which shall include, but not
be limited to, a site plan; the number of employees; the number and description of the
vehicles and equipment to be used; hours of operation; method of solid waste disposal;
grading, drainage and erosion control; fencing; screening; signage; and type and
location of exterior storage.
The General Provisions shall apply to future development in all districts and to existing
development within all compliance periods as noted in individual Sections. Compliance
may be waived by the County if a building condition created under prior Ordinances
physically precludes the reasonable application of the standards.
4-2 LOT AND YARD REQUIREMENTS
4-2-1 Purpose
This Section identifies minimum yard spaces, exceptions, and areas to be provided for
in each zoning district.
4-2-2 Minimum Lot Area Requirements
1. The minimum lot area shall conform to the standards of the applicable
zoning district. No lot, yard or other open space shall be reduced in area
or dimension so as to make such lot, yard or open space less than the
minimum required by this Ordinance, and if an existing yard or other open
space is less than the minimum required, it shall not be further reduced.
2. For parcels located in the Agricultural Preservation, Rural Residential
Reserve, Urban Expansion Reserve, Urban Transition Reserve, and
Urban Business Reserve Districts, that portion of the property that lies
within the road right-of-way will be included when determining compliance
with the minimum lot area requirements.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 4 General Provisions
3. For parcels located in the Rural Residential Single Family Cluster and the
Rural Residential Single Family Districts, that portion of the property that
lies within the County road right-of-way will be included, and that portion of
the property that lies within the Township road right-of-way will be
excluded when determining compliance with the minimum lot area
requirements.
4. For parcels located in the Agricultural Preservation Density, Agricultural
Woodlands, Rural Residential Suburban Single Family, Urban Expansion
Cluster, Urban Transition Cluster, General Commercial, and Rural
Industrial Zoning Districts, that portion of the property that lies within the
road right-of-way shall be excluded when determining compliance with the
minimum lot area requirements.
4-2-3 Subdivision of Lots
1. No lot or parcel of land under the jurisdiction of this Ordinance shall be
split or subdivided so as to create an illegal nonconforming lot. Any
proposal to subdivide a lot or parcel of land by any means after the
effective date of this Ordinance shall be submitted to the Planning
Department prior to filing in the Office of the County Recorder or Registrar
of Titles. The Planning Department shall examine the proposed lot split to
determine whether it complies with this Ordinance.
2. If it is determined that the instrument is not in compliance with this
Ordinance, the Planning Department shall notify the applicant of such nonconformity
and the proposed lot split shall not be recorded in the Office of
the County Recorder or Register of Titles. If possible, through the
provisions of this Ordinance, the applicant may correct the nonconformities
of a proposed lot split or splits.
3. Two (2) or more parcels required to be considered one parcel for zoning
purposes by the Planning Department shall be consolidated or combined
to form a single parcel. The combination or consolidation shall be
accomplished through the filing of the appropriate deed or contract for
deed transferring interest in all of the parcels to be merged, i.e., a deed by
the property owner(s) [the grantor(s)] deeding to herself or himself [the
grantee(s)] setting forth the legal descriptions of all said parcels required
to be consolidated. The resulting single parcel shall be consolidated
under one (1) tax parcel identification number if permitted by the County
Taxation Department. A written request by the property owners to
combine the parcels under one (1) parcel identification number may be
required by the County Taxation Department at the time the consolidating
deed is to be recorded. A note shall be placed on the deed as follows:
“this is one parcel for zoning purposes.”
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 4 General Provisions
4-2-4 Lot Frontage
All lots shall abut upon a publicly maintained street for a minimum of sixty-six (66) feet
for the bulk of the property.
4-2-5 Platted and Unplatted Property
1. All principal buildings hereafter erected shall be so placed and described
so that they will not obstruct street and utility extensions or other features
or proper subdivision and land planning in accordance with the adopted
Township Transportation maps.
2. On corner lots and through lots, both road lines shall be front lot lines for
applying the yard setback regulations of this Ordinance except in the case
of a rear yard fence or accessory building. In addition, no home on a
through lot or corner lot in any residential zone shall be allowed direct
access to any collector or arterial designated as such by the Scott County
Transportation Plan.
3. Outlots are deemed unbuildable and no building permit shall be issued for
such properties, except in the case of the permitted uses specified in
Chapter 16.
4-2-6 Yards and Setbacks
1. Setbacks. All building and structures shall comply with the setbacks within
the applicable district except as may be required within other sections of
this Ordinance. All setbacks shall be measured from the appropriate lot
line, right-of-way or centerline of the road/street as determined by the
County.
2. Triangular Lots. In the case of triangular lots, where the rear lot line is a
single vertex, the rear yard setback points of reference shall be
determined by measuring the length of the setback distance from the
vertex along the side lot lines. The rear setback line shall be determined
by traversing the lot and connecting these points of reference.
3. District Setback Exceptions. Where adjacent principal structures within
the same block have front yard or setbacks from the ordinary high water
level of adjoining lake setbacks less than the required minimum, the front
yard or ordinary high water level (OHWL) minimum setback may be the
average of the adjacent principal structures. If there is one adjacent
principal structure, the front yard or OHWL minimum setback may be the
average of the required setback and the setback of the adjacent principal
structure.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 4 General Provisions
4. Permitted Encroachments. The following shall be considered as permitted
encroachments on setback requirements as provided in this Ordinance,
however, no building may be built on or extended over easements of
record.
a. In any yard: posts, off-street parking places, flues, leaders, sills,
pilasters, lintels, cornices, eaves, gutters, bay windows less than
two feet in depth, awnings, open terraces, steps, chimneys, flag
poles, ornamental features, open fire escapes, sidewalks, exposed
ramps (wheelchair), fences, and all other similar devices incidental
and appurtenant to the principal structure.
b. Decks are exempted from setback requirements if the deck is no
higher than eighteen (18) inches above the ground level, except
that the deck cannot be located within five feet of a property line.
5. Sight Triangle Setback. On corner lots in all districts, no structure or
plantings shall be placed or constructed within the sight visibility triangle
setback in a manner that may interfere with traffic or pedestrian visibility
along a public right-of-way between the heights of three (3) feet and either
ten (10) feet or the road centerline grade. The sight triangle is defined as
follows: beginning at the intersection of the projected property lines of two
(2) intersecting roads, thence thirty (30) feet along one property line,
thence diagonally to a point of thirty (30) feet from the point of beginning
on the other property line, thence to the point of beginning.
6. Buffer Yards.
a. Double frontage lots shall have at least twenty (20) feet, designated
as an additional drainage and utility easement, in order to allow
space for buffering/screen planting along the back lot line for those
lots which abut major collector or arterial roads.
b. Lots which border major collector or arterial roads on a side yard
shall have at least twenty (20) feet, designated as an additional
drainage and utility easement in order to allow space for buffering
and screening plantings along the lot line bordering such roads.
7. Local Roads. All Township roads shall be classified as local roads in
regards to the application of required setbacks.
8. Lot Coverage. Lot coverage shall not exceed the maximums listed in the
zoning district performance standards within each respective zoning
district, except for institutional uses that shall not exceed seventy-five (75)
percent of lot area in all zoning districts.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 4 General Provisions
4-2-7 Special Consideration for Properties Affected by Improvement Projects
Resulting in Land Taking
If a governmental body takes land through negotiation or by exercise of its rights of
eminent domain and by that taking creates a parcel which does not conform to the
width, area, or yard requirements of this Ordinance, the non-conforming parcel shall
become a legal non-conformity and may be used thereafter only by complying with the
provisions of Chapter 3 of this Ordinance.
If the owner of a property which becomes a legal non-conformity as the result of a
government taking applies for a variance to reinstate the legal status to the property, the
governmental taking shall constitute a hardship for the purpose of the variance.
4-2-8 Lots of Record Bisected by a Public Road, Railroad, or Similar Public Rightof-
Way
1. A lot of record that is bisected by a public road, railroad, or similar public
right-of-way is considered one (1) parcel for zoning purposes.
2. A single family home may be constructed on either portion of the bisected
property upon demonstrating two (2) individual sewage treatment sites are
available and the proposed home will meet all setback and access
separation requirements without a variance. Construction of the home
shall not result in the creation of additional residential density. Deed
restriction(s) shall be recorded on the appropriate parcels, if necessary.
3. At such time as the lot of record is proposed for subdivision, the entire
property shall be platted according to the requirements of the Scott County
Subdivision Ordinance.
4-3 BUILDING PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
4-3-1 Purpose
All uses and structures permitted pursuant to this Ordinance shall conform to the
performance and design standards set forth in this Ordinance, which are the minimum
standards necessary to comply with the intent and purposes of this Ordinance. The
performance standards established in this Ordinance are designed to encourage a high
standard of development by providing assurance that neighboring land uses will be
compatible.
Before any permit is approved, the Planning Department shall determine whether the
proposed use will conform to the performance standards. An applicant or landowner
shall supply data necessary to demonstrate such conformance, which shall include, but
not be limited to, a site plan; the number of employees; the number and description of
the vehicles and equipment to be used; hours of operation; method of solid waste
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 4 General Provisions
disposal; grading, drainage and erosion control; fencing; screening; signage; and type
and location of exterior storage.
The performance standards shall apply to future development in all districts and to
existing development within all compliance periods as noted in individual sections.
Compliance may be waived by the County if a building condition created under prior
Ordinances physically precludes the reasonable application of the standards.
4-3-2 Dwelling Units
1. Only one (1) single family dwelling unit shall be allowed per parcel.
a. If a new single family dwelling unit is proposed on a parcel with an
existing dwelling unit, the existing dwelling unit may be utilized until a
certificate of occupancy is issued for the new home. A financial
guarantee shall be provided to the County to ensure prompt removal,
or conversion to a non-habitable accessory structure, of the other
residence within sixty (60) days of issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for the new dwelling. The financial guarantee amount shall
be fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) or acceptable amount based on a
submitted demolition and removal estimate.
2. Prohibited Dwelling Units. No garage, camper, tent, fish house, accessory
structure, automobile, travel trailer, motor home, park model trailer or
recreational vehicle shall at any time be occupied as a dwelling unit.
4-3-3 Building Size
1. Residential Structures. For all dwelling units in all residences, except
mobile homes and accessory dwelling units, the finished floor area shall
not be less than nine hundred sixty (960) square feet.
2. Commercial and Industrial Structures. Commercial and industrial
buildings (principal structure) having less than one thousand (1,000)
square feet of floor area may only be allowed upon approval of a
conditional use permit as provided for in Section 2-6 of this Ordinance.
4-3-4 Moved In or Manufactured Dwellings
Except for mobile homes permitted in Chapter 7 of this Ordinance, all new or used
permanent dwellings moved into or within the County shall meet the following minimum
requirements:
1. Every dwelling to be moved into the unincorporated area of Scott County
shall be inspected and approved by the Building Official prior to said
structure being moved in.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 4 General Provisions
2. Every dwelling moved into this jurisdiction shall meet the requirements of
the Minnesota State Building Code.
3. Every dwelling moved into this jurisdiction shall have a full load bearing
perimeter foundation with a minimum clear span floor loading capability to
a center wall or beam which complies with the requirements of the
Minnesota State Building Code.
4. Measurements. Dwelling structures shall not be less than thirty (30) feet
in length and not less than twenty-two (22) feet in width over that entire
minimum length. Width measurements shall not take into account
overhangs and other projections beyond the principal walls. Dwellings
shall also meet the minimum floor area requirements as set out in this
Ordinance.
5. Roof. Dwellings shall have an earth covered, composition, metal, shingled
or tiled roof.
6. Receive a Building Permit. The application for a building permit in addition
to other information required shall indicate the height, size, design and the
appearance of all elevations of the proposed building and a description of
the construction materials proposed to be used, and the delineation of any
anticipated future deck, porch and/or garage. The exterior architectural
design of a proposed dwelling may not be so at variance with, nor so
dissimilar to, the exterior architectural design of any structure or structures
already constructed or in the course of construction in the immediate
neighborhood, nor so at variance with the character of the surrounding
neighborhood
7. Financial Guarantee. Every moved in dwelling shall be required to post a
security acceptable to the County as a condition to the building permit.
4-3-5 Building Type and Construction
All buildings shall be designed to accomplish the goals and policies of the
Comprehensive Plan. Building materials shall be attractive in appearance, of a durable
finish, and be of a quality that is compatible and harmonious with adjacent structures.
All buildings shall be of good architectural quality to ensure they will maintain and
enhance the property values of neighboring properties and not adversely impact the
community’s public health, safety and general welfare.
1. General Provisions.
a. Except in association with farming activities, no galvanized or
unfinished steel or unfinished aluminum buildings (walls or roofs),
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 4 General Provisions
except those specifically intended to have a corrosive designed
finish such as CORTEN steel shall be permitted in any zoning
district.
b. Buildings in all zoning districts shall maintain a high standard of
architectural and aesthetic compatibility with surrounding
properties.
c. Exposed building foundations not exceeding 2 feet in height above
grade and other such portions of a building’s façade need not
comply with the requirements for the primary façade treatment or
materials.
2. Residential Building Requirements
a. The primary exterior building finishes for principal residential
buildings shall consist of the following materials
(1) Brick or Stone (natural or artificial).
(2) Monolithic architectural concrete block.
(3) Wood, natural or composite, provided the surfaces are
finished for exterior use or wood of proven exterior durability
is used, such as cedar, redwood or cypress.
(4) Stucco (natural or artificial).
(5) Vinyl, steel, aluminum, or fiber-cement siding.
(6) Thermal glass
3. Commercial/Industrial/Institutional Building Requirements
a. The primary exterior building finishes for new or expanding principal
commercial, industrial and institutional buildings in
commercial/industrial zoning districts shall consist of the following
materials:
(1) Brick or Stone (natural or manufactured).
(2) Fiber-cement siding/concrete composite board.
(3) Cast in place concrete or pre-cast concrete panels.
(4) Monolithic architectural/decorative with integral color
concrete block.
(5) Curtain wall panels of steel, glass, fiberglass and aluminum
(non-structural, non-load bearing) provided such panels are
factory fabricated and finished with a durable non-fade
surface and their fasteners are of a corrosion resistant
design.
(6) Glass
(7) Stucco (natural or artificial).
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 4 General Provisions
(8) Pre-manufactured Kynar (or similar) finish coated 26-guage
minimum steel panels, provided there is protection designed
for metal in vulnerable places such as high traffic areas,
doors (loading, entry, garage), and corners.
(9) Factory finish texture faced steel panels, provided there is
protection designed for metal in vulnerable places such as
high traffic areas, doors (loading, entry, garage), and
corners.
(10) Wood, natural or composite, provided the surfaces are
finished for exterior use or wood of proven exterior durability
is used, such as cedar, redwood, or cypress.
b. The following are permitted accent materials that may be used for
up to 25% of any exterior wall area.
(1) Wood, natural or composite, provided the surfaces are
finished for exterior use or wood of proven exterior durability
is used, such as cedar, redwood or cypress.
(2) Metal.
(3) Vinyl, steel, or aluminum siding.
(4) Field painted materials (i.e. decorative band on precast
concrete).
c. No wall length shall exceed 100 feet without visual relief,
incorporating design features such as windows, horizontal/vertical
patterns, contrasting material colors, or varying wall depths.
All new building façades and refaced façades of existing buildings
shall include a minimum of three (3) of the following elements:
(1) Accent materials on all walls visible from public view.
(2) Visually pleasing front entry that, in addition to doors, shall
be accented by a minimum 150 square feet around the door
entrance (300 square feet for multi-tenant building).
(3) 25% window coverage on each front that faces a street.
(4) Contrasting, yet complimentary material colors.
(5) A combination of horizontal and vertical design features.
(6) Irregular building shapes or varying wall depths and shapes.
(7) Varying roof line, design, or materials.
(8) Decorative lighting design.
(9) Arcades, awnings, window bays, balconies or similar
ornamental features
(10) Other unique architectural features in the overall concept.
d. Other design provisions:
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 4 General Provisions
(1) For Commercial, Industrial and Institutional properties all
garages and accessory structures shall be of a similar color,
type, quality, and appearance as the principal structure.
(2) Principal building roofs that are exposed or an integral part
of the building architecture shall be constructed only of
commercial grade asphalt shingles, wood shingles, standing
seam metal, slate, tile, fabric (plastic fabric or canvas) or
materials similar in appearance and performance. Flat roofs
(1/12 slope or less) and accessory building roofs are not
subject to these material limitations.
e. Exemptions: Whenever an existing industrial or commercial
building has been damaged or destroyed to the extent of fifty
percent (50%) or more of its fair market value, and a building permit
has been applied for within 180 days of when the property was
damaged, the re-built structure shall be exempt from the exterior
building standards of this Section.
4-3-6 Building and Structure Heights
1. All buildings and structures shall comply with the maximum building height
of the applicable zoning districts.
2. Exceptions. The building height limits established herein for zoning
districts shall not apply to the following:
a. Belfries.
b. Chimneys or flues.
c. Church spires.
d. Cupolas and domes which do not contain useable space.
e. Elevator penthouses.
f. Flag poles mounted on a building.
g. Parapet walls extending not more than three (3) feet above the
limiting height of the building.
h. Agriculture silos.
i. Necessary mechanical and electrical appurtenances.
j. Poles, towers and other structures for essential services.
k. Personal wireless service and commercial broadcasting antennas
not exceeding twenty (20) feet above the roof of the antenna
support structure.
l. Antenna towers.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 4 General Provisions
3. Roof mounted mechanical equipment must meet the following standards:
a. Rooftop mechanical equipment shall not exceed the building height
standards by more than ten (10) feet.
b. All rooftop and ground mounted mechanical equipment shall be
buffered so as to mitigate noise in compliance with this Ordinance
c. All rooftop and ground mounted equipment shall be painted or color
clad to match the building or screened from view with secured
fencing or parapets in a harmonious color.
4. Aviation Obstructions. In the case of any proposal to construct or alter a
structure which will exceed a height of two hundred (200) feet above
ground level of the site, or any proposal to construct or alter a structure to
a height greater than an imaginary surface extending upward and outward
at a slope of one hundred to one (100:1) from the nearest point of the
runway of a public airport, the applicant shall notify the Commissioner of
the Minnesota Department of Transportation in writing of the plans at least
thirty (30) days in advance of making applicable permit requests to the
County. The applicant shall provide the Planning Department with any
comments received from the Commissioner of the Minnesota Department
of Transportation as part of the required applicable permit request. This
local reporting is in addition to any federal permitting and review
processing which may be simultaneously required.
4-3-7 Lowest Floor Elevations
High Surface Water Elevation. No structure, except piers, docks, and retaining walls
shall be placed at an elevation such that the lowest floor, including basement floor, is
less than three (3) feet above the highest known water level where an outlet exists and
has been defined, or less than one (1) foot above the 100 year regulatory flood
protection elevation, if determined, of any adjacent lake, pond, river, watercourse, or
wetland. If sufficient data on known high water levels are not available, the property
owner is responsible for determining the 100 year flood elevation. When fill is required
to meet this elevation, the fill shall be allowed to stabilize, and construction shall not
begin until the property has been inspected by the Building Official and a soil
engineering report is provided for the proposed structure.
4-3-8 Sewage Disposal
The installation of on-site sewage treatment systems shall be in compliance with the
provisions of the State Uniform Building Code and Scott County’s Individual Sewage
Treatment System Ordinance No. 4, as amended.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 4 General Provisions
4-3-9 Accessory Buildings and Structures
1. Rural Residential, Residential Suburban, Urban Expansion, Urban
Transition, Urban Business Reserve, and Agricultural Districts.
a. No accessory building shall exceed the height in the respective
zoning district.
b. One (1) accessory building, not to exceed one hundred twenty
(120) square feet of floor area, shall be allowed and is not required
to meet setbacks and shall be permitted in addition to the allowed
square footage of accessory building size.
c. No accessory building permit shall be issued on a lot until the
foundation for the principal building to which it is accessory is
complete.
2. Single Family Accessory Buildings.
a. Detached Accessory Buildings. See individual zoning district.
b. Attached Garages. The maximum floor area for attached garages
shall be the greater of eight hundred (800) square feet or a footprint
equal to the footprint of the principal building.
c. The roofline of attached garages shall not extend above the roofline
of the principal structure on the lot.
3. Commercial and Industrial Districts. No accessory building shall exceed
the height of the principal building except by conditional use permit.
4-3-10 Fencing
Fences are a permitted accessory use in all zoning districts subject to the following
standards:
1. All fences (except agricultural fences) shall be entirely located upon the
property of the person, firm or corporation constructing, or causing the
construction of such fence unless the owner of the property adjoining
agrees in writing and submitted to the Planning Department that such
fence may be erected on the division line of the respective properties.
2. Fences shall not exceed six (6) feet in height from finished grade in Rural
Residential, Residential Suburban, and Urban Reserve Zoning Districts or
eight and one-half (8.5) feet in height from finished grade in Commercial
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 4 General Provisions
and Industrial Districts. Agricultural fences that are seventy-five (75)
percent or more open are exempt from the district fence height standards.
3. Taller Fences. Fences taller than the district fence height standards may
be allowed by administrative permit subject to the following conditions:
a. Taller fences shall be seventy-five (75) percent open or more to
allow for the passage of air and light, and shall be setback a
minimum of ten (10) feet from a property line.
b. Taller fences that are less than seventy-five (75) percent open shall
comply with the required principal building setbacks of the zoning
district.
4. Fences which are greater than twenty (20) percent opaque shall not
exceed three and one-half (3.5) feet in height within fifteen (15) feet of a
street right-of-way.
5. That side of the fence considered to be the face (finished side as opposed
to structural supports) shall face the abutting property.
4-4 SCREENING AND LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
4-4-1 Required Screening
1. Where any commercial or industrial use (i.e., structure, parking or storage)
abuts Rural Residential, Residential Suburban, Urban Transition or Urban
Expansion Zoning Districts, such business or industry shall provide
screening along the boundary of the residential property. Screening shall
also be provided where a business or industry is across the street from a
residential zone, but not on that side of a business or industry considered
to be the front (as determined by the Planning Department). All the
screening specifically required by this Ordinance shall be subject to the
following standards:
1. Greenbelt Planting Strip
a. A greenbelt planting strip shall consist of evergreens deciduous
trees, shrubs and and plants of a sufficient density to compose an
eighty (80) percent opaque visual screen and reasonable buffer
viewed at a ninety (90) degree angle from the greenbelt planting
strip. This planting strip shall be designed to provide visual
screening to a minimum height of six (6) feet. The grade for
determining height shall be the grade elevation of the building or
use for which the screening is providing protection, unless
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 4 General Provisions
otherwise established by the Planning Department. An earth berm
may be used, but shall not be used to achieve more than eight (8)
feet of the required screen. The planting plan and type of plantings
shall require the approval of the Planning Department.
b. A fence may also be installed, but not in lieu of the greenbelt. The
fence shall be constructed of masonry, brick, or wood, except as
otherwise provided herein. Such fence shall provide an eighty (80)
percent opaque screening effect and shall be a minimum of six (6)
feet in height but shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. The
grade for determining height shall be the grade elevation of the
building or use for which the screening is providing protection,
unless otherwise established by the Planning Department. The
design and materials used in constructing a required screening
fence shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Department.
Fences in excess of eight (8) feet in height shall require an
administrative permit subject to the approval of the Planning
Department.
2. Screening Standards
a. Deciduous trees shall be planted not more than forty (40) feet apart.
Evergreen trees intended for screening shall be planted not more than
twelve (12) feet apart or depending on the plant spread.
b. Where plant materials are planted in two (2) or more rows, plantings
shall be staggered in rows unless otherwise approved by the Planning
Department.
c. Required screening does not count towards minimum landscape
requirements identified in section 4-4-2.
4-4-2 Required Landscaping
The preservation of existing trees and vegetation, as well as the planting of new
trees and vegetation, can significantly add to the quality of the physical built
environment. Trees can provide the following benefits to the community:
? Provide buffers and screens again noise, air pollution, and unsightly and
incompatible uses;
? Reduce the hazards of flooding and aid in the control of erosion and storm
water runoff;
? Act to moderate extremes of temperature and provide shade;
? Aid in energy conservation
New or expanding utility, commercial, industrial, and institutional uses shall be
subject to mandatory landscape plan and specification requirements.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 4 General Provisions
1. General Landscape Standards
a. Said landscape plan shall include a narrative describing the
overarching landscape architecture elements and how the design and
placement of plant types and materials will complement the form and
function of the developed site.
b. Said landscape plan shall be developed with an emphasis upon the
entry focal areas, boundary or perimeter of the proposed site at points
adjoining a public right-of-way, parking lot, other property and the
immediate perimeter of the structure.
c. The number of plantings shall be the greater of a.) 1 landscape unit per
40 feet of the site perimeter or b.) 1 landscape unit per 500 sq. ft. of
gross building area.
d. The target goal for site landscaping is that all existing and new tree
canopies at full maturity cover at least five (5) to ten (10) percent of the
entire developed site.
e. All landscaping incorporated in said plan shall conform to the following
minimum sizes, standards and criteria:
A landscape unit shall be defined as one (1) of the following:
Landscape Unit Potted/Container
OR
OR Balled and
Burlapped
Deciduous/Shade trees 2.5 inch
diameter/#25
container
2.5 inch diameter
Ornamental trees (flowering crabs,
hawthorn, etc.)
6 – 8 feet in
height/#7
container
2 inch diameter
Coniferous/Evergreen trees --- 6 feet
Tall shrubs and hedge material
(evergreen or deciduous)
3 – 4 feet in
height
3 – 4 feet in
height
Low shrubs, deciduous
Evergreen
Spreading evergreens
18–24 inch
potted/#2 - #10
container
24 – 30 inches
24 – 30 inches
18 – 24 inches
* Type and mode are dependent upon time of planting season, availability,
and site conditions (soils, climate, groundwater, manmade irrigation,
grading, etc.).
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 4 General Provisions
f. For all landscape plans, at least 10% of the evergreen and/or
deciduous trees must exceed the minimum size (to 8 feet high and 3½
inches caliper balled and burlapped respectively) to establish some
diversity in size or enrichment of design intent.
g. The complement of trees fulfilling the minimum requirements shall
provide a variety of vertical and horizontal plantings and landscape
features to maintain a mix of plant types.
2. Design and Placement: The landscape plan shall articulate, shape and
form the landscape design of the exterior space using landscape elements
of plant materials, walks, terraces, fences, creative grading, sculpture,
lighting, etc to create hard and soft elements into a composition form.
a. All areas within the property lines (or beyond, if site grading extends
beyond) shall be treated. All exterior areas not paved or designated as
roads, parking, or storage must be planted into vegetation (lawns,
ground covers, or shrubs).
b. At least 50% of the total building foundation perimeter shall be sodded
or landscaped with approved ground cover, shrubbery, and trees.
c. Plant material centers shall not be located closer than three (3) feet
from the fence line or property line and shall not be planted to conflict
with public plantings, sidewalks, trails, fences, parking areas, and
driveways based on the judgment of the Planning Department.
d. Where massing of plants or screening is intended, large deciduous
shrubs shall be planted four (4) feet on center or closer, and/or,
evergreen shrubs shall be planted three (3) feet on center or closer.
e. Turf slopes in excess of three to one (3:1) are prohibited, except as
part of a rain garden design.
f. Trees and shrubs shall not be planted in the right of way.
g. All plants required as part of an approved landscaping plan shall be
maintained and kept alive. Dead plants shall be replaced in
accordance with the approved landscape plan.
3. Landscaping of Parking Areas (Landscaping provided in parking areas
may be used to meet overall landscaping requirements):
a. At least 3% of the total land area within the required parking and
driveway areas of a site shall be landscaped for lots with less than 30
spaces. At least 5% of the land area shall be landscaped for sites
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 4 General Provisions
having between 30-50 parking spaces, and at least 8% of the land
area shall be landscaped for sites having over 50 parking spaces
b. A landscape amenity (island, bump-out, etc.) shall be installed in any
parking area having more than 10 contiguous linear spaces.
c. A minimum landscape buffer area twenty (20) feet in width shall
separate any parking, driveway or structure from a lot line in common
with any residential district.
4. Landscape Guarantee: All new plants shall be guaranteed for a full
growing season from the time planting has been completed. All plants
shall be alive, of good quality, and diseases free at the end of the warranty
period or be replaced. Any replacements shall be warranted for a full
growing season from the time of planting. The growing season is herein
defined as the period from June 1 to September 30.
5. Time of Planting: Planting operations shall be conducted under favorable
weather conditions during one of the following planning seasons as
specified herein. For deciduous plant materials, spring planting should
occur from April 1 to June 1; and fall planting from September 30 –
November 15. For coniferous plant materials, spring planting should occur
from April 1 to May 15; and fall planting from August 15 to October 15.
5. Landscape plans may be accompanied by a minimum $5,000 financial
guarantee consistent with Section 2-12 of this Ordinance, prior to issuance
of a building permit.
6. Any proposed modifications to these landscape requirements must
consider a site specific design solution if site conditions are deemed
appropriate and other functional requirements (screening, etc.) are met.
4-5 EXTERIOR LIGHTING STANDARDS
1. Purpose. It is the purpose of this Ordinance Section to encourage the use
of lighting systems that will reduce light pollution and promote energy
conservation while increasing night time safety, utility, security and
productivity.
2. Exemptions. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to the
following:
a. This Section does not prohibit the use of temporary outdoor lighting
used during customary holiday seasons.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 4 General Provisions
b. This Section does not prohibit the use of temporary outdoor lighting
used for celebrations and promotions.
c. Lighting required by a government agency for the safe operation of
airplanes, or security lighting required on government buildings or
structures.
d. Emergency lighting by police, fire, and rescue authorities.
e. Lighting required for the operation of outdoor ball fields or sports
facilities associated with public parks.
3. Non-Conforming Uses.
a. All outdoor lighting fixtures existing and legally installed prior to the
effective date of this Ordinance are exempt from regulations of this
Section but shall comply with the previous ordinance requirements
for glare as follows: In all districts, any lighting used to illuminate
an off-street parking areas, signs, or other structures, shall be
installed so as to deflect light away from any adjoining Rural
Residential, Residential Suburban, or Urban Expansion Zoning
Districts or from the public streets. Direct or sky-reflected glare,
whether from floodlights or from high temperature processes such
as combustion or welding, shall not be directed into any adjoining
property. Welding associated with farming activities or agricultural
uses shall be exempt from the glare standard of this provision. The
source of lights shall be hooded or controlled in some manner so as
not to light adjacent property. Lighting standards shall not exceed
twenty five (25) feet or the height of the principal building on a lot
without a conditional use permit.
b. Whenever a light fixture that existed on the effective date of this
Ordinance is replaced by a new outdoor light fixture, the provisions
of this Section shall be complied with.
4. Intensity. No light source or combination thereof which cast light on a
public road shall exceed one (1) foot candle meter reading as measured
from the centerline of said street nor shall any light source or combination
thereof which cast light on adjacent property exceed four-tenths (0.4) foot
candles as measured at the property.
5. Method of Measuring Light Intensity. The foot candle level of a light
source shall be taken after dark with the light meter held six (6) inches
above the ground with the meter facing the light source. A reading shall
be taken with the light source on, then with the light source off. The
difference between the two readings will be identified as the light intensity.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 4 General Provisions
6. Performance Standards.
a. Agricultural, Rural Residential, Residential Suburban, Urban
Transition and Urban Expansion Zoning District Standards. Any
lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area, structure, or
area shall be arranged as to deflect light away from any adjoining
residential property or from any public right-of-way in accordance
with the following provisions:
(1) The light source shall be hooded or controlled so as not to
light adjacent property in excess of the maximum intensity
defined in Section 4-4-3.4.
(2) Bare light bulbs shall not be permitted in view of adjacent
property or public right-of-way, unless part of a permanent
fixture.
b. Urban Business Reserve, Commercial, and Industrial Districts. Any
lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area, structure, or
area shall be arranged so as to deflect light away from any
adjoining property or from any public right-of-way in accordance
with the following provisions:
(1) Shielding. The luminare shall contain a cutoff which directs
and cuts off the light at an angle of ninety (90) degrees or
less.
(2) Intensity. Light sources shall not be permitted so as to light
adjacent property in excess of the maximum intensity
defined in Section 4-4-3.4.
(3) Height. The maximum height above the ground grade
permitted for light sources mounted on a pole is twenty-five
(25) feet. A light source mounted on a building shall not
exceed the height of the building. In no case shall the height
of a light source mounted on a pole or on a building exceed
the height limits of the zoning district in which the use is
located unless allowed by conditional use permit.
(4) Canopy lighting shall only be permitted under the canopy
structure and consist of canister spotlights recessed into the
canopy. No portion of the light source or fixture may extend
below the bottom face of the canopy. Total canopy
illumination below the canopy may not exceed one hundred
fifteen (115) foot candles at ground level.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 4 General Provisions
(5) Location.
(a) The light source of an outdoor light fixture shall be set
back a minimum of ten (10) feet from a road right-ofway
and five (5) feet from a side or rear lot line.
(b) No light sources shall be located on the roof unless
said light enhances the architectural features of the
building and is approved by the Planning Department.
(6) Glare. Direct or reflected glare from high temperature
processes such as combustion or welding shall not be visible
from any adjoining property.
7. Submission of Plans. All applications, except single family residential and
agricultural land uses, that include outdoor lighting, must include evidence
that the proposed outdoor lighting will comply with this Section. The
application shall contain the following information, in addition to other
required information:
a. Site plans indicating the location on the premises of all illuminating
devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors and other lighting
devices.
b. Description of the type of illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps,
supports, reflectors and other lighting devices. The description may
include, but is not limited to, catalog cuts by manufacturers and
drawings (including sections where required).
c. Photometric plans illustrating the angle of the cutoff or light
emissions, and illumination field of the proposed site lighting.
4-6 NUISANCE STANDARDS
1. Air Pollution. Any use shall be operated to control air pollution so that it is
not detrimental to, or a danger to, the public health, safety, comfort or
general welfare of the public. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the rules
and regulation adopted by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, as
amended, shall apply.
2. The emission of odor by any use, except existing permitted agricultural
uses, shall be in conformance with all applicable regulations. Uses or
activities which have the potential for odor problems shall prepare an odor
control plan which must identify all sources of odor associated with the
proposed use and detail how these odor emissions will be addressed by
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 4 General Provisions
the facility. The plan shall incorporate current Best Management Practices
for control of odors from similar facilities and propose methods for
addressing and mitigating conditions that result in odor complaints. The
use shall be subject to any future odor regulations and shall not be
considered a grandfathered use.
3. The emission of noise by any use, except for existing permitted
agricultural uses, shall be in conformance with all applicable regulations.
Uses or activities which have the potential for noise problems shall
prepare a noise control plan which must identify all sources of noise
associated with the proposed use and detail how these noise emissions
will be addressed by the facility. The plan shall incorporate current Best
Management Practices for control of noise from similar facilities and
propose methods for addressing and mitigating conditions that result in
noise complaints. The use shall be subject to any future noise regulations
and shall not be considered a grandfathered use.
4. Bulk Storage (Liquid). All uses associated with bulk liquid storage in
above ground or underground storage tanks shall be in accordance with
the rules and regulations adopted by the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency and the Minnesota State Building Code, as amended. This
includes registering tanks, preventing spills or leaks into the environment,
and assuring that the tanks are not a fire or explosion hazard.
5. Hazardous Materials. Any use shall be operated so as not to release
hazardous materials into the air, soil or water in violation of Federal, State,
or County regulations. In addition, there shall be no release of hazardous
material in such concentration so as to be detrimental to or endanger the
public health, safety, comfort or welfare or cause injury or damage to
property, business or the environment.
6. Solid Waste. In all zoning districts, all solid waste, except for crop residue,
shall be kept in closed containers designed for such purposes and shall be
managed in accordance with the Scott County Solid Waste Management
Ordinance. The owner of vacant land shall be responsible for keeping
such land free of all solid waste.
7. Waste.
a. All waste generated shall be disposed in a manner consistent with
all applicable Federal, State, County, and local regulations.
b. Any accumulation of waste generated on any premises, brought on
the premises or stored on the premise which is not stored in
containers which comply with all applicable Federal, State, County
and local regulations, or any accumulation of mixed municipal solid
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 4 General Provisions
waste generated on any premises which has remained thereon for
more than one week, is a nuisance and may be abated. Judgment
may be obtained for collection of the costs of abatement against the
record owner(s) of the property where the nuisance is found.
Any accumulation of infectious, nuclear, pathological, or hazardous
waste which is not stored and disposed in a manner consistent with
all applicable Federal, State, and local regulations, or other material
declared to be a public health nuisance may be abated and the cost
of abatement may be assessed against the property where the
health nuisance is found.
c. The accumulation, storage, processing, and disposal of waste on
any premises, which is not generated on that premises, is
prohibited.
8. Radiation Emission. All activities that emit radioactivity shall comply with
the minimum requirements of all applicable Federal, State, County, and
local regulations.
9. Electrical Emission. All activities which create electrical emissions shall
comply with the minimum requirements of the Federal Communications
Commission.
10. Commercial, industrial, institutional refuse and recyclable materials and
equipment.
a. All refuse, recyclable materials, and necessary handling equipment
including but not limited to garbage cans, recycling bins, and
dumpsters shall be stored within the principal structure, within an
accessory building, or totally screened from eye-level view from all
neighboring uses and the public right-of-way.
b. Exterior storage of equipment shall require the following:
(1) Exterior wall or fence treatment shall be similar and/or
complement the principal building.
(2) The enclosed trash and/or recycling receptacle area shall be
located in the rear or side yard and shall observe all
applicable setback requirements and easements.
(3) The trash and/or recycling enclosure must be in an
accessible location for pick up hauling vehicles.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 4 General Provisions
(4) The trash and/or recycling receptacles must be fully
screened from view of adjacent properties and the public
right-of-way by a fence or wall of at least six (6) feet in height
and a minimum opaqueness of eighty (80) percent.
(5) All dumpsters, recycling bins, handling equipment, and
enclosures shall be kept in a good state of repair with tight
fitting lids to prevent spilling and spread of debris. All
designs and construction of such enclosures shall be subject
to the Planning Department’s approval.
4-7 OUTDOOR STORAGE STANDARDS
1. Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to provide standards for allowing
outdoor storage of materials, equipment, and vehicles as may be allowed
within the respective zoning districts such that the activity can occur
compatibly with surrounding uses and properties.
2. Vehicles/Equipment.
a. Vehicles “For Sale” Within a Commercial/Industrial District. Motor,
commercial and recreational vehicles shall not be displayed “for
sale” or sold within commercial/industrial districts unless as part of
an approved licensed sales dealership or for short term parking
(twelve (12) hours or less) if the vehicle is owned by an employee
or owner of said business where the vehicle is parked with the
consent of the business owner.
b. Property owners of lots less than ten (10) acres in the Rural
Residential Reserve Cluster, Rural Residential Single Family,
Residential Suburban, Urban Transition Reserve Cluster, and
Urban Expansion Reserve Cluster Zoning Districts may be
permitted to park or store one (1) business associated vehicle not
exceeding one (1) ton and one (1) trailer with associated equipment
on the trailer, either indoors or outdoors, provided that it is not used
for transporting hazardous, or flammable materials. Associated
business supplies must be kept indoors. Storage of additional
vehicles is not allowed without a conditional use permit.
3. Semi-trailers, cargo containers, railroad cars, or similar structures shall not
be used for storage in any zoning district after the effective date of this
ordinance.
4. Junked or Inoperable Vehicles - Unless specifically permitted, all motor
vehicles, kept or stored outside on any property in any zoning district, shall
be currently licensed, and shall be in an operating condition. When a
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 4 General Provisions
vehicle is lacking vital components needed for operation or current
registration, it is declared to be inoperable and shall be removed from the
property or placed into a garage or other accessory structure or such
vehicle(s) shall be completely screened from view of all adjacent
properties or the public right of way (ROW ).
5. In all zoning districts, except Agricultural Districts, salvage parts and
equipment not currently being used for the purpose of business activities
shall be stored in a building, or screened from neighboring properties and
public roads, or shall be removed from the property.
6. In the Agricultural, Urban Expansion, Urban Transition, and Urban
Business Reserve Zoning Districts, the on-site salvage and storage of
parts and equipment for the property owner’s use for the purpose of
farming activities shall be permitted. Storage of salvage parts and
equipment shall not be located within the required front yard setbacks of
the respective district.
7. Any motor vehicle or agricultural/industrial equipment or a part which is in
violation of this Ordinance is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
The County may enter upon the land where the public nuisance is located
and remove and dispose of such public nuisance, after a court hearing as
provided by law, and after thirty (30) days notice to the owner of the land
and the owner of the motor vehicle and or agricultural/industrial equipment
and parts, if known. No compensation shall be paid for any motor vehicle
or agricultural/industrial equipment and parts removed or disposed of
pursuant to this Section. If the County receives any proceeds from the
removal and disposal of such items, the County shall first apply the
proceeds to reimburse the County for any expenses incurred, and refund
the remainder to the owner, if known. Judgment may be obtained against
the record owner(s) of the property upon which the motor vehicle and or
agricultural/industrial equipment and parts were located for costs incurred
by the County in the removal and disposal of these items which are not
reimbursed.
8. Unless specifically permitted, no person may accumulate or permit to
accumulate or store outside on any property in any zoning district which
might constitute a nuisance by reason of appearance, odor, sanitation, or
a fire hazard any discarded goods, products and materials. These
materials shall be disposed of in a manner consistent with all applicable
Federal, State, County and local regulations. Any scrap wood, parts,
metals, or recycled materials that are kept for future use, shall be stored
within an accessory structure or garage so as to remain out of public view
from an adjacent property or public right of way.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 4 General Provisions
Discarded goods, products and materials are hereby defined within as
discarded materials resulting from the handling, processing, storage,
preparation, serving and consuming of food, or materials which normally
result from the operation of a household or business use. Discarded
goods, products, and materials include but are not limited to: rubbish,
cans, paper, cardboard, glass, bottles, plastics, rubber, rags, wood, ashes,
tires, batteries, pesticides, household appliances, scrap iron, other metals,
motor oil, automobile fluids, automotive or other mechanical parts,
construction waste and materials, furniture or any other household refuse
or material.
The terms do not include natural, untreated and cut firewood, construction
material or other waste or debris resulting from the permitted construction,
reconstruction or demolition of buildings that is appropriately contained in
a dumpster, roll off container or other acceptable device suitable for
containing such materials or debris. This section does not apply to
licensed sanitary or demolition landfills.
Scott County Traffic, Parking,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 5 Access and Loading
CHAPTER 5: TRAFFIC, PARKING, ACCESS, AND LOADING
5-1 PARKING
5-1-1 Purpose
The regulation of off-street parking spaces in this Ordinance is to alleviate or prevent
congestion of the public rights-of-way and to promote the safety and general welfare of
the public, by establishing minimum requirements for off-street parking of motor vehicles
in accordance with the intensity of utilization of various parcels of land or structures.
The regulations and requirements set forth herein shall apply to all off-street parking
facilities in all of the zoning districts of the County.
5-1-2 Site Plan Drawing Necessary
All applications for a conditional use, interim use, administrative use, building permit, or
a certificate of occupancy in all zoning districts shall be accompanied by a site plan,
indicating the location of off-street parking and loading spaces in compliance with the
requirements set forth in this Ordinance.
5-1-3 General Provisions
1. Required off-street parking space in any district shall not be utilized for
open storage of goods or for the storage of vehicles which are unlicensed
or inoperable, or for sale or rent.
2. Parking shall not be allowed in areas that are not designed for off-street
parking.
3. Off-street parking spaces existing upon the effective date of this
Ordinance shall not be reduced unless said numbers exceed the
requirements of this Ordinance.
4. Calculating Space.
a. When determining the number of off-street parking spaces results
in a fraction, each fraction of one-half (1/2) or more shall constitute
another space.
b. In churches and other places of public assembly in which patrons
or spectators occupy benches, pews or other similar seating
facilities, each twenty-two (22) inches of such design capacity
seating facilities shall be counted as one (1) seat for the purpose of
determining requirements.
Scott County Traffic, Parking,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 5 Access and Loading
c. Should a structure contain two (2) or more types of use, each use
shall be calculated separately for determining the total off-street
parking spaces required.
d. Floor Area. The term “floor area” for the purpose of calculating the
number of off-street parking spaces required shall be determined
on the basis of the exterior floor area dimensions of the buildings,
structure or use times the number of floors, minus ten (10) percent,
except as may hereinafter be provided or modified.
5-1-4 Location
1. Spaces accessory to single family dwellings shall be located on the same
lot as the principal use.
2. No off-street parking area containing more than four (4) parking spaces
shall be located closer than ten (10) feet from an existing lot zoned or
used for residential purposes.
3. All open commercial/industrial/institutional off-street parking areas
designed to have head-in parking along the property line shall provide a
bumper curb or a guard of normal bumper height not less than ten (10)
feet from the side property line.
4. The setback for any off-street parking space or drive aisle from any street
right-of-way shall be ten (10) feet in Rural Residential, Residential
Suburban, Urban Transition and Urban Expansion Zoning Districts and
twenty (20) feet in commercial/industrial districts.
5. Off-street parking for a commercial or industrial use located on a lot other
than the lot on which the principal use is located shall be by conditional
use permit and shall meet the following conditions:
a. All parking spaces for commercial and industrial uses shall be
located within three hundred (300) feet of the main entrance of the
principal use being served.
b. The parking spaces must be on an adjacent lot or separated from
the lot by a street right-of-way.
c. The parking spaces must not create unsafe traffic or pedestrian
conditions.
Scott County Traffic, Parking,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 5 Access and Loading
5-1-5 Parking Lot Design
1. Agricultural, Rural Residential, Residential Suburban, Urban Business
Reserve, Urban Transition, and Urban Expansion Uses.
a. Each parking stall shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet wide by
eighteen (18) feet in depth.
b. Parking areas shall be surfaced to control dust and stormwater
drainage.
c. Driveway curb cut width in the residential and agricultural zoning
districts shall not exceed twenty-four (24) feet.
2. Institutional, Commercial, and Industrial Uses.
a. Each off-street parking space shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet
wide by eighteen (18) feet deep. Access drives and aisles shall be
a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet wide for two-way traffic, and
eighteen (18) feet wide for one-way traffic. Parking space
dimensions for angled parking shall be approved by the Planning
Department.
b. Parking spaces for compact cars may be included within a parking
plan approved by the Planning Department provided such spaces
comprise no more than forty (40) percent of the spaces for the
entire use of the project, and provided they are clearly identified on
the site and their location is designed carefully into the overall site
plan. Such spaces shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet wide by
sixteen (16) deep.
c. Disability Accessible Parking. Disability accessible parking spaces
shall be provided as applicable pursuant to Minnesota Statutes
168.021, as may be amended.
d. Circulation.
(1) Site access and parking areas shall be designed so that
circulation between parking spaces or aisles occurs within
the designated parking lot and does not depend upon a
public street or alley.
(2) Site access and parking area design which requires direct
backing into the public street is prohibited.
Scott County Traffic, Parking,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 5 Access and Loading
(3) Driveway curb cuts shall not exceed thirty-six (36) feet in
width.
e. Required off-street parking, loading, and services areas located in
any front or side yard shall be paved and shall be drained so as to
dispose of all surface water accumulation within the parking area, in
accordance with an approved stormwater management plan.
Acceptable surfaces may include asphalt, concrete or substitute as
approved by the Planning Department. All surfacing must be
completed prior to the occupancy of the structure, unless otherwise
approved by the Planning Department.
f. Grade Elevation – Parking Spaces and Areas. The grade
elevation of any parking area shall not exceed five (5) percent,
except as approved by the Planning Department.
g. Striping. All parking areas of five (5) spaces or more shall be
marked with painted lines not less than four (4) inches wide.
h. Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area
shall be hooded and so arranged as to reflect the light away from
adjoining property, abutting residential uses and public rights-ofway
and shall be in compliance with Section 4-4-3 of this
Ordinance.
i. Curbing. Open off-street parking may be required to provide a
perimeter continuous concrete curb around parking lot where it is
necessary to control site drainage or to channel on-site traffic.
j. Required Screening. For commercial, institutional and industrial
uses, all open, off-street parking areas of four (4) or more spaces
located within thirty (30) feet of a residentially zoned district shall be
fenced or screened with plant material not less than 4 feet in height
from abutting or surrounding Rural Residential, Residential
Suburban, Urban Transition and Urban Expansion zoned properties
k. Landscaping. Open off-street parking lots shall be landscaped per
the provisions of Chapter 4 of this Ordinance
Scott County Traffic, Parking,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 5 Access and Loading
5-1-6 Off-Street Spaces Required
1. Off-street parking areas shall be of a sufficient size to provide parking for
patrons, customers, suppliers, visitors and employees, and shall be as set
forth in the following table.
1. One Family Residences Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit
2. Business, Professional
Office, and Retail Store
At least one (1) off-street parking space for each
two hundred (200) square feet of floor area
3. Restaurants, Cafes,
Taverns, Night Clubs
At least one (1) space for each two and one-half
(2.5) seats based on capacity design
4. Churches, Theaters,
Auditoriums, and other
Places of Assembly
One (1) space for each three (3) seats upon
maximum capacity
5. Industrial, Warehouse,
Goods
Storage, handling bulk at least one space for each
employee on maximum shift or one (1) space for
each two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor
area, whichever is larger.
6. Uses Not Specified or
Not Precisely Identified.
Calculated by the Planning Department based on,
but not limited to, characteristics for similar uses
and professional studies prepared by American
Planning Association or Institute of Traffic
Engineers.
2. Proof of Parking. If it can be demonstrated by the applicant that the
parking spaces required exceeds demand, all parking need not be
constructed initially but parking required to satisfy the Ordinance shall be
shown on the site plan and labeled as “Proof of Parking”.
5-1-7 Vehicle and Equipment Parking in Rural Residential Reserve Cluster, Rural
Residential Single Family, Residential Suburban Single Family, and Urban
Expansion Reserve Cluster Zoning Districts
1. No construction equipment or similar equipment shall be parked on lots
less than ten (10) acres in the Rural Residential Reserve Cluster, Rural
Residential Single Family, Residential Suburban Single Family, Urban
Transition Reserve Cluster, and Urban Expansion Reserve Cluster Zoning
Districts, or on public streets except for the purposes of loading,
unloading, or rendering a service or unless allowed by conditional use
permit or interim use permit.
2. One (1) business associated vehicle not exceeding one (1) ton and one
(1) trailer with associated equipment on the trailer may be allowed to be
parked or stored on lots less than ten (10) acres in the Rural Residential
Scott County Traffic, Parking,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 5 Access and Loading
Reserve Cluster, Rural Residential Single Family, Residential Suburban
Single Family, Urban Transition, and Urban Expansion Reserve Cluster
Zoning Districts.
5-1-8 Maintenance
It shall be the joint responsibility of the operator and owner of the principal use, uses,
and/or building to maintain, in a neat and adequate manner, the parking lot/driveway
surfacing, parking spaces, accessways, landscaping and required fences.
5-2 SITE ACCESS
5-2-1 Access to County Roads
Authorization to construct or alter a driveway on a County road shall consist of a permit
signed by the County Engineer or his authorized representative. Driveways shall be
constructed in accordance with County adopted standards and the minimum access
spacing guidelines in Scott County Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7, as amended. No
driveway shall be constructed to a County road until such permit has been obtained.
5-2-2 Access to Township Roads
Authorization to construct or alter a driveway on a Township road shall consist of a
permit signed by a representative of the Town Board. Driveways shall be constructed in
accordance with Township adopted standards. No driveway shall be constructed to a
Township road until such permit has been obtained.
The proximity of a residential or industrial/commercial/institutional driveway to a major
roadway intersection will be reviewed by County staff during plat review or special use
permit review. The table below sets the minimum allowed distances between private
driveways and major roadway intersections.
Street With
Proposed Private
Driveway
Nearest Intersecting Street
Local
Street
Collector Arterial
Principal
Arterial
Local Street
Residential 40 ft 55 ft 70 ft 100 ft
Ind./Comm./Inst. 100 ft 150 ft 150 ft 500* ft
Collector Street**
Residential 40 ft 55 ft 70 ft 100 ft
Ind./Comm./Inst. 100 ft 200 ft 500* ft 500* ft
* Driveway access may be located less than five hundred (500) feet from the
nearest intersection if the proper roadway geometrics are installed to limit
access to right turns in and out of the property only. Such exceptions are
subject to approval of the County and the Township Engineer (as applicable).
Scott County Traffic, Parking,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 5 Access and Loading
Review criteria shall include, but not be limited to, sight lines and distances,
traffic volumes and speeds on the public street, intersection controls, street
and driveway spacing, trip generation from the property.
** If proposed driveway is to access a County collector road, these minimum
setbacks only apply if the road’s anticipated cross section is two-lane
undivided, and the 20 year forecasted traffic volume is less than 3,000 ADT.
Driveway Spacing to Intersection – Examples
5-2-3 Private Access Drives (Outside of Road Right-of-Way
1. Private access drives outside road right-of-way may be shared between
property owners.
2. Private access drives outside road right-of-way to principal structures shall
comply with the Uniform Fire Code.
Scott County Traffic, Parking,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 5 Access and Loading
5-3 TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT
5-3-1 Traffic Control
1. The traffic control generated by any use shall be channeled and controlled
in a manner that will avoid congestion on public streets, traffic hazards,
and excessive traffic through residential areas, particularly truck traffic.
2. Internal traffic shall be so regulated as to ensure its safe and orderly flow.
3. Traffic into and out of business areas shall, to the extent possible, be
forward moving with no backing into public streets.
4. On corner lots (in all districts), nothing shall be placed or allowed to grow,
with the exception of seasonal crops, within the sight visibility triangle
setback in a manner that may interfere with traffic or pedestrian visibility
along a public right-of-way between the heights of three (3) feet and ten
(10) feet above the road centerline grade. The sight triangle is defined as
follows: Beginning at the intersection of the projected property lines of two
(2) intersecting roads, thence thirty (30) feet along one property line,
thence diagonally to a point of thirty (30) feet from the point of beginning
on the other property line, thence to the point of beginning. The sight
triangle may be enlarged where determined by the Planning Department
to be necessary for public safety.
5-3-2 Traffic Impact Studies
Traffic impact studies are utilized to evaluate the interaction between existing
transportation infrastructure and proposed land development projects. The basic
premise is that land development generates new traffic that will travel on the adjacent
highway system and that the amount of traffic and the relative impact to the system is
predictable. The purposes of a traffic impact study are 1) identify potential adverse
impacts to the existing transportation system and to proposed developments, such as
on-site congestion and/or congestion on adjacent roadways, inadequate access
capacity, crash experience or expectancy, or limited flexibility to modify the
development to eliminate problems or adjust to changed conditions; 2) assist public and
private sector entities identify and resolve issues related to the location of driveways,
public streets, traffic controls and other transportation facilities that are requested; and
3) assist in the long-term planning such that the extension and growth of the
transportation system may occur in a manner that is comprehensive in nature and
supportive of the public good.
The need for a traffic impact study when new or expanded development projects are
proposed will be determined by the County Engineer. The County’s guiding document
on traffic impact analyses shall serve as reference on the study process, report format,
and performance standards used to measure any potential traffic impacts.
Scott County Traffic, Parking,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 5 Access and Loading
5-4 OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING AREAS
5-4-1 Design Standards
The following standards shall apply for off-street loading and unloading areas:
1. All required loading areas be off-street and shall be located on the same
lot as the building or use to be served. A loading area shall be located at
least twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection of two (2) street
rights-of-way and at least fifty (50) feet from a Rural Residential,
Residential Suburban, Urban Transition, or Urban Expansion Zoning
District, unless within a building. Loading areas shall not occupy the
required front yard space.
2. A required loading area shall not be less than twelve (12) feet in width, fifty
(50) feet in length and fourteen (14) feet in height, exclusive of aisle and
maneuvering space.
3. Each required loading berth shall be located with means of vehicular
access to a street or public alley in a manner which will least interfere with
traffic.
4. All loading areas and access ways shall be surfaced and shall be drained
so as to dispose of all surface water accumulation in the loading areas in
accordance with an approved storm water management plan. Acceptable
surfaces may include asphalt, concrete, or a substitute as approved by the
Planning Department. All surfacing must be completed prior to the
occupancy of the structure unless otherwise approved by the Planning
Department.
5. Any space allocated as a loading berth or maneuvering area shall not be
used for storage of goods, or inoperable vehicles or be included as a part
of the space requirements necessary to meet the off-street parking area.
6. Off-street loading or unloading space shall be provided in connection with
any structure which is to be erected or substantially altered, and which
requires the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by trucks or
similar vehicles.
7. Noise from loading or unloading activity shall not exceed standards as
permitted by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA).
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
CHAPTER 6: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT, EROSION CONTROL,
AND WETLANDS
6-1 PURPOSE
The purposes of this Chapter are to provide for:
1. The protection, preservation, maintenance, and use of the water and soil
resources of the unincorporated area of the County through management
of stormwater drainage, minimization of land disturbance, and prevention
of damage from erosion and sedimentation;
2. The use of controls and regulations to secure safety from floods; to
prevent loss of life, property damage, and other losses and risk associated
with flood conditions; to reduce the financial burdens imposed upon the
community through rescue and relief efforts occasioned by the occupancy
or use of areas subject to periodic flooding; to protect individual and
community riparian rights; and to preserve the location, character, and
extent of natural and artificial water storage and retention areas;
3. The enforcement of this Chapter and the coordination of the enforcement
of appropriate and applicable Federal, State, County, and local
regulations;
4. The implementation of the goals and policies of the Scott County
Comprehensive Plan, as amended, the Scott County Water Resources
Plan, as amended, the Scott Watershed Management Organization
Comprehensive Water Resource Plan, as amended, and water resource
plans prepared by the Lower Minnesota River Watershed District, the Prior
Lake/Spring Lake Watershed District, and the Vermillion River Watershed
Joint Powers Organization, as amended.
ARTICLE A. ADMINISTRATION
6A-1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this article is to provide for the clear, consistent and efficient
administration of this Chapter.
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
6A-2 GRADING PERMITS REQUIRED
1. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, it shall be unlawful for
anyone to conduct land disturbing activities without first obtaining a written
grading permit from the Planning Department in accordance with Chapters
2-8 of this Ordinance unless specifically exempted by Section 6A-2.8 of
this Chapter. All land disturbing activities, whether requiring a permit or
otherwise, shall conform to the standards in this Chapter.
2. A separate Grading Permit may not be required where this Ordinance
requires another zoning application. As a part of the application for a
conditional use permit, interim use permit, subdivision, or variance, the
land disturbing activities shall be reviewed in conjunction with the zoning
application.
3. Approval of a grading permit shall not waive or void any other applicable
permits or approvals by this Ordinance or permits or regulations of other
agencies.
4. A grading permit shall not be issued without the applicant first providing a
Resource Management Plan, an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, or a
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan.
5. Resource Management Plan. A Resource Management Plan, signed by a
Professional Engineer, or Licensed Landscape Architect meeting the
NPDES requirements of a “trained professional”, shall be required for the
following activities unless waived by the Planning Department:
a. All commercial/industrial subdivisions and all subdivisions of land
creating five (5) or more residential lots.
b. Commercial, industrial, institutional, or recreational land uses that
result in the creation of one (1) or more acres of new impervious
surfaces, except where a Resource Management Plan for the
property has already been completed and approved after March 2,
1996 and the Plan is current and applicable to the proposed
project.
c. Any land disturbing activity within a Shoreland District where one
hundred (100) or more linear feet of shoreline will be disturbed
(unless waived by the Planning Department).
d. Any public or private road/highway project which will result in the
creation of one or more acres of impervious surface outside of the
existing surfaced roadway area.
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
e. All land disturbing activities resulting in the creation of one (1) or
more acres of new impervious surfaces.
f. Any proposed project that is an extension or continuation of a
previous project requiring a grading permit under this section will
have the number of lots or impervious surfaces total applied
cumulatively from the previous five years and the cumulative total
will determine if a Resource Management Plan is required. This
section shall apply for a period of five years after the official
approval of the previous project.
g. Any redevelopment project where the proposed land disturbing
activity exceeds 1 acre in size and the existing impervious cover
equals or exceeds 15% of the disturbed area.
6. Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. An Erosion and Sediment Control
Plan, signed by a professional engineer or licensed landscape architect
meeting the NPDES requirements of a “trained professional”, shall be
required for the following activities unless waived by the Planning
Department:
a. All grading activities, which do not require a Resources
Management Plan that result in the disturbance of one (1) acre or
more of land, imports five-hundred (500) or more cubic yards of
material, or a significant change to the existing hydrologic
characteristics.
b. All subdivisions of land resulting in four (4) or fewer residential lots.
c. Any filling, draining, or alteration of a natural or artificial stormwater
storage or retention area, wetland, or public water.
d. Topographic alteration/grading and filling within a Shoreland District
in accordance with Section 70-8-7 of this Ordinance.
e. All grading activities resulting in the disturbance of more than
10,000 square feet of land within a Floodplain.
f. All grading activities resulting in the disturbance of more than
10,000 square feet of land within the Bluff Overlay District as
defined on Map 1 of the 2009-2018 Scott WMO Comprehensive
Water Resource Management Plan dated June 9, 2009, as
amended.
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
g. Except where all site work will be completed in one day and the
disturbed area is completely sodded, the installation or repair of
individual sewage treatment systems located:
(1) on steep slopes, or;
(2) on riparian lots within the Shoreland District, or;
(3) within the bluff impact zone.
h. All commercial, industrial, institutional and recreational site
development disturbing more than 10,000 square feet of land and
creating less than one acre of new impervious surface.
i. Public or private road/highway project disturbing one or more acres
of land outside of the existing surfaced roadway area and creating
less than one acre of new impervious surface.
j. Construction, installation, and maintenance of electric, telephone,
or cable television utility lines or individual service connection to
these utilities, where one or more acres or one hundred (100) or
more lineal feet of shoreline is anticipated to be disturbed.
7. Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. A Stormwater Pollution Prevention
Plan shall be required for the following activities:
a. All land disturbances ten-thousand (10,000) square feet or greater
in size not included in Sections 6A-2.5 and 6A-2.6 above and not
specifically exempt in Section 6A-2.8 below.
8. Exemptions. The following land disturbing activities do not require a
Grading Permit:
a. Preparation of land for construction of a single family residence
where a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan is provided with the
application for a Building Permit.
b. Minor land disturbing activities involving less than ten thousand
(10,000) square feet of land area including, but not limited to, home
gardens, landscaping, repairs and yard maintenance work unless
such work is regulated by the Shoreland, Floodplain, or Bluff
Overlay District Ordinances.
c. Installation and repair of individual sewage treatment systems other
than those on steep slopes, on riparian lots within a Shoreland
District or in a bluff impact zone.
d. Agricultural activities including tilling, plowing, discing, drain tiling,
and planting activities for agriculture, horticulture, or silverculture
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
including projects where up to five-hundred (500) cubic yards of
material are imported or exported.
e. Installation of fence, sign, telephone, or electric poles and other
kinds of posts or poles.
f. Emergency work to protect life, limb, or property and emergency
repairs, provided the land area disturbed is adequately shaped and
stabilized when appropriate in accordance with the requirements of
the Planning Department.
g. Construction, installation, and maintenance of electric, telephone,
or cable television utility lines or individual service connection to
these utilities, where less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of
land or one hundred (100) lineal feet of shoreline is anticipated to
be disturbed, or where fewer than fifty (50) cubic yards of materials
are anticipated to be moved in such activities.
h. Minor wetland impacts under 10,000 square feet of cumulative
impact (previous and proposed) that have received an approved
“no loss” or “exemption” determination from the local government
unit administering the Wetland Conservation Act or Minnesota
DNR, as amended.
i. All maintenance, repair, resurfacing and reconditioning activities of
existing road, bridge and highway systems which do not involve
land disturbing activities outside of the existing surfaced roadway
area.
j. All projects being completed by or with the cooperation of the Scott
Soil and Water Conservation District as part of carrying out its
mission.
9. Contribution in lieu of physical improvements. If approved by the County,
an applicant may also make an in-kind or monetary contribution to the
development and maintenance of community stormwater management
facilities that are part of an approved Resource Management Plan that is
designed to service multiple land disturbing and development activities
undertaken by one or more persons, including the applicant. If made, this
contribution shall be in addition to any standard stormwater development
fee that the County may require.
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
6A-3 GRADING PERMIT INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS
6A-3-1 Resource Management Plan
All activities identified in Section 6A-2.5 require a Grading Permit and a Resource
Management Plan to be approved by the Planning Department prior to any land
disturbance. These plans shall be signed by a Professional Engineer or Landscape
Architect meeting the NPDES requirements of a “trained professional”, drawn to an
appropriate scale, and the applicant shall include sufficient information to evaluate the
environmental characteristics of affected areas, the potential impacts of the proposed
activity on water and soil resources, and the measures proposed by the applicant to
prevent those impacts. The Planning Department may require the applicant to provide
any additional information or data needed to complete the review. The applicant shall
perform all land disturbance activities in strict accordance with the approved plan.
1. The Resource Management Plan shall include, but not be limited to the
following information:
a. The site plan information outlined in Section 2-10-3 of this
Ordinance.
b. The implementation schedule with anticipated starting and
completion dates of each land disturbing activity including
installation of construction site erosion control measures needed to
meet the requirements of this Ordinance;
c. Location map with major streets and landmarks;
d. Project description narrative describing the overall project and the
nature and extent of land disturbing activity. The project description
shall also identify a project contact person;
e. A site plan and (if required) vicinity map showing existing drainage
flow patterns and receiving water body(ies);
f. Locations of existing wetlands, public waters and natural or artificial
water storage and retention areas, protected waters and their
individual 100-year flood elevations and wetland boundaries shall
be surveyed and located on the site plan;
g. Soils map showing soil boundaries, including mapping unit, soil
name, slopes, hydrologic group, and highlighting areas of hydric
soils;
h. 100-year floodplains shall be shown on the site plan, including
regulatory floodplains as defined in the floodplain zoning ordinance
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
as well as localized floodplains associated with local stormwater
management facilities, ponds, streams and wetlands.
i. Pre-settlement and Developed Drainage Maps which illustrate the
existing and proposed sub-watershed boundaries, drainage
patterns, and discharge points.
j. Hydrologic calculations for volume runoff, velocities, and peak flow
rates for the 2-year, 10-year, and 100-year storm event for both the
Pre-settlement and Developed conditions.
k. Normal water level, 100-year high water level and emergency
overflow elevations shall be provided on the site plan for all
stormwater management facilities, ponds, and wetlands.
l. Ordinary High Water (OHW) levels shall be provided on the site
plan for all lakes, streams and DNR Protected Wetlands. Normal
water levels shall be provided where an OHW has not been
established.
2. The Resource Management Plan shall also include the requirements for
the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan detailed in Section 6A-3-2 as well
as all of the information necessary to comply with the performance
standards identified in the following Sections:
a. Section 6B, Stormwater Management;
b. Section 6C, Erosion and Sediment Control;
c. Section 6D, Wetland Conservation; and
d. Section 6E, Floodplain Alterations; and
e. Section 6F, Bluff Standards; and
f. Section 6G, Watershed Standards
6A-3-2 Erosion and Sediment Control Plan
All activities identified in Section 6A-2.6 require a Grading Permit and an Erosion and
Sediment Control Plan to be approved by the Planning Department prior to any land
disturbance. These plans shall be signed by a Professional Engineer or Landscape
Architect meeting the NPDES requirements of a “trained professional”, drawn to an
appropriate scale and the applicant shall include sufficient information to evaluate the
environmental characteristics of affected areas, the potential impacts of the proposed
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
activity on water and soil resources, and the measures proposed by the applicant to
prevent those impacts. The Planning Department may require the applicant to provide
any additional information or data needed to complete the review. The applicant shall
perform all land disturbance activities in strict accordance with the approved plan:
1. The Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall meet the standards of Parts
III and IV for the General Permit Authorization to Discharge Storm Water
Associated With Construction Activity Under the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System/State Disposal System Permit Program,
Permit MN R100001 (NPDES General Construction Permit), issued by the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, August 1, 2013, as amended, except
where more specific requirements are provided in the Chapter.
2. An Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall include, but not be limited to
the following information:
a. Property location map illustrating the site location relative to
adjoining properties and streets;
b. Site survey illustrating property boundaries, corner monuments,
easements, existing and proposed contours, and wetland
delineation lines;
c. Delineation Report and Notice of Application from the Wetland
Conservation Act (WCA) LGU on the locations of existing wetlands,
public waters, and natural or artificial water storage and retention
areas located on-site or adjacent to the land disturbance;
d. General location of existing and proposed structures including
signs;
e. The implementation schedule with anticipated starting and
completion dates of each land disturbing activity including location
and description of erosion and sediment control practices;
f. Project description;
g. Proposed spot site elevations illustrating lot corner elevations,
lowest floor elevations, first floor elevations, and garage floor
elevations;
h. Critical Erosion or Sedimentation Areas: Describe areas with
potential for serious erosion or sedimentation problems;
i. Existing and proposed drainage patterns and drainage areas;
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
j. Best management practices to minimize the potential for sediment
and pollutant discharges from the site;
k. All temporary and permanent stormwater management facilities;
l. Identify construction limits, areas to remain undisturbed, and
phased construction areas;
m. Description of the maintenance of all erosion and sediment control
practices which address the following:
(1) Efforts to prevent erosion;
(2) Prevention of sediment damages;
(3) Implementation schedule;
(4) Site restoration and landscape efforts.
n. Identify the individual who will be responsible for erosion and
sediment control.
3. The Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall also include all of the
information necessary to comply with the performance standards identified
in the following Sections:
a. Section 6C, Erosion and Sediment Control;
b. Section 6D, Wetland Conservation; and
c. Section 6E, Floodplain Alterations; and
d. Section 6F, Bluff Standards; and
e. Section 6G, Watershed Standards
6A-3-3 Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan
All land disturbing activities not identified in Section 6A-2.5 and Section 6A-2.6, and not
specifically exempt in Section 6A-2.8, require a Grading Permit and a Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan to be approved by the Planning Department prior to any land
disturbance. These plans shall be drawn to an appropriate scale and the applicant shall
include sufficient information to evaluate the environmental characteristics of affected
areas, the potential impacts of the proposed activity on water and soil resources, and
the measures proposed by the applicant to prevent those impacts. The Planning
Department may require the applicant to provide any additional information or data
needed to complete the review. The applicant shall perform all land disturbance
activities in strict accordance with the approved plan:
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
1. A Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan shall include, but not be limited to
the following information:
a. Property Survey, Plat Map, Subdivision Drawings, or County
Geographical Information System (GIS) based map, illustrating
property boundaries, corner monuments, easements, existing and
proposed contours, and wetland delineation lines;
b. Delineation Report and Notice of Application from the Wetland
Conservation Act (WCA) LGU on the locations of existing wetlands,
public waters, and natural or artificial water storage and retention
areas located on-site or adjacent to the land disturbance as
determined is necessary by Planning Department staff;
c. General location of existing and proposed structures including
signs;
d. The implementation schedule with anticipated starting and
completion dates of each land disturbing activity including location
and description of erosion and sediment control practices;
e. Project description;
f. Proposed spot site elevations illustrating lot corner elevations,
lowest floor elevations, first floor elevations, and garage floor
elevations;
g. Critical Erosion or Sedimentation Areas: Describe areas with
potential for serious erosion or sedimentation problems;
h. Existing and proposed drainage patterns and drainage areas;
i. Best management practices to minimize the potential for sediment
and pollutant discharges from the site;
j. All temporary and permanent stormwater management facilities;
k. Identify construction limits, areas to remain undisturbed, and
phased construction areas;
l. Description of the inspection and maintenance of all erosion and
sediment control practices which address the following:
(1) Efforts to prevent erosion;
(2) Prevention of sediment damages;
(3) Implementation and inspection schedule;
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
(4) Site restoration and landscape efforts.
m. Identify the individual who will be responsible for erosion and
sediment control.
2. The Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan shall also include all of the
information necessary to comply with the performance standards identified
in the following Sections:
a. Section 6C, Erosion and Sediment Control;
b. Section 6D, Wetland Conservation; and
c. Section 6E, Floodplain Alterations; and
d. Section 6F, Bluff Standards; and
e. Section 6G, Watershed Standards
6A-4 REVIEW OF GRADING PERMITS
1. The Planning Department shall review the Grading Permit for
determination of the technical adequacy and effectiveness of the proposed
plan and its compliance with the performance standards in this Chapter.
2. The Grading Permits shall be reviewed and processed in accordance with
Chapter 2-8, Administrative Permits of this Ordinance.
3. No land disturbing activities subject to the requirements of this Chapter
shall commence until approval has been given by the County.
6A-5 APPROVAL OF GRADING PERMIT; PERMIT ISSUANCE; FINANCIAL
GUARANTEE
1. If the Planning Department determines that the application for a Grading
Permit meets the requirements of this Chapter, the Planning Department
shall issue a permit valid for 180 days from the date the permit is issued
that authorizes the land disturbing activity contingent upon the satisfactory
implementation and completion of the approved grading permit. The
permit shall reference the specific approved plan or approved revision
thereof and shall contain provisions deemed necessary to ensure the
maintenance of any permanent or temporary practices.
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
2. Upon approval of the grading permit, for all projects that require a
Resource Management Plan or an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan,
the Planning Department shall require the applicant to provide a financial
guarantee in the form of a letter of credit or cash deposit in favor of the
County equal to one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of site grading,
stormwater management, and erosion/sediment control costs necessary
to ensure the satisfactory installation, completion, and maintenance of the
measures and procedures as required in the approved Grading Permit.
The County may allow one security to be held by the Township if agreed
to as part of a developer’s agreement including the County and allowing
the county to approve or deny any requests to reduce or eliminate the
security.
3. For all zoning and subdivision applications requiring a Resource
Management Plan a minimum $5,000 financial guarantee shall be
provided to the County to ensure that the Certificate of Compliance
procedures are completed.
6A-6 DENIAL OF GRADING PERMIT
1. If the Planning Department determines that the application for a Grading
Permit does not meet the requirements of this Chapter, the Planning
Department shall deny the issuance of a permit to the applicant. The
applicant may seek to revise the proposed application and reapply for a
permit.
6A-7 INSPECTION
1. The Planning Department or County authorized agent may inspect the
applicant's progress of implementing the plan required by the permit. If
the Planning Department finds that insufficient progress or a noncompliant
activity is occurring, the Planning Department shall immediately
notify the applicant or landowner of the problem and demand compliance.
If compliance is not followed the County may draw on the financial
guarantee to ensure protection of public soil and water resources.
6A-8 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
1. After all of the required measures and procedures as described in the
application for a Grading Permit have been executed by the applicant, the
Planning Department shall conduct a review to ensure that all required
measures and procedures have been properly executed by the applicant.
2. Where a Resource Management Plan has been prepared and approved in
the issuance of the Grading Permit, the Planning Department shall not
conduct its final review until the measures and procedures of the plan
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
have been certified as being completed by a professional engineer, or
licensed landscape architect registered in the State of Minnesota.
3. The applicant shall provide the County with “as built” project plans for any
application requiring a Resource Management Plan. One (1) full size
hardcopy plan set and one (1) set of digital PDF plans shall be submitted
to the Planning Department.
4. If the Planning Department determines that the measures required by the
Grading Permit has been adequately executed, the Planning Department
shall issue a certification of compliance to the applicant and release the
remaining financial guarantee collected as outlined in Section 2-12.
6A-9 RESTORATION REQUIRED
1. If the applicant does not implement the requirements of the Grading
Permit, the Planning Department may order the applicant to restore the
development site, in whole or in part, to compliant conditions as they
existed prior to the initiation of the land disturbing activity.
6A-10 MAINTENANCE OF PERMANENT MEASURES
1. The applicant or successors shall be responsible for the installation and
maintenance of any temporary or permanent measures identified with the
Grading Permit application. At the time of completion of the development,
those structures, measures and systems within public easements shall be
permanently maintained by the Township after official acceptance by the
Township Board.
2. If the County determines that any land disturbing activity has become a
hazard to any person, or endangers the property of another, adversely
affects water quality or any waterbody, increases flooding, or otherwise
violates this Ordinance, the owner of the land upon which the land
disturbing activity is located, or other person or agent in control of such
land, upon receipt of written notice from the County, shall within the time
period specified therein repair or eliminate such condition. The owner of
the land upon which a land disturbing activity is located shall be
responsible for the cleanup and any damages from sediment that has
eroded from such land. The owner is responsible for obtaining any
necessary permits from the County under this Ordinance before
commencing any repairs or restoration.
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
6A-11 EXPIRATION OF GRADING PERMITS
1. All stand-alone grading permits issued by the County expire 180 days
after being issued. The applicant may request an extension in writing that
will be considered and approved at the Planning Department’s discretion.
2. In the event a grading permit expires prior to final stabilization and
restoration of the site, the applicant may be prosecuted for grading
activities without a permit and subject to any and all legal actions
allowable under this ordinance.
ARTICLE B. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS
6B-1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Article is to prevent or reduce, to the most practicable extent, the
effect or impacts of stormwater runoff within the County and to provide for the protection
of natural and artificial water storage and retention areas and public waters. Further,
this Article clarifies the performance standards as they pertain to the permit system,
including standards and specifications for conservation practices and planning activities,
to minimize stormwater runoff damages in order to prevent degradation of water and
soil resources.
6B-2 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Proper stormwater management shall be followed within the County as described in this
Article. The following stormwater management practices shall be used in developing a
Resource Management Plan.
1. General Standards:
a. The need for stormwater management facilities shall be reduced by
incorporating or restoring the use of natural topography and land
cover such as wetlands, ponds, natural swales and depressions to
the degree that they can accommodate the additional flow of water
without compromising the integrity or quality of the wetland or pond.
When development density, topographic features, and soil
vegetation conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle
stormwater runoff using natural features and vegetation, various
types of constructed facilities such as diversions, settling basins,
skimming devices, dikes, waterways, and ponds may be used.
Preference shall be given to designs using surface drainage,
vegetation, and infiltration rather than buried pipes and manmade
materials and facilities.
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
b. Stormwater Rate Control: The resource Management Plan shall
include the design of all stormwater management facilities
necessary to manage increased runoff so that the 2-year, 10-year
and 100-year storm peak discharge rates from the property
boundary shall not exceed pre-settlement conditions and
accelerated channel erosion on and off site will not occur as a
result of the proposed land disturbing or development activity. Presettlement
conditions may include lake or pond outlets that have
existed as of the effective date of this Ordinance, and that will be
maintained in accordance with Section 4A-10 of this Ordinance. A
project may be exempt from the peak discharge rate requirements
above if a downstream facility has been designed and constructed
to include the discharge rate requirements of the proposed project.
c. Detention Storage for Water Quality: Where a project’s ultimate
development replaces surface vegetation with one or more acres of
cumulative impervious surface and all runoff has not been
accommodated in a Watershed District’s or County’s adopted
applicable storm water management plan or practice (i.e. regional
ponding) the runoff shall be discharged to a wet sediment pond.
The reconstruction or work on existing private or public roadways
must comply with this requirement unless specifically exempt under
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) rules.
d. Stormwater Volume Control.
(1) For protection of downstream water bodies from channel
erosion and nutrient loadings, the applicant shall use the
most current Best Management Practices (BMPs) to reduce
the general impacts of increased runoff volume.
(2) Development resulting in the creation of impervious surfaces
must explicitly address the use of BMPs Best Management
Practices to limit the loss of pervious area. BMPs to be
evaluated shall include, but not be limited to, vegetated
swales, pond outlets perched above ground water levels,
roof drainage to pervious areas, depressed casual storage
areas, minimization of the number and width of parking
stalls, “rural section” roads and road width minimization, and
mitigation of disrupted soils.
e. Prevention of downstream nuisance and damage.
(1) In addition to the general channel protection stormwater
volume controls described above, the applicant shall also
demonstrate that increased stormwater runoff volumes
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
above pre-settlement conditions will not adversely affect
downstream properties or water resources. An assessment
of the potential for adverse impacts downstream of site
improvements, whether on- or off-site, is required except
when the proposed activity, development or redevelopment
is less than 20 acres and less than 8 percent of the site is
covered by impervious surface, or when the rate control
provisions of paragraphs 3(b) and 3(c) of the Rule, as
applicable, are met; and the proposed activity, development
or redevelopment does not increase runoff volume for the 2-
year critical duration event (not including snow melt). To
demonstrate that the proposed activity does not accelerate
on or off-site erosion, downstream nuisance, flooding or
damage, the applicant must complete an evaluation
downstream to the point where the proposed activity is 10
percent of the drainage area (e.g. a 10 acre development
must evaluate downstream to the point where the drainage
area is 100 acres). The evaluation at a minimum must
consist of an assessment of:
(2) Potential impacts to areas surrounding landlocked lakes or
ponds, or lakes or ponds with inadequate outlets where flood
levels would be increased by added runoff volume. The
evaluation must include:
(a) An assessment of water levels in the water body
resulting from the contributing watershed’s full annual
runoff yield during a 100-year wet year using the
Simplified Hydrologic Yield Method (SHYM), or more
rigorous methods for back to back 100-year critical
events, for both existing conditions and fully
developed watershed conditions; and
(b) The identification of public and private structures
(including low floor and entry elevations of
residences, and individual sewage treatment systems
(ISTS)), and infrastructure (sanitary sewer,
stormwater pipes and facilities, and roads)
surrounding the water body and located within 2
vertical feet of the future conditions water level
elevation predicted using the SHYM, or the elevation
for the back to back 100-year critical event.
(c) If there are public or private structures or
infrastructure located within 2 vertical feet of the
future conditions SHYM, or back to back 100-year
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
critical event elevation, the applicant must
demonstrate that no adverse impacts to health, safety
and welfare, or property damage, would occur; or
provide corrective actions. Corrective actions shall
include the following as necessary to mitigate in
proportion to the proposed project impact:
(1) Controlling post-development runoff volumes at
existing conditions;
(2) Controlling runoff rates to less than presettlement
rates;
(3) Protecting or re-locating impacted structures or
infrastructure, or securing easements for
additional flooded areas; or
(4) Other actions necessary to mitigate the impact.
(3) Potential impacts to downstream infrastructure, public and
private structures, and erosion along the drainage path and
downstream public waters. The evaluation must include:
(a) The identification of existing public and private
drainage easements;
(b) The locations, condition, and dimensions of the
existing drainage infrastructure;
(c) The location and elevation of structures with low
floors, or entries within 2 vertical feet of the 100-year
critical storm flood level;
(d) The location and description of known existing
flooding problems; and
(e) A hydrologic and hydraulic assessment of flooding
impacts of the proposed project on downstream public
and private structures.
(f) An assessment of existing and potential watercourse
erosion, bank stability, bank protection, and
watercourse slope;
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
(g) An assessment of the hydrologic and hydraulic
capacity of the downstream public and private
infrastructure;
(h) An assessment of property damages; and health,
safety and welfare impacts relative to increased
flooding of public and private infrastructure.
Minnesota Department of Transportation guidelines
shall be used to assess safety of flood levels at
downstream driveways and road crossings.
(i) If property damage, erosion, public health, safety and
welfare impacts are identified the applicant must
provide corrective action. Corrective actions shall
include the following as necessary to mitigate in
proportion to the proposed project impact:
(1) Actions described in Section 6B-2.1.e (1)(c) of
this rule;
(2) Obtaining easements;
(3) The installation of stream bank stability and
protection measures;
(4) The upgrading, protecting or re-locating
impacted infrastructure; or
(5) Other actions necessary to mitigate the impact.
(4) Potential impacts to wetlands with exceptional vegetative
diversity functional value. The evaluation must include:
(a) Delineation and functional assessment of wetlands
according to Section 6D-4.4;
(b) A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the before and
after project water level bounce and period of
inundation for wetlands with exceptional vegetative
diversity for the 1-year, 2-year and 10-year critical
duration events.
(c) The applicant must provide corrective actions that
mitigate in proportion to the proposed project impact
as specified in the Paragraph below; if the water level
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
bounce and period of inundation created by the
storms evaluated in Section 6B-2.1.e(3)(b) of this
Chapter exceeds the limit specified in the following
table.
(d) Corrective actions shall consist of runoff rate and
volume controls necessary to keep the water level
bounce and period of inundation within the limits
specified in the following table.
f. Stormwater facilities must be designed and installed consistent with
the current Best Management Practices.
g. The requirements of this Section are intended to be minimal
standards for protection of the public interest in protection of soil
and water resources. Where design and construction requires the
involvement of professional expertise, the standards of this Section
shall not define or replace the requirements of professional conduct
and practice.
h. The county may approve alternative stormwater practices and
methodologies it deems to provide equivalent performance and
protection as compared to the standards outlined within this
section.
2. Specific Standards for Stormwater Conveyance and Rate Control
Facilities.
a. All stormwater management calculations submitted for review shall
include sufficient information to evaluate the changes to the
stormwater drainage characteristics within the watershed areas
affected by the proposed land disturbance activity. The applicant
shall provide calculations, which clearly show the effects of this
development on the peak rate of discharge, the time of
concentration, channel velocities and other potential drainage
impacts to water and soil resources both on and off the
development site. The County may require the Applicant to provide
as part of the stormwater management calculations, any additional
information or data needed to complete the review.
b. The stormwater calculations submitted for review shall use
standard hydrological and hydraulic analysis methods that are
acceptable to the County. Calculations which use unproven
methodologies or apply proven methodologies incorrectly shall be
determined by the County to be unacceptable for the purposes of
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
this Chapter and shall be returned to the applicant for correction
and resubmittal.
c. Acceptable hydrological methods and procedures to determine
peak runoff discharge rates and runoff volumes for all development,
except for street and highway pavement drainage systems, shall be
the standard methods of the Natural Resources Conservation
Service (NRCS) SCS TR 55 and the SCS TR 20 Methods as
defined in the current Hydrology Guide for Minnesota.
d. Precipitation events for the TR 55 and TR 20 Methods shall be for
the one (1), two (2), ten (10) and one hundred (100) year twentyfour
(24) hour frequency storm events using NOAA Atlas 14 rainfall
depths for the project location as found on the Precipitation Data
Frequency Server located at http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/
and use either a Type II rainfall distribution or an Atlas 14
distribution.
e. Acceptable hydrological methods and procedures to determine
peak runoff discharge rates for street and highway pavement
drainage systems, inlet capacities and piped storm sewer systems
shall be the Rational Method as defined in the current Minnesota
Department of Transportation Drainage Manual.
f. Precipitation events for the Rational Method shall be for the one (1),
two (2), ten (10) and one hundred (100) year storm events using
the NOAA Atlas 14 rainfall intensity duration frequency (IDF) curves
for the South Central Region developed by MnDOT and located at
http://www.dot.state.mn.us/bridge/hydraulics/atlas14/atlas14regions
/atlas14regions.html
g. Where development site drainage discharges to an existing
roadway, ditch or storm sewer system or other public facility, the
applicant shall provide as part of the calculations, all survey, utility
or other topographic data of the existing condition needed for the
County to determine that the proposed development does not
impact or degrade any critical roadway element or affect the safety,
maintenance and function of the public facility.
h. Drainage Areas. Resource management plans shall show existing
and proposed drainage areas used for stormwater analysis,
including off-site portions of sub-watersheds that are partly located
on the property for which the plan is being prepared. Where
drainage areas include runoff from off-site areas, those areas may
be shown and measured from maps at larger scales (e.g., United
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
States Geological Survey Quadrangle Maps) if better mapping is
not reasonably available.
i. Runoff Curve Numbers (RCNs): Stormwater management plans
shall include a detailed breakdown of existing and proposed RCNs
used.
j. Pre-settlement conditions: Pre-settlement runoff curve numbers
shall be used for all areas undergoing a land use change. The
following curve numbers shall be used to analyze pre-settlement
conditions:
Hydrologic Soil Group Runoff Curve Number
A 30
B 55
C 71
D 77
k. For evaluation of post-development runoff, drained hydric soils shall
be assumed to revert to an undrained condition unless the
applicant demonstrates that publicly owned and maintained
drainage facilities will be adequate to maintain the drained
condition.
l. Impervious Coverage: Stormwater management calculations shall
list the new impervious area created in each sub-watershed and
shall include the assumptions and calculations used for determining
impervious area (house pad, driveway, etc).
m. Runoff Calculations: The applicant shall provide calculations for
two (2), ten (10), and one hundred (100) year peak discharge rates
for each subwatershed comparing pre-settlement conditions and
proposed conditions. For projects located within the Vermillion
River Watershed Joint Powers Organization jurisdiction, the
applicant shall provide calculations for the one (1) year peak
discharge rate for each subwatershed comparing existing
conditions and proposed conditions.
n. Where pre-settlement conditions indicate no runoff, the infiltration
capacity required elsewhere in this ordinance may be used to
demonstrate compliance with a no-runoff requirement for the storm
frequency and duration being considered.
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
o. The minimum design capacity of all drainage systems shall
accommodate the runoff from a ten (10) year storm event. All
drainage systems and facilities shall be designed to withstand the
runoff from the critical one hundred (100) year event or
accumulative antecedent conditions without damage to the system
or facility, downstream areas and/or significant risk to human health
and safety.
p. Drainage plans shall show pre-existing drains and tile lines.
Stormwater facilities must be designed assuming that tiles will no
longer function unless an easement is supplied for future
maintenance and the applicant demonstrates that the tile line has
design capacity and service condition that make it suitable as a
component of the stormwater management system.
q. Drainage plans must evaluate landlocked lakes and ponds in the
design analysis and include the water levels of the water bodies
resulting from the contributing watershed’s full annual runoff yield
during a 100-year wet year using the Simplified Hydrologic Yield
Method (SHYM) or back to back 100-year critical events for both
existing and fully developed watershed conditions.
3. Specific Standards for Wet Detention Basins.
a. All stormwater wet detention ponds shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the W.W. Walker Method (1987)
described in the Best Management Practices and provide:
1. A permanent wet pool with dead storage greater than or equal to
the runoff from a 2.5-inch storm event;
2. Pond outlets shall be designed to prevent short circuiting of the
flow from pond inlets to the outlets;
3. A normal water elevations above the Ordinary High Water
(OHW) of adjacent water bodies, or normal water level where the
OHW is not established.
4. An outlet skimmer to prevent migration of floatables and oils for
at least the 1-year storm event; and
5. Access for future maintenance.
6. Stormwater facilities may also be designed using the
methodology in the General Permit Authorization to Discharge
Storm Water Associated With Construction Activity Under the
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System/State Disposal
System Permit Program, Permit MN R100001 (NPDES General
Construction Permit), issued by the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency, August 1, 2008, as amended, section III.C.1.
b. Designs for detention basins shall include but not necessarily be
limited to calculations for estimated inflow and outflow, permanent
and temporary storage volumes, mean depth, outlet design,
downstream stabilization, emergency spillway, pond profile and
pond cross section.
c. Skimmers shall be included on outlet of wet detention ponds.
Construction details of the skimmers shall be shown on the
construction plans for the pond.
d. Ground Water Sensitivity: Wet ponds located in areas identified as
being highly susceptible to ground water contamination (except
ground water discharge areas) shall be designed so that the pond
bottom shall be at least three feet above the seasonal high ground
water elevation and bedrock and be lined with two (2) feet of soil
having a permeability less than 0.3 inches per hour.
4. Specific Standards for Volume Control.
a. Infiltration practices for control of stormwater runoff volume shall be
capable of infiltrating a volume of runoff equivalent to the depth of
one (1) inch of runoff over the area of all new impervious surfaces
within the development within forty-eight (48) hours. This condition
may be waived for sites with predominately Type C and D soils, or
where a shallow water table prevents construction of infiltration
systems, provided the following conditions are met:
(1) Credits and site design practices to minimize the creation of
connected impervious surfaces are used to the extend
practical.
(2) Underdrains are used to promote filtration instead of
infiltration.
b. Volume controls shall be greater than the volume of runoff
equivalent to the depth of one (1) inch of runoff over the area of all
new impervious surfaces if necessary to mitigate downstream
impacts in accordance with Section 6B-2-1.e.3.
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
c. Infiltration volumes and facility sizes shall be calculated using the
appropriate hydrologic soil group calculation and saturated
infiltration rate from the table below. Documented site specific
infiltration or hydraulic conductivity measurements can be used in
place of the values in the table if approved by the County. Soil
percolation rates may not be used for calculating infiltration rates.
The goals of these BMPs are to minimize the amount of directly
connected impervious surface created, preserve the infiltration of
the soil, and incorporate practices into the design which are
capable of infiltrating one (1) inch of runoff from impervious
surfaces within forty-eight (48) hours.
Soil
Group
Infiltration Rate
(inches per hour)
Soil Texture
A 0.3 Sandy, loamy sand, or sand loam
B 0.15 Silt loam or loam
C 0.07 Sandy clay loam
Source: Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds (SCS, June 1986)
d. Infiltration areas shall be limited to the horizontal areas subject to
prolonged wetting.
e. Areas of permanent pools tend to lose infiltration capacity over time
and will not be accepted as an infiltration practice.
f. New constructed stormwater outfalls to any public waters must
provide for filtering or settling of suspended solids and skimming of
surface debris before discharge.
g. Before infiltrating runoff, pretreatment shall be required for parking
lot runoff and for runoff from new road construction that will enter
the infiltration system. The pretreatment shall be designed to
protect the infiltration system from clogging and to protect
groundwater quality. Pretreatment options may include, but are not
limited to, oil/grease separation, sedimentation, biofiltration,
filtration, swales or filter strips. To minimize potential groundwater
impacts it is desirable to infiltrate the cleanest runoff. To achieve
this, a design may propose greater infiltration of runoff from low
pollutant sources such as roofs, and less from higher pollution
source areas such as parking lots.
h. Infiltration systems must be designed to bypass higher flows.
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
i. Infiltration areas must be fenced or otherwise protected from
disturbance before the land disturbing activity starts.
j. Constructed infiltration practices, such as infiltration ponds and
trenches, as the best management practice for volume control shall
be avoided by using other appropriate volume control practices,
credits, or areas of project sites, and shall not be used:
(1) For runoff from fueling and vehicle maintenance areas,
(2) On areas with less than 3 feet vertical separation from the
bottom of the infiltration system to the elevation of seasonal
high groundwater or top of bedrock,
(3) For areas with runoff from industrial, commercial and
institutional parking lots and roads where there is less than 5
feet separation from the bottom of the infiltration system to
the elevation of the seasonal high groundwater,
(4) On areas with Type D soils.
(5) Where Industrial facilities are not authorized to infiltrate
stormwater under an NPDES/SDS Industrial Stormwater
Permit from the MPCA.
(6) Where high levels of contaminants in the soil and or
groundwater will be mobilized by infiltrating stormwater.
(7) Areas within 1000 feet up-gradient and 100 feet downgradient
of active karst features.
j. The volume required for infiltration practices may be reduced by
using stormwater volume credits. The credits outlined in the 2009-
2018 Scott Watershed Management Organization’s (WMO)
Comprehensive Water Resource Management Plan Standards,
adopted June 9, 2009, as amended, may be applied.
5. Specific standards for areas of moderate or high susceptibility to ground
water contamination or are located within a Drinking Water Supply
Management Area (DWSMA) as defined in Minnesota Rule 4720.5100,
subp. 13.
a. Infiltration areas shall have either natural undisturbed soil or be
lined with at least two feet of soil with a permeability of 5 minutes
per inch or slower.
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
b. Infiltration areas shall be at least three feet above the seasonal high
ground water elevation and bedrock.
c. Constructed infiltration practices in areas of medium or high
groundwater susceptibility shown on Map 5 of the Scott WMO
Comprehensive Water Resource Management Plan adopted June
9, 2009, as amended; and within 400 feet of a community water
system or within 100 feet of a private well shall have pretreatment
of runoff unless otherwise specified in an approved Wellhead
Protection Plan.
6. Specific Standards for Redevelopment.
a. Redevelopment is anytime a parcel exceeds 15% impervious
coverage and the proposed land disturbing activity exceeds 1 acre
in size.
b. All new impervious surfaces added to the site must meet the
volume control standards outlined in section 6B-2.4
c. Additional volume control to reduce the total volume of stormwater
leaving the site from the existing impervious surfaces must also be
provided in addition to the volume required under section 6B-2.4.
ARTICLE C. EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL STANDARDS
6C-1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Article is to prevent or reduce, to the most practicable extent,
erosion and sedimentation and their associated effects within the County and to provide
for the protection of natural and artificial water storage and retention areas and public
waters.
6C-2 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Proper erosion and sediment control practices shall be followed within the County as
described in this Article. All land disturbing activity, whether or not a permit is required,
shall adhere to the following performance standards:
1. General Standards.
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
a. No land owner or applicant shall cause or conduct any land
disturbing activity which causes erosion or sedimentation or which
results in damages to water or soil resources or off-site impacts.
b. All development shall conform to the natural limitations presented
by the topography and soil types in order to minimize soil erosion
and sedimentation.
c. Land disturbing activities shall only occur in increments of workable
size such that adequate erosion and sediment controls can be
provided throughout all phases of the development. The smallest
practical area of land shall be exposed or otherwise disturbed at
any one period of time.
d. Erosion and sediment control measures shall meet the standard for
the General Permit Authorization to Discharge Storm Water
Associated With Construction Activity Under the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System/State Disposal System Permit
Program Permit MN R100001 (NPDES General Construction
Permit) issued by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, August
1 2003, as amended; except where more specific requirements are
provided in Section 6C-2.2 of this Chapter below.
e. All erosion and sediment controls shall be installed on all down
gradient perimeters before commencing the land disturbing activity,
and shall not be removed without County or Township approval or
approval of a Certificate of Compliance pursuant to Section 6A-8 of
this Chapter.
2. Specific Standards.
a. No land disturbing activity shall cause active gully erosion or
negative off-site impacts.
b. No land disturbing activity shall cause an increase in channel
erosion in any watercourse, whether permanent or intermittent, at
any time during or following development.
c. No land disturbing activity shall cause the creation of unstable
slopes persisting after the completion of the development.
d. Permanent or temporary soil stabilization must be applied to
disturbed areas (areas where vegetation has been removed or
where cuts have been made), as soon as possible, not to exceed
the time frames provided in the NPDES General Construction
Permit Part IV.B.2. BMPs for soil stabilization should be selected to
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
be appropriate for the time of year, site conditions, and estimated
duration of use.
e. The Erosion and Sediment Control Plan and construction
specifications shall define specifications and rates for landscaping,
grass seed, fertilizing, mulch anchoring methods and time
requirements for permanent seeding.
f. Soil stockpiles must be stabilized or protected with sediment
trapping measures to prevent soil loss. This includes temporary
soil stockpiles. These stockpiles cannot be placed in any natural
buffers or surface waters, including stormwater conveyances such
as curb and gutter systems, or conduits and ditches unless there is
a bypass in place for the stormwater.
g. A permanent vegetative cover shall be established on disturbed
areas not otherwise permanently stabilized.
h. Properties adjacent to the site of a land disturbance shall be
protected from sediment deposition.
i. Sediment basins and traps, perimeter dikes (for diversion),
sediment barriers (silt curtains or hay bales), and other measures
intended to trap sediment on-site must be constructed as a first
step in grading and be made functional before upslope land
disturbance takes place. Earthen structures such as dams, dikes,
and diversions must be seeded and mulched within fifteen (15)
days of installation.
j. Stormwater runoff from drainage areas with more than five (5)
acres of disturbed area must pass through a temporary sediment
trapping basin or other suitable sediment trapping facility. The
basins must be designed and constructed according to the
standards in the NPDES General Construction Permit Park III.B.
k. Cut and fill slopes must be designed and constructed in a manner
which will minimize erosion. Slopes which are not vegetated within
one (1) year of construction must be provided with additional slope
stabilizing measures by the applicant until the problem is corrected.
l. Properties and waterways downstream from development sites
shall be protected from erosion due to increases in the volume,
velocity, and peak flow rate of stormwater runoff.
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
m. All on-site stormwater conveyance channels shall be designed and
constructed to withstand the expected velocity of flow from a 10-
year frequency storm without erosion.
n. Rip rap shall be placed at culvert outfalls in accordance with
MnDOT standard specifications.
o. All storm sewer inlets which are made operable during construction
shall be protected so that sediment-laden water will not enter the
conveyance system without first being filtered or otherwise treated
to remove sediment.
p. Construction vehicles and equipment shall be kept out of
watercourses to the extent possible.
q. The construction of non-exempt underground utility lines shall be
subject to the following criteria:
(1) No more than five hundred (500) feet of trench are to be
opened at one time unless approved by the Planning
Department.
(2) Where consistent with safety and space consideration,
excavated material is to be placed on the uphill side of
trenches.
(3) Trenched watering devices shall discharge in a manner
which will not adversely affect flowing streams, drainage
systems, or off-site property.
r. Wherever construction vehicle access routes intersect paved public
roads, provisions must be made to minimize the transport of
sediment by runoff or vehicle tracking onto the paved surface such
as rock construction entrances. The rock construction entrances
will be limited to one access per site whenever possible.
s. The applicant shall be responsible for proper operation and
maintenance of all erosion and sediment controls, and soil
stabilization measures, in conformance with best management
practices, and in conformance with the maintenance requirements
in the NPDES General Construction Permit. The applicant is
responsible for the operation and maintenance of temporary
erosion prevention and sediment control BMPs for the duration of
the construction work at the site. The applicant is responsible until
the site has undergone final stabilization as defined in NPDES
General Construction Permit Appendix B, and has received an
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
approved Certificate of Compliance in accordance with Section 6A-
8 of this Chapter. After the required vegetation density cover has
been met, all synthetic and structural erosion prevention and
sediment control BMPs need to be removed and disposed of
properly before final stabilization has been met.
t. Erosion and sediment control measures shall be consistent with
Best Management Practices (BMPs), and shall be sufficient to
retain sediment on-site.
u. If the land disturbing activity is taking place on a site where the soils
are already disturbed (e.g. a tilled agricultural site that is being
developed), areas that will not be disturbed as part of the
development and areas that will not be disturbed according to the
time frames and slopes specified in the NPDES General
Construction Permit Part IV.B.2 shall be seeded with temporary or
permanent cover before commencing the proposed land disturbing
activity.
v. All areas previously used in agricultural production must be
vegetated using permanent vegetation for any land undergoing a
land use change from agricultural production.
w. Any construction activities occurring on agricultural land that will
stay in agricultural land after construction activities have
commenced is to be returned back to a cultivated state at minimum
before the site has achieved final stabilization.
x. All temporary BMPs shall be removed and disposed of properly
within 30 days of no longer providing erosion prevention or
sediment capturing purposes.
ARTICLE D. WETLAND CONSERVATION
6D-1 PURPOSE
The County finds that wetlands serve a variety of beneficial functions. Wetlands
maintain water quality, reduce flooding and erosion, provide food and habitat for wildlife,
provide open space, and are an integral part of the County’s environment. Wetlands
are important physical, educational, ecological, aesthetic, recreational and economic
assets to the County. They are critical to the County’s stormwater management and
other aspects of health, safety and general welfare. Regulating wetlands and the land
uses around them are therefore in the public interest.
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
6D-2 LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNIT (LGU)
In all the unincorporated areas of the County, each individual Town Board has accepted
the responsibility to act as the Local Government Unit (LGU) to implement the Wetland
Conservation Act of 1991, as amended, and the accompanying rules of the Minnesota
Board of Water and Soil Resources. The Planning Department shall notify permit
applicants to contact their LGU for the requirements of the Wetland Conservation Act.
6D-3 REGULATION
1. No person or political subdivision shall drain, fill, excavate or otherwise
alter a wetland or public waters wetland without first obtaining the approval
of a wetland replacement plan from the local government unit with
jurisdiction over the activity.
2. For any parcel created or redeveloped after the effective date of this
Ordinance, a buffer shall be maintained around the perimeter of all
wetlands and public waters wetlands. The buffer provisions of this
Chapter shall not apply to any parcel of record as of the amended date of
this Ordinance until such parcel is subdivided or developed.
3. The buffer portions of this Chapter do not apply to any wetland or public
waters wetland with a surface area equal to or less than the area of
wetland impact allowed without replacement as de minimus under the
Wetland Conservation Act (WCA), and to those portions of wetlands that
will be filled under approved wetland replacement plans per the Wetland
Conservation Act (WCA).
6D-4 CRITERIA
1. Any drainage, filling, excavation or other alteration of a public waters
wetland or wetland shall be conducted in compliance with Minnesota
Statutes, section 103G.245, the WCA, and regulations adopted
thereunder.
2. A public waters wetland or wetland may be used for stormwater storage
only if the use will not adversely affect the function and public value of the
wetland as determined by the local government unit.
3. Wetland replacement/mitigation siting must follow the priority order below:
a. Mitigation on-site
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
b. Mitigation within the same subwatershed
c. Mitigation within the WMO boundary
d. Mitigation within Scott County
e. Mitigation within the same major watershed.
4. A wetlands functional assessment for vegetative diversity will be
completed with each wetland, and public waters wetlands, delineated for a
project and buffers established according to the following table. The
functional assessment and wetland rankings will be determined using the
Minnesota Routine Assessment Method version 3.0 (MnRAM 3.0, as
amended). Rankings are summarized as follows.
Buffer
Requirement
Exceptional High Medium Low
Stormwater
Ponds
Average Buffer
Width
65 feet 50 feet 35 feet 25 feet 0
Minimum Buffer
Width
25 feet 25 feet 25 feet 25 feet 0*
*Must have a building setback of 10 feet from delineated edge of wetland and elevated as
necessary to meet provisions of paragraph 3(1) of Rule D.
“Exceptional” Wetland – are wetlands assigned the exceptional rating
using MnRAM 3.0 for evaluating wetland functions. These wetlands are
most susceptible to human impacts, are most unique, have the highest
community resources significance such as rare species habitats, and
similar characteristics.
“High” Wetland – are wetlands assigned the high rating using MnRAM
3.0 for evaluating wetland functions. These wetlands are relatively
undisturbed but exhibit evidence of more disturbance or degradation than
Exceptional wetlands. High wetlands have conditions and functions that
are susceptible to human impacts, are connected to other wetlands or
watercourses, and may contain locally significant or rare wetland types.
“Moderate” Wetlands – are wetlands assigned a moderate rating using
MnRAM 3.0 for evaluating wetland functions. These wetlands typically
provide a diversity of habitats, and are connected to other wetland or
upland habitats to provide wildlife habitat.
“Low” Wetlands – are wetlands assigned a low rating using the MnRAM
3.0 for evaluating wetland functions. These wetlands tend to be less
susceptible to further impacts than the other wetland management
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
classifications. They also have low diversity and connectivity to other
wetlands and watercourses.
Stormwater Ponds – are designated strictly for treating and retaining
stormwater.
5. All structures shall have a minimum set-back of 35 feet from the
delineated edge of wetlands and public waters wetlands.
6. The first 25 feet of buffer as measured from the wetland or public waters
wetland cannot be disturbed during project construction (i.e., cleared or
graded, except for temporary disturbances for public roads and utility
construction) and must be protected from disturbance with temporary
fencing prior to construction. Vegetation can be replaced and site soils
preparation work completed within this first 25 feet if necessary to
establish acceptable vegetation in accordance with Paragraph 3(h) of this
Rule.
7. Buffers shall apply whether or not the wetland or public waters wetland is
on the same parcel as a proposed development. An applicant is required
to delineate the boundary for any wetland or public waters wetland on the
project land. An applicant shall not be required to delineate wetlands on
adjacent property, but must review available information to estimate the
wetland boundary.
8. Buffer vegetation shall be established and maintained as follows:
a. Where acceptable natural vegetation exists in buffer areas, the
retention of such vegetation in an undisturbed state is required
unless an applicant receives approval to replace such vegetation.
A buffer has acceptable natural vegetation if it:
(1) Has a continuous, dense layer of perennial grasses that has
been uncultivated or unbroken for at least 5 consecutive
years; or
(2) Has an overstory of trees and/or shrubs that has been
uncultivated or unbroken for at least 5 consecutive years; or
(3) Contains a mixture of the plant communities described in
Paragraphs 3(h)(1)(aa) and 3(h)(1)(bb) of this Rule above
that has been uncultivated or unbroken for at least 5 years.
b. Notwithstanding the performance standards set forth in Section 6D-
4.8 of this Chapter, the County may determine existing buffer
vegetation unacceptable if:
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
(1) It is composed of undesirable plant species including but not
limited to common buckthorn, purple loosestrife, leafy spurge
or noxious weeds; or
(2) It has topography that tends to channelize the flow of runoff;
or
(3) For some other reason it is unlikely to retain nutrients and
sediment.
c. Where buffers are not vegetated or have been cultivated or
otherwise disturbed within 5 years of the permit application, such
areas shall be replanted and maintained. The buffer plantings must
be identified on the permit application. The buffer landscaping shall
comply with the following standards:
(1) Buffers shall be planted with a seed mix approved by
MnDOT, BWSR, NRCS or SWCD, with the exception of a
one-time planting with an annual nurse or cover crop such
as oats or rye.
(2) The seed mix shall be broadcast according to MnDOT,
BWSR, NRCS or SWCD specifications of the selected mix.
The annual nurse cover crop shall be applied at a minimum
rate of 30 pounds per acre. The MnDOT, BWSR, or NRCS
seed mix selected for permanent cover shall be appropriate
for the soil site conditions and free of invasive species.
(3) Native shrubs may be substituted for forbs with prior
approval from the County. Such shrubs may be bare root
seedlings and shall be planted at a rate of sixty (60) plants
per acre. Shrubs shall be distributed so as to provide a
natural appearance and shall not be planted in rows.
(4) Native prairie grasses and forbs shall be planted using a
method approved by the County prior to planting or seeding.
(5) No fertilizer shall be used in establishing new filter strips,
except on highly disturbed sites when deemed necessary to
establish acceptable buffer vegetation and then limited to
amounts indicated by an accredited soil testing laboratory.
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
(6) All seeded areas shall be mulched immediately with clean
straw at a rate of one and one-half (1.5) tons per acre.
Mulch shall be anchored with a disk or tackifier.
(7) Buffers (both natural and created), shall be protected by silt
fence during construction and the fence shall remain in place
until the area crop is established.
d. Buffer vegetation shall be established and maintained in
accordance with the requirements found in this Paragraph 3(h) of
this Rule. During the first 2 full growing seasons, the owner must
replant any buffer vegetation that does not survive. The owner
shall be responsible for reseeding/or replanting if the buffer
changes at any time through human intervention or activities. At a
minimum the buffer must be maintained as a “no mow’ area.
9. When a buffer is required the applicant shall, as a condition to issuance of
a permit:
a. Submit to the County for its approval a conservation easement for
protection of approved buffers, or include the buffer in a dedicated
outlot as part of platting and subdivision approval. The easement
shall describe the boundaries of the wetland or public waters
wetland and buffer, identify the monuments and monument
locations, and prohibit any the alterations set forth in Paragraph 3(j)
of this Rule below and the removal of the buffer monuments within
the buffer, wetland, or public waters wetland. Outlot descriptions
shall provide for an equivalent level of protection of the buffer and
prohibit any alterations set forth in 6D-4.10 of this Rule below.
b. File the approved easement for record and submit evidence thereof
to the County, or complete preliminary and final plats including
dedicated outlot(s); and
c. Install the monumentation required by 6D-4.12 of this section.
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
10. Subject to Section 6D-4.11 of below, alterations including building,
storage, paving, mowing, plowing, introduction of noxious vegetation,
cutting, dredging, filling, mining, dumping, grazing livestock, agricultural
production, yard waste disposal or fertilizer application, are prohibited
within any buffer. Noxious vegetation, such as European buckthorn,
purple loosestrife and reed canary grass, may be removed. Alterations
would not include plantings that enhance the natural vegetation or
selective clearing or pruning of trees or vegetation that are dead, diseased
or pose similar hazards.
11. The following activities shall be permitted with any buffer, and shall not
constitute prohibited alterations under Section 6D-4.10 above:
a. Use and maintenance of an unimproved access strip through the
buffer, not more than 20 feet in width, for recreational access to the
watercourse or wetland and the exercise of riparian rights;
b. Placement, maintenance, repair or replacement of public roads,
and utility and drainage systems that exist on creation of the buffer
or are required to comply with any subdivision approval or building
permit obtained from the County, so long as any adverse impacts of
public road, utility and drainage systems on the function of the
buffer have been avoided or minimized to the extent practical;
c. Construction, maintenance, repair, reconstruction or replacement of
existing and future public roads within a buffer, so long as any
adverse impacts of the road on the function of the buffer have been
avoided or minimized to the extent practical.
d. Individual Sewage Treatment Systems (ISTS) may be constructed
within a buffer but outside the 35 foot structure setback as long as
the vegetation growing on the system is maintained in accordance
with Paragraph 3(h) of this Rule, and the system otherwise meets
County and State rules for ISTS systems.
e. Clearing, grading and seeding is allowed if part of an approved
Wetland Replacement Plan.
12. Buffers shall be monumented to clearly designate the boundaries of all
buffers within new residential developments. A monument shall be
required at each parcel line where it crosses a buffer strip and shall have a
maximum spacing of 200 feet along the edge of the buffer. Additional
monuments shall be placed as necessary to accurately define the edge of
the buffer. A monument shall consist of a post and a buffer sign. The
signs shall be obtained from the Scott County and include warnings about
fines for disturbing and/or developing buffers. The signs shall be a
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
minimum of 5 inches wide by 7 inches vertical, have a brown field with
white lettering, and shall be securely mounted on a post to a minimum
height of 4 feet above grade.
13. Other activities which would change the character of a wetland shall not
diminish the quantity, quality or biological diversity of the wetland.
6D-5 WETLANDS, DNR PROTECTED
All protected wetlands in the unincorporated areas shown on the Protected Waters
Inventory Map for Scott County, shall be subject to the following requirements, except
as otherwise stated in this Ordinance:
1. The lowest floor elevation of buildings shall be placed above the greater of
three (3) feet above the ordinary high water level of DNR protected
wetlands or one (1) foot above the one hundred (100) year flood elevation.
2. Structures shall maintain a seventy-five (75) foot setback from the ordinary
high water level. If an ordinary high water level has not been determined
for a DNR Protected Wetland, the setback shall be measured from the
delineated boundary of the wetland.
3. Individual sewage treatment systems shall maintain a fifty (50) foot
setback from the ordinary high water level. If an ordinary high water level
has not been determined for a DNR Protected Wetland, the setback shall
be measured from the delineated boundary of the wetland.
ARTICLE E. FLOODPLAIN ALTERATIONS
6E-1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this article is to provide guidance for managing local floodplain areas to
maintain critical 100-year flood storage volumes and to assure that new structures are
constructed above the flood-prone areas to avoid causing an increase in the critical
flood levels that could affect both the new construction and nearby structures.
6E-2 REGULATION
No person or political subdivision shall alter or fill land, or build a structure, below the
100-year critical flood elevation of any public waters, public waters wetland or other
wetland without first obtaining a permit from the Planning Department.
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
6E-3 CRITERIA
1. Floodplain alteration or filling shall not cause a net decrease in flood
storage capacity below the projected 100-year critical flood elevation
unless it is shown that the proposed alteration or filling, together with the
alteration or filling of all other land on the affected reach of the water body
to the same degree of encroachment as proposed by the applicant, will
not cause high water or aggravate flooding on other land and will not
unduly restrict flood flows.
2. A land disturbing activity within a floodplain may require a grading permit
in accordance with Section 6A-2 of this Chapter.
3. An activity that alters or fills a wetland within a floodplain may require a
grading permit in accordance with Section 6A-2 of this Chapter as well as
applicable wetland permits in accordance with the Wetland Conservation
Act.
ARTICLE F. BLUFF STANDARDS
6F-1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this section is to protect adjacent property, structures, and landowners
from potential damages as a result of destabilizing steep slopes identified as bluffs.
6F-2 REGULATION
1. No person shall develop, redevelop, or commence land disturbing
activities on bluffs located in the Bluff Overlay District without protecting
adjacent property and water bodies from erosion, sedimentation, flooding,
or other damage.
6F-3 CRITERIA
1. Minimum Bluff Standards: Any land disturbing activity, development or the
redevelopment of land in a Bluff Overlay District shown on “Map 1: Bluff
Overlay District of the Scott WMO” as included in the 2009-2018 Scott
WMO Water Resource Management Plan, adopted June 9, 2009, as
amended shall require a topographic survey to determine if a bluff is
present. At its discretion, the County may waive the topographic survey
requirement where a review of the available contour information clearly
indicates a bluff is not present. The standards below only apply to those
areas as identified on Map 1: Bluff Overlay District of the Scott WMO as
included in the 2009-2018 Scott WMO Water Resource Management
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
Plan, adopted June 9, 2009, as amended. Where bluffs are present, the
following standards shall apply:
a. All grading, clear cutting, and/or other land disturbing activities are
prohibited in the Bluff Impact Zone and/or Bluff Face.
b. Selective removal of vegetation is allowed with an approved plan, prior
approval from Scott County, or when deemed reasonable and meet
criteria outlined in 6F-3.1a. Examples of this include but are not limited
to: plantings that enhance the natural vegetation or the selective
clearing of noxious, exotic or invasive vegetation or the pruning of
trees or vegetation that are dead, diseased or pose similar hazards.
c. All structures shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from the top of
bluff.
d. All Individual and Community Sewage Treatment Systems (ISTS or
CSTS) shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from the top of bluff.
e. All storm water ponds, swales, infiltration basins, or other soil
saturation-type features shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from
the top of bluff.
2. The following activities shall be permitted within the Bluff Face, and shall
not constitute prohibited activities under Section 6F-3.a, 6F-2.1, 6F-4:
(1) Maintenance, repair or replacement of public roads and utility
and drainage systems that exist on creation of the Bluff Overlay
District.
(2) Disturbances that are part of an LGU approved plan to repair,
grade, or re-slope existing bluff faces that are eroding or
unstable as necessary to establish stable slopes and
vegetation.
(3) Plantings that enhance the natural vegetation or the selective
clearing of noxious, exotic, or invasive vegetation or the
pruning of trees or vegetation that is dead, diseased or pose
similar hazards.
6F-4 EXCEPTIONS
1. Mining activities shall be exempted from Section 6F-3 provided that:
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
a. An extractive use site development and restoration plan is developed,
approved by the local government, and followed over the course of the
project;
b. The mining operation is conducted in such a manner as to minimize
interference with the surface water drainage outside of the boundaries
of the mining operation;
c. The landowner complies with all other applicable state and local
regulations governing mining.
2. Disturbances, grading, or re-grading of abandoned mine slopes necessary to
establish stable slopes and vegetation are exempt from Section 6F-3.
3. For the purposes of constructing Public Improvement Projects, land disturbances
in the Bluff Impact Zone and Bluff Face may be permitted providing the project
Proposer demonstrates an appropriate need for these activities to occur and that
avoidance and minimization sequencing was followed.
4. Maintenance, repair, or replacement of public roads and utility and drainage
systems that exist on creation of the Bluff Overlay District.
5. Disturbances that are part of an LGU approved plan to repair grade or re-slope
existing bluff faces that are eroding or unstable as necessary to establish stable
slopes and vegetation.
6. Plantings that enhance the natural vegetation or the selective clearing of noxious,
exotic or invasive vegetation or the pruning of trees or vegetation that are dead,
diseased or poses similar hazards.
ARTICLE G. WATERSHED STANDARDS
6G-1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this article is to provide for the implementation of the goals and policies
of the various watershed management organizations that operate within the County.
This includes the goals and policies of the 2009-2018 Scott WMO Organization Water
Resource Management Plan, adopted June 9, 2009, as amended, and water resource
management plans prepared by the Lower Minnesota River Watershed District, the
Prior Lake – Spring Lake Watershed District, and the Vermillion River Watershed Joint
Powers Organization, as amended.
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
6G-2 REGULATION
1. All activities requiring a permit under this chapter must also meet the minimum
standards of the watershed management organization in which the activity is
located.
2. If an activity is located within the political boundaries of the Scott Watershed
Management Organization, the minimum standards of the WMO as laid out in the
2009-2018 Scott WMO Organization Water Resource Management Plan,
adopted June 9, 2009, as amended, will apply to the activity where county
ordinance is not more restrictive or deemed equivalent.
3. If an activity is located within the political boundaries of the Prior Lake – Spring
Lake Watershed District, the minimum standards of the District as laid out in the
Prior Lake Spring Lake Watershed District Rules, adopted August 12, 2003, as
amended, as amended, will apply to the activity where county ordinance is not
more restrictive or deemed equivalent.
4. If an activity is located within the political boundaries of the Lower Minnesota
River Watershed District, the minimum standards of the District as laid out in the
1999 Lower Minnesota River Watershed District Management Plan, as amended,
will apply to the activity where county ordinance is not more restrictive or deemed
equivalent.
5. If an activity is located within the political boundaries of the Vermillion River
Watershed Joint Powers Organization, the minimum standards of the District as
laid out in the Vermillion River Watershed Joint Powers Organization Standards,
as adopted May 27, 2010, as amended, will apply to the activity where county
ordinance is not more restrictive or deemed equivalent.
6G-3 CRITERIA
1. As identified in section 6G-2, all land disturbing activities must meet the minimum
standards of the local watershed management authority when the County deems
the watershed regulations to be more stringent than County Ordinance.
2. For areas located within the Vermillion River Watershed Joint Powers
Organization, the following specific standards will also apply:
a. Resource Management Plans required under section 6A-3-1 must also
analyze the 1-year storm peak discharge rates for existing and proposed
conditions. The peak discharge rates from this event must not exceed the
existing discharge rates from the project site.
b. Development that creates one acre or more of new impervious area must
incorporate volume control practices into the design sufficient to prevent
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
an increase in the runoff volume for the 2-year 24-hour storm above predevelopment
conditions. This condition may be waived for sites with
predominately Type C and D soils, or where a shallow water table
prevents construction of infiltration systems, provided the following
conditions are met:
(1) Credits and site design practices to minimize the creation of
connected impervious surfaces are used to the extent practical.
(2) Underdrains are used to promote filtration instead of infiltration
c. The stormwater volume credits identified in Section 6B-2.4.j are replaced
with the stormwater volume credits identified in the Vermillion River
Watershed Joint Powers Organization Standards, adopted May 27, 2010,
as amended.
d. Projects located within the VRWJPO must also comply with the
requirements identified in the VRWJPO Rules and with the buffer
standards adjacent to major waterways as identified on Map 1, attached to
the VRWJPO Rules, March 9, 2007, as amended. The buffer and
conservation easements required are summarized in the following table:
Classification Buffer Width Standard
Conservation Corridor Lower Reach (Vermillion River
Downstream of Biscayne
Avenue) – 150 foot average,
100 foot minimum measured
from the edge of the meander
belt of the river.
Upper Reach (Vermillion River
upstream of Biscayne Avenue
and South Branch Vermillion
River) – 150 foot average, 100
foot minimum, measured from
the edge of the meander belt of
the river.
Aquatic Corridor – Principal
Connector
Required buffer width 100 foot
average, 65 foot minimum
measured from the edge of the
meander belt of the river.
Aqautic Corridor – Principal
Connector with Trout Stream
100 foot, no averaging, as
required by the General Permit
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
Designation to Discharge Stormwater
Associated with Construction
Activity under the National
Pollution Discharge Elimination
System/State Disposal System
Program Permit MN R100001
(NPDES General Construction
Permit) issued by the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency,
August 1, 2003.
Aquatic Corridor – Tributary
Connector
50-foot average, 35-foot
minimum: plus 2 feet for every 1
percent of slope measured from
the meander belt of the tributary.
Water Quality Corridor 30-foot average, 20-foot
minimum where there is a flow
path for concentrated surface
runoff measured from the
centerline of the flow path.
ARTICLE H. ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION
6H-1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the
citizens of Scott County through the regulation of non-storm water discharges to the
urban or rural storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by
state and federal law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of
pollutants into a municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with
requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit
process.
The objectives of this article are to regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by
storm water discharges by any user; to prohibit illegal discharges and illicit connections
to the MS4; and to establish legal authority to carry out all enforcement procedures
necessary to ensure compliance with this ordinance.
6H-2 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall mean:
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
Illegal Discharge – Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the storm drain
system, except as exempted in Section 6H-4 of this article.
Illicit Connections – Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface that
allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system.
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) – The system of conveyances
(including sidewalks, roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins,
curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) owned and operated by
MS4 Townships and the County Road system in the Urban Area as defined by the
MPCA and designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water, and this is not
used for collecting or conveying sewage.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water Discharge
Permit – A permit issued by the EPA that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to
waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable to an individual, group, or
general area-wide basis.
Non-Storm Water Discharge – Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not
composed entirely of storm water.
Pollutant – Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include,
but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids,
non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes, refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter,
or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same
may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables, pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers;
hazardous substances and wastes, sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens, dissolved
and particulate metals; animal wastes, wastes or residues that result from constructing
a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
6H-3 APPLICABLILITY
This article applies to all water entering the storm drain system generated on any
developed and undeveloped lands in the MS4 Townships and County Road system in
the Urban Area as defined by the MPCA.
6H-4 PROHIBITION OF ILLEGAL DISCHARGES
1. No person shall throw, drain or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under
its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the MS4 any pollutants or
waters containing any pollutants, other than storm water.
2. The following discharges are exempt from prohibitions established in this section;
water line flushing, landscape irrigation, diverted stream flows, rising ground
waters, uncontaminated ground water infiltration and pumped ground water,
discharges from potable water sources, foundation drains, air conditions
Scott County Stormwater Management,
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 6 Erosion Control, and Wetlands
condensation, irrigation water, springs, lawn watering, individual residential car
washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, de-chlorinated swimming
pool discharges, and discharges or flow from firefighting as necessary to protect
public health and safety.
3. The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water discharge permitted under
an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and
administered under the authority of the EPA, provided that the discharger is in full
compliance with all requirements of the permit, wavier, or order and other
applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.
6H-5 PROHOBITION OF ILLICIT CONNECTIONS
1. The construction, use, and maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
2. A person is considered in violation of this ordinance if the person connects a line
conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.
3. Improper connections in violation of this ordinance must be disconnected and
redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system,
the sanitary sewer system, or other authorized disposal system.
6H-6 VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of
the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the
provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions and penalties
outlined Chapter 2, Section 13 of this Zoning Ordinance.
In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to the public health or safety
and declared a public health nuisance, the County shall abate the violation and the
costs of abatement may be assessed against the property where the health nuisance is
found.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 7 Specialty Housing
CHAPTER 7: SPECIALTY HOUSING
7-1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish performance standards for residential uses
that operate beyond the scope of traditional housing. These standards should be
applied to ensure that these specialty housing uses are reasonably compatible with their
surrounding environment.
7-2 BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS
7-2-1 Conditions of Approval
In addition to general procedures, standards and criteria provided in this Ordinance, a
bed and breakfast establishment may be allowed in applicable zoning districts provided
that:
1. A maximum of six (6) bed and breakfast units may be established in a
structure.
2. The facility shall have a state license (hotel and food), and comply with
building and fire codes as may be required or applicable.
3. The facility shall be owner or manager occupied.
4. The principal structure shall have a minimum size of one thousand five
hundred (1,500) gross square feet and shall be located on a lot which
meets the minimum lot size of the district in which it is located.
5. All bed and breakfast units shall be established within the principal
structure.
6. Not more than the equivalent of one (1) full time person shall be employed
by the bed and breakfast facility who is not a resident of the structure.
7. Dining and other facilities shall not be open to the general public but shall
be used exclusively by the registered guests and residents.
8. Two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for the home plus one
(1) off-street parking space for each bed and breakfast unit. Parking
areas shall be screened and landscaped pursuant to Chapter 4 of this
Ordinance.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 7 Specialty Housing
9. Not more than one (1) identification sign not exceeding twelve (12) square
feet in area may be attached to each wall which faces a street. The sign
shall be reflective of the architectural features of the structure and may not
be internally illuminated or lighted between 10:00 PM and 6:00 AM.
10. Adequate lighting shall be provided between the principal structure and
the parking area for safety purposes.
7-3 MOBILE HOMES
7-3-1 Mobile Home for Full Time Farm Employment
In addition to general procedures, standards and criteria provided in this Ordinance, a
mobile home for full time farm employment may be allowed in applicable zoning districts
providing the following:
1. The farm has a minimum of eighty (80) acres and is being actively farmed.
2. At least one occupant of the mobile home and farm home shall work a
minimum of forty (40) hours per week in the agricultural operation.
3. The mobile home shall be located on the farm with the principal residence.
4. The applicant shall submit with the application, and annually thereafter, a
signed statement certifying that the occupant of the farm related mobile
home has and will be employed on the farm at least 40 hours per week.
5. The mobile home shall be removed from the site within sixty (60) days
after it ceases to be farm related under the criteria of (1) above.
6. The mobile home shall not be made a permanent structure.
7. An individual sewage treatment system shall be installed in accordance
with Scott County Individual Sewage Treatment System Ordinance No. 4
and applicable State laws, as amended.
8. The applicant shall demonstrate the need for the farm related mobile
home.
9. The permit shall be reviewed every two (2) years by the Township Board
for compliance. The Township Board shall report the status of the permit
to the Planning Department.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 7 Specialty Housing
7-3-2 Mobile Home for Infirmed Family Member
In addition to general procedures, standards and criteria provided in this Ordinance, a
mobile home for infirmed family members may be allowed in applicable zoning districts
under the following conditions:
1. The parcel of property shall be a minimum of ten (10) acres in size and
must have a permanent residence existing on the property.
2. The mobile home shall be occupied by an infirmed family member of the
owners and residents of the parcel of property. For the purpose of this
Section, the term "infirmed" shall mean "being of such state of mind or
body as to require assistance in maintaining oneself."
3. The mobile home shall be removed from the property within sixty (60)
days after the mobile home is vacated by the person or persons for whom
the interim use was granted.
4. Any funds expended by the County in the removal of the mobile home
shall be paid by the owners of the property on which the interim use has
been granted.
5. A letter shall be signed and submitted by a licensed medical doctor
certifying that the person or persons who will be occupying the mobile
home are infirmed.
6. The mobile home shall meet all setback requirements of the zoning
district, including individual sewage treatment system setbacks. A
common sewage treatment system and common water system may be
used upon proof to the Planning Department that these systems are
adequate for the additional use proposed.
7. Additional conditions may be recommended by the Planning Advisory
Commission and imposed by the County Board.
7-3-3 Mobile Home While Building a Home
In addition to general procedures, standards and criteria provided in this Ordinance, a
mobile home while building a single family dwelling may be allowed in applicable zoning
districts for a period of six (6) months under the following conditions:
1. The issuance of a building permit for a permanent residential home has
been issued.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 7 Specialty Housing
2. The mobile home shall be occupied by the property owner of the building
site parcel during construction.
3. The mobile home shall be located on the same tract as approved for the
building permit.
4. The mobile home shall be connected to the individual sewage treatment
system as well as approved in the building permit application.
5. The applicant shall provide a five thousand dollar ($5,000.00) financial
guarantee to insure the prompt removal of the mobile home. The mobile
home shall be removed from the property within thirty (30) days of
issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the new home.
6. The applicant shall show proof of financial assurance before approval of
the interim use permit.
7. If a residential dwelling becomes uninhabitable through fire, natural
disaster, or occurrence uncontrollable by the owner, a temporary permit
may be granted by the County Board for up to forty-five (45) days. The
applicant is still required to apply for an interim use permit. The temporary
permit does not mean the interim use permit will be granted.
7-4 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS
7-4-1 Purpose
The purpose of this Section is to allow accessory dwelling units to provide additional
housing opportunities for large or extended families, family members infirmed or with
disabilities, and/or elderly family members with a need for semi- independent living
situations. Accessory dwelling units have been found to be a compatible secondary or
subordinate use to Single Family Dwellings that under certain performance standards
will not negatively alter the character of the surrounding neighborhood. An accessory
dwelling unit is not designed nor intended to conflict with the purpose and intent of a
specific zoning district or act as an alternative to increase residential dwelling density.
7-4-2 Permit/Application Procedures
1. In addition to general procedures, standards and criteria provided in this
Ordinance, attached accessory dwelling units and detached accessory
dwelling units may be allowed in applicable zoning districts provided they
are consistent with the eligibility and performance standards outlined in
Sections 7-4-3 and 7-4-4.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 7 Specialty Housing
2. Fees. The zoning application fee and annual inspection fee shall be
established by resolution of the County Board.
7-4-3 Eligibility
1. Any lot proposed for an accessory dwelling unit shall contain a principal
single family dwelling.
Exception for New Single Family Construction. An attached accessory
dwelling unit may be approved conditional to the unit being constructed
concurrently with the principal single family dwelling.
2. The principal single family dwelling on the lot shall be owner-occupied.
3. Minimum Lot Size for Detached Accessory Dwelling Units. The lot on
which a detached accessory dwelling unit is located shall be at least five
(5) acres in size.
7-4-4 Performance Standards
1. Not more than one (1) accessory dwelling unit shall be allowed on a lot.
2. Occupancy of the accessory dwelling unit is limited to family members
related by blood, marriage, or adoption. There shall be an annual
verification that the persons living in the accessory dwelling unit are family
members as defined herein.
3. Size. In no case shall the habitable square footage of an accessory
dwelling unit be more than forty (40) percent of the habitable area of the
principal single family dwelling, nor more than eight hundred (800) square
feet, nor less than three hundred (300) square feet. For the purposes of
accessory dwelling units within or attached to a garage, only the habitable
portion shall be calculated for accessory dwelling unit size requirements.
4. Amenities. An accessory dwelling unit shall not contain more than one (1)
bathroom, one (1) kitchen (with or without eating area), one (1) utility
room, two (2) bedrooms, and one (1) living/multi-purpose room.
5. Sewage treatment shall be provided for the accessory dwelling unit in
accordance with the Scott County Individual Sewage Treatment System
Ordinance No. 4.
6. Off-Street Parking. In addition to the parking spaces required for the
principal single family dwelling on the lot, two (2) off-street parking spaces
shall be provided for the accessory dwelling unit.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 7 Specialty Housing
7. Driveway. An accessory dwelling unit and its supporting parking area
shall be served by the same driveway and access that serves the principal
single family dwelling.
8. Detached Accessory Dwelling Unit Setbacks. In addition to meeting
principal building setbacks, the detached accessory dwelling unit shall be
located in the side or rear yard of the principal single family dwelling and
be separated by at least ten (10) feet from the principal single family
dwelling, but not more than one hundred fifty (150) feet.
9. Design and Appearance.
a. The exterior design of an accessory dwelling unit shall incorporate
a similar architectural style, roof pitch, colors, and materials as the
principal single family dwelling on the lot.
b. Attached accessory dwelling units shall be designed so that, to the
degree reasonably feasible, the appearance of the building remains
that of a single family dwelling.
c. Detached accessory dwelling units shall be situated in such a way
as to minimize its visibility from adjacent streets and properties.
d. All related aesthetic matters including architecture and landscaping
shall be subject to review by the Planning Department.
10. An accessory dwelling unit shall not be subdivided nor otherwise
segregated in ownership from the principal single family dwelling.
11. All kitchen appliances and/or plumbing equipment shall be removed once
the accessory dwelling unit is no longer occupied by a family member.
12. Other Regulations. The accessory dwelling unit shall comply with all other
local and state regulations.
13. Additional conditions may be imposed to ensure that the proposed use is
compatible with the surrounding land uses.
7-4-5 Elimination/Expiration
1. Termination. Any accessory dwelling unit permit may be terminated if the
use in question violates any of the standards of this Ordinance, or any
conditions placed on the permit.
2. Expiration. Any accessory dwelling unit permit shall expire upon the
occurrence of any of the following events:
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 7 Specialty Housing
a. Re-zoning of the property to a zoning district in which accessory
dwelling unit is not specified as an allowable use.
b. The unit is no longer occupied by a family member as defined in
Section 7-4-4.
c. All kitchen appliances and/or plumbing equipment are removed and
the unit no longer meets the definition of a dwelling unit.
Scott County Home Occupations and
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 8 Home Extended Businesses
CHAPTER 8: HOME OCCUPATIONS AND HOME EXTENDED
BUSINESSES
8-1 HOME OCCUPATIONS
8-1-1 Purpose
The purpose of this Section is to provide a means through the establishment of specific
standards and procedures by which home occupations may be conducted in residential
and agricultural areas without jeopardizing land use harmony and compatibility, and the
health, safety, and general welfare of the surrounding neighborhood.
8-1-2 Permit
In addition to general procedures, standards and criteria provided in this Ordinance,
home occupations may be allowed in applicable zoning districts provided they are
consistent with the performance standards outlined in Section 8-1-3.
8-1-3 Performance Standards
Home occupations shall be allowed if the following standards are met:
1. The business shall be located within the principal structure of the property
of the business owner.
2. Not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the gross floor area of the
residence shall be used for the home occupation.
3. No stock-in-trade shall be displayed so as to be visible from any street.
4. No person shall be employed other than a member of the household
residing on the premises.
5. Noise levels which constitute a nuisance shall be prohibited as regulated in
the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency’s Noise Pollution Control Rules
(NPCR).
6. The home occupation shall not generate more than three (3)
client/customer vehicles at any one time and all parking shall be provided
on-site.
7. The home occupation shall not require alterations to the exterior of the
residence or change the residential character.
Scott County Home Occupations and
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 8 Home Extended Businesses
8. One business sign shall be permitted, no larger than twelve (12) square
feet in area per surface. Signs shall not be constructed to have more than
two (2) surfaces and shall not be illuminated.
9. No outside storage shall be permitted.
10. An individual sewage treatment system shall be designed and sized to
accommodate both the residential use and the home occupation in
accordance with Scott County Individual Sewage Treatment System
Ordinance No. 4, as amended.
11. The home occupation shall comply with all county, state and federal
regulations.
8-2 HOME EXTENDED BUSINESSES
8-2-1 Purpose
The purpose of this Section is to establish standards for home extended businesses to
ensure that these uses are reasonably compatible with their surrounding environment.
8-2-2 Exceptions
The following uses shall not be classified as a home extended business:
1. Property owners who park or store one (1) vehicle used for any business
use and one (1) trailer with associated equipment parked on the trailer,
either indoors or outdoors, provided that it is not used for transporting
hazardous, flammable, or biological materials may be permitted in all
zoning districts except for lots less than ten (10) acres in the Rural
Residential Reserve Cluster, Rural Residential Single Family, Residential
Suburban, Urban Transition Reserve Cluster and Urban Expansion
Reserve Cluster Districts. The property owner must be the only employee
of the business.
Property owners of lots less than ten (10) acres in the Rural Residential
Reserve Cluster, Rural Residential Single Family, Residential Suburban,
Urban Transition Reserve Cluster and Urban Expansion Reserve Cluster
Districts may be permitted to park or store one (1) business associated
vehicle not exceeding one (1) ton and one (1) trailer with associated
equipment on the trailer, either indoors or outdoors, provided that it is not
used for transporting hazardous, or flammable materials. The property
owner must be the only employee of the business. Storage of business
associated supplies must be kept indoors.
Scott County Home Occupations and
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 8 Home Extended Businesses
2. Any on-site outdoor storage of commercial or agricultural equipment or
vehicles associated with an active farming operation.
8-2-3 Permit
In addition to general procedures, standards and criteria provided in this Ordinance,
home extended businesses may be allowed in the applicable zoning district provided
consistency with the standards outlined in Sections 8-2-4, 8-2-5, and 8-2-6.
8-2-4 General Performance Standards
The following standards apply to home extended businesses in all applicable zoning
districts:
1. The business shall be located on the homestead property of the business
owner.
2. There shall be no more than one non-resident employee working on-site.
3. The property on which the home extended business is located shall be at
least five (5) acres in size, unless the specific zoning district requires a
larger minimum lot size.
4. All buildings used in conjunction with the home extended business shall
meet the requirements of the State Building Code.
5. All on-site production, assembly, sales, and service shall be conducted
within a building approved for the extended home business.
6. All equipment and vehicles shall be stored within an enclosed structure,
except in agricultural districts where outdoor storage may be allowed
under Section 8-2-5 of this Ordinance.
7. A landscape plan may be required that illustrates screening from adjacent
public right-of-way and adjacent residential uses.
8. On-site parking shall be provided.
9. Noise levels which constitute a nuisance shall be prohibited as regulated
in the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency's Noise Pollution Control Rules
(NPCR).
10. No liquid, gaseous and solid wastes resulting from the use shall be
discharged into the soil, water or air until the specific methods and means
of discharge have been reviewed and approved by the appropriate county,
state or federal agency.
Scott County Home Occupations and
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 8 Home Extended Businesses
11. The operator shall provide evidence of a contract for the removal of all
solid wastes by a licensed hauler to an approved site.
12. The use shall comply with the Scott County Hazardous Waste
Management Ordinance.
13. The use shall comply with Minnesota Statutes if the property is enrolled in
the Agricultural Preserve Program.
14. The site access shall be from a hard surface road unless access via a
gravel road is approved by the road authority.
15. One business sign shall be permitted, no larger than twelve (12) square
feet in area per surface. Signs shall not be constructed to have more than
two (2) surfaces and shall not be illuminated.
16. An Individual Sewage Treatment System shall be provided for the home
extended business in accordance with the Scott County Individual Sewage
Treatment System Ordinance No. 4.
17. The use shall comply with all applicable county, state and federal
regulations.
18. If the site conditions or nature of the activity generates excessive dust,
appropriate control measures may be required.
19. The home extended business shall be limited to three (3) business
associated vehicles.
20. On-site working hours may be set by the County.
21. For parcels less than fifteen (15) acres in size, the accessory structure use
for home extended businesses shall not exceed zoning district standards
for non-agricultural accessory building floor area.
22. For parcels fifteen (15) acres and larger in size, the size of accessory
structure use for home extended businesses can be increased up to six
thousand (6,000) square feet provided the following conditions are met:
a. Accessory structures that exceed zoning district standards must be
setback at least one hundred (100) feet from all property lines, in
addition to all other applicable setbacks.
Scott County Home Occupations and
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 8 Home Extended Businesses
23. Additional conditions may be imposed by the Planning Advisory
Commission and County Board to ensure that the proposed use is
compatible with the surrounding land uses.
8-2-5 Performance Standards – Agricultural Zoning Districts
The following standards apply to home extended businesses within Agricultural zoning
districts, in addition to the general performance standards.
1. Outdoor storage may be allowed for home extended businesses in
agricultural zoning districts provided the following conditions are met:
a. The outdoor area shall not exceed three thousand (3,000) square
feet in area.
b. The outdoor storage area is delineated by fence.
c. The outdoor storage area is located at least one hundred (100) feet
from adjoining property lines.
d. The outdoor storage is screened from the view of adjoining
residential uses and public right-of-way.
e. The height of storage materials shall not exceed the height of
screening provided.
8-2-6 Performance Standards – Rural Residential and Urban Reserve Zoning
Districts
The following standards apply to home extended businesses within Rural Residential
and Urban Reserve Zoning Districts, in addition to the general performance standards:
1. Outdoor storage of equipment, supplies, or products is prohibited.
8-2-7 Termination and Expiration of Home Extended Businesses or Interim Use
Permits
1. Termination. The County Board may terminate any home extended
business interim use permit if the use in question violates any of the
standards of this Ordinance, or other conditions placed on the permit by
the County Board.
2. Expiration. Any home extended business interim use permits will expire
upon the occurrence of any of the following events:
a. Re-subdivision of the property.
Scott County Home Occupations and
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 8 Home Extended Businesses
b. Rezoning of the property.
c. Changes or amendments to the Comprehensive Plan that affect the
property on which a home extended business exists.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 9 Animals, Stables, and Feedlots
CHAPTER 9: ANIMALS, STABLES, AND FEEDLOTS
9-1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide standards for the keeping of animals in
association with various allowed uses in a manner compatible with surrounding uses
and consistent with the health, safety and general welfare of the community.
9-2 LIMITED LIVESTOCK RAISING
9-2-1 Applicability - This section shall only apply to agricultural operations meeting the
definition of Limited Livestock Raising in Chapter 16.
9-2-2 Animal Unit Measurement - A unit of measure used to compare differences in
the production of animal wastes which has a standard amount of waste produced on a
regular basis by a slaughter steer or heifer. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the
following equivalents apply:
To determine the animal unit measure for any animal not specified below, divide the
average adult weight by one-thousand (1,000).
Animal
Unit
No. of
Animals Per
Acre
Equivalent Animal Units (AU)
250 AU’s 500 AU’s
(1) Slaughter Steer or Heifer 1.0 1.0 250 500
(1) Cow and Calf Pair 1.2 .8 208 417
Mature Dairy Cow
(1) Over 1,000 lbs.
(1) Under 1,000 lbs.
1.4
1.0
.7
1.0
179
250
357
500
Swine
(1) Over 300 lbs.
(1) Between 55-300 lbs.
(1) Under 55 lbs.
.4
.3
.05
2.5
3.3
20.0
625
833
5,000
1,250
1,667
10,000
(1) Sheep or lamb .1 10 2,500 5,000
(1) Duck .01 100.0 25,000 50,000
Turkey
(1) Over 5 lbs.
(1) Under 5 lbs.
.018
.005
55.6
200.0
13,889
50,000
27,779
100,000
Chickens (Dry Manure)
(1) Over 5 lbs.
(1) Under 5 lbs.
.005
.003
200.0
333.3
50,000
83,333
100,000
166,667
(1) Chicken (Liquid Manure) .033 30.3 7,576 15,152
(1) Horse 1.0 1.0 250 500
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 9 Animals, Stables, and Feedlots
9-2-3 Maximum Animal Unit Density
1. Except as provided under Par. 3, below, no livestock shall be kept on any
single parcel or contiguous parcels having less than a total of two (2)
acres of Productive Acreage for the first animal unity and one (1)
Productive Acreage for each additional animal unit. For the purposes of
this section, contiguous parcels shall mean two or more parcels of land
that are under common ownership and within two miles of each other, as
measured along a public right-of-way.
2. For private equine operations where horses are kept in an enclosed
structure in an in-house operation, the number of animals may exceed the
allowed animal unit density under Par. 1, above, through a conditional use
permit. The plan submitted shall include a building plan, drawn to scale,
site plan and a detailed operations plan. The plan shall include an area
providing daily exercise, interior building layout and equine confinement
areas, which shall not be less than one hundred (100) square feet per
equine. All new or expansion of existing feedlots shall comply with section
9-4.
3. The County may by Administrative Permit allow livestock densities that
exceed the limits under Par. 1, above, subject to the following:
a. Application: The applicant shall submit, at a minimum, the following
information for review by the County:
(1) A scaled map or drawing that shows with reasonably clarity
and accuracy the location of existing and proposed buildings,
Pastures, cropland, Feedlots, and manure storage and
disposal areas;
(2) The proposed type and number of animals;
(3) The proposed method of collecting, storing, and disposing of
manure;
(4) The proposed measures to minimize odor and control insects;
(5) The proposed method of disposal of dead, dying, or diseased
animals; and
(6) The proposed method to manage runoff from any feedlot or
manure stockpile areas.
b. Conditions: The applicant shall comply with the following for the
duration of the Permit:
1. Collect, manage and dispose of manure in accordance with a
manure management plan approved by the Scott Soil and Water
Conservation District. If the applicant does not own sufficient land
to dispose of manure in accordance with the approved manure
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 9 Animals, Stables, and Feedlots
management plan, the applicant shall secure through legal and
binding instrument the rights to spread manure on nearby
Productive Land. The permit holder shall upon request by the
County provide evidence that such legal instrument(s) are in effect,
and that the agreement(s) cover the minimum acreage required to
enable disposal of the manure in accordance with the approved
manure management plan.
2. Ensure all areas grazed by livestock meet the minimum vegetative
cover requirements set forth in the definition of Pasture.
3. Effectively control odor and insects.
4. Effectively prevent manure runoff in compliance with applicable
state and local feedlot regulations.
5. Other conditions the County considers reasonable and necessary
to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
c. Annual Review: Any Administrative Permit issued under this section
shall be subject to annual review. Failure to comply with the
conditions set forth in the permit is cause for revocation of the
permit and constitutes a violation of this Ordinance.
9-2-4 Poultry Raising
On parcels less than 10 acres in the RR-2, RR-3, RR-1C, UTR-C, and UER-C Zoning
Districts, limited raising of poultry animals (chickens, ducks, turkeys, geese & related
fowl) may be permitted subject to the following regulations:
a. The maximum number of poultry animals shall be limited to: 10 animals on lots
between 0 - 2.49 acres; 20 animals on lots between 2.5 – 4.99 acres; 40 animals
on lots between 5.0 – 9.99 acres. Lots 10 acres or greater shall be regulated
according to other provisions in this chapter.
b. Roosters are not permitted on any lot or parcel less than 10 acres.
c. Poultry shall at all times be confined to the property and must be kept in enclosed
structures, coops, or runs. Enclosures, coops, and runs shall be set back 30 feet
from any property lines, and shall be located closer to the residence on the
subject parcel than to any other adjacent residence.
d. The poultry facilities shall be maintained and animal waste properly disposed so
to effectively control odor and insects.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 9 Animals, Stables, and Feedlots
9-3 STABLES
9-3-1 Private Horse Riding Arena
1. Private horse riding arenas may be allowed in all zoning districts, except
the Commercial and Industrial Districts, with the approval of a Conditional
Use Permit. The following are the minimum lot requirements:
a. Private horse riding arenas shall only be located on parcels having
an area of 10.0 acres or greater.
b. Private horse riding arenas shall meet minimum principal structure
front, side, and rear yard setback standards in all applicable zoning
districts.
2. Private horse riding arenas may be exempted up to 10,000 square feet
from the allowed accessory building size on parcels between 10.0 and
39.99 acres. No private riding arena shall exceed 10,000 square feet in
gross floor area unless the applicant designates the accessory building
floor area that would otherwise be allowed as personal storage on their
parcel as additional floor area to be connected to and used as part of the
riding arena and other horse related uses.
a. If the interior layout indicates that a portion of the allowed
accessory building area within the riding arena will be used for
personal storage (all types of trailers, boats, vehicles, equipment,
workshops, etc), that area designated as personal storage shall be
physically separated from the rest of the building, as approved by
the Planning Department.
3. Horse stalls, tack rooms, supply rooms, horse wash rooms, and all other
horse related uses/rooms within the riding arena may occupy a maximum
of 20% of the total floor area of the proposed building. If part of the
building is used for personal storage as identified in 9-3-2-2a, that area
designated as personal storage shall not be included in the calculation
that determines the size of floor area that will be allowed for horse related
uses.
4. In addition to the submittal requirements in Chapter 2, the following shall
be submitted: Site survey with all existing and proposed improvements
indicated, building elevations, interior building layout/floor plan indicating
use of each room/area in the riding arena, vehicle parking area, outdoor
fencing and paddock areas, type of footing/flooring material to be installed,
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 9 Animals, Stables, and Feedlots
and a detailed operations plan of how the applicant intends to use/operate
the private horse arena.
5. The footing material in the horse riding arena shall be sand, wood chips,
stone-dust, or other surface approved by the Planning Commission.
9-3-2 Public Stables
Conditions for the operation of a public stable within applicable zoning districts shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. Provision for plans, drawn to scale, of the public stable operation shall
include a site plan, consistent with Section 2-10 of this Ordinance, building
plans to be designed as a commercial building, operational plans,
elevations, trails, signs, lighting, parking, individual sewage treatment
system and well systems. A plan shall be submitted for fences, paddocks
and outside arenas to be constructed and maintained to safely contain
equine at all times. A productive acreage determination will be required.
2. When the public stable property is less than forty (40) acres, the property
shall have a minimum of two (2) productive acres for the first equine and
one (1) productive acre for each additional equine. If equine are kept in
an in-house operation, this density may be increased pending a building
plan, drawn to scale, site plan and detailed operations plan. The plan
shall include an area providing daily exercise, interior building layout and
equine confinement areas, which shall be not less than one hundred (100)
square feet per equine.
3. All structures, parking lots, and storage areas shall be set back at least
one hundred (100) feet from the property line and at least two hundred
(200) feet from an adjacent parcel residence or well. .
4. The applicant shall submit a plan for manure handling, removal of other
waste materials, and receive a Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
Feedlot Permit, if required. The plan shall provide for the storage of
manure and other waste materials at least one hundred (200) feet from an
adjacent parcel residence or well.
5. Depending upon the size of the operation, one employee dwelling unit
may be allowed as part of the public stable operation. This shall be
submitted as part of the detailed plan.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 9 Animals, Stables, and Feedlots
9-4 FEEDLOTS
9-4-1 Setbacks
1. New or expanding feedlots shall comply with the following setback
requirements:
1100 - 250
Animal Units
250 +
Animal Units
Existing residence other than operator
or a member of the operator’s family
500 feet 11,000 feet
Property line 100 feet 1100 feet
DNR Protected Wetland 75 feet 75 feet
Public ditch-not DNR protected 100 feet 1100 feet
Public road right-of-way 50 feet 50 feet
DNR protected watercourse or tributary 300 feet 300 feet
DNR Protected Lakes* 1,000 feet 1,000 feet
* Existing feedlots within a Shoreland Overlay District may not be expanded toward the
OHWL of the lake beyond the feedlot’s existing setback.
2. New residences shall be set back five hundred (500) feet from feedlots
containing between one hundred (100) and two hundred fifty (250) animal
units and one thousand (1,000) feet from feedlots of two hundred fifty
(250) animal units or more. This provision does not apply to dwellings
constructed as a principal residence on the same parcel and under the
same ownership as the feedlot.
3. New feedlot operations having fifty (50) or more animal units shall be located
one (1) mile or more from a city boundary or existing public sewer or water.
9-4-2 Prohibitions
New or expansion of existing feedlots shall be prohibited in the Floodplain District.
9-4-3 MPCA Permit
New or expansion of existing feedlots shall obtain a Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
Feedlot Permit, if required, and comply with all requirements.
9-4-4 Standards for Conditional Use Permits
1. The County shall review the impact of the feedlot and its effect on the
neighborhood and environment. The review shall include, but not be
limited to, the following criteria:
a. The size of the operation and type of animal raised in the operation.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 9 Animals, Stables, and Feedlots
b. The method of spreading or incorporating manure from the feedlot.
c. The measures which will be taken to minimize odor at the feedlot
site and during the disposal of manure.
d. The method of disposal of dead, dying, or diseased animals.
e. The method of controlling runoff from the feedlot in compliance with
applicable state and local standards.
2. Conditional use permits shall be in effect only as long as land specified for
spreading or incorporating manure is available for such purposes.
3. Land spreading agreements shall be provided if the applicant does not
own the minimum acreage as required in the manure management plan
and that minimum must be under agreement throughout the lifetime of the
permitted feedlot. Any shortage of minimum required acreage is cause for
revocation of the permit and constitutes a violation of this Ordinance.
4. The applicant shall receive an approved Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency Feedlot Permit.
5. All feedlots shall be operated consistent with the Certificate of
Compliance.
6. Additional conditions may be imposed which the Planning Advisory
Commission and County Board consider necessary to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 10 Mining
CHAPTER 10: MINING
10-1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Section is to control mining operations so as to minimize conflicts
with adjacent land uses and to ensure that the mining area is reclaimed with a use
compatible with the Comprehensive Land Use Plan and completely restored at the
completion of the mining operation.
10-2 ADMINISTRATION
1. Permit Review. An interim use permit shall be required for all mining
operations. All existing operations shall obtain a permit within five (5)
years following adoption of this Ordinance. The County Board may also
require a performance bond or some other form of financial guarantee
from the landowner to ensure that the conditions in this Section are met.
2. Portable asphalt and concrete mixing plants may be allowed without a
public hearing before the Planning Advisory Commission in all applicable
districts if an interim use permit is already approved for the gravel pit in
which it will be located, the plant will provide material primarily for a public
project, and providing the portable asphalt or concrete mixing plant is to
be operated for a maximum two hundred forty (240) hours annually,
unless an extension is approved.
3. The applicant shall apply to the Planning Department to locate a portable
asphalt or concrete mixing plant in the gravel pit. Issuance of the permit
requires a Township Board recommendation and approval of the County
Board. Conditions of the permit shall consist of, but not be limited to,
pollution control standards, hours of operation, setbacks, haul roads, area
where plant is to be located, slopes, etc. Neighboring property owners
within one-quarter (1/4) mile shall be notified of the County Board meeting
at which the permit application will be considered.
4. Portable asphalt and concrete plants which operate more than two
hundred forty (240) hours annually may be approved by the County Board
through the issuance of a interim use permit in the A-1 Agricultural, A-3
Agricultural Cluster, and the RR-1 Rural Residential Reserve districts,
provided an interim use permit is already approved for the mining
operation in which it will be located, subject to the following standards:
a. The area approved for mining through the Interim use permit must
encompass a minimum of forty (40) acres.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 10 Mining
b. The concrete plant or asphalt plant must be a minimum of 1/4 mile
from a primary residential building other than the operators.
c. The concrete plant or asphalt plant must be a minimum of ½ mile
from any RR-1C (Rural Residential Cluster), RR-2 (Rural
Residential Single Family), RR-3 (Residential Suburban Single
Family), UER-C (Urban Expansion Reserve Cluster), and UTR-C
(Urban Transition Reserve Cluster) zoning districts.
d. The plant and equipment must be located and screened in such a
manner so as to have the least environmental and aesthetic impact
on adjacent properties.
e. Access roads to and from the mining site shall be paved. Traffic to
and from the mining site shall be routed to avoid streets that
primarily serve abutting residential properties.
f. All Federal, State and local air, water and noise standards must be
met. All necessary Federal, State and local permits shall be
obtained by the operator.
g. Hours of operation for Asphalt and concrete plants shall be 6:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday unless otherwise
stipulated in the approved interim use permit based on noise, traffic
and air control mitigation measures.
h. Aggregate mined on site must be adequate for use in asphalt or
concrete and must be the primary sources of aggregate used in the
plant.
5. Asphalt and concrete recycling facilities may be allowed as accessory
uses in gravel pit with an approved Interim Use or Conditional Use Permit
subject to the following standards:
a. A Scott County Solid Waste License is issued for the facility
(conditions may be placed on the license limiting volumes, stockpile
height, stockpile location, crushing hours, or any other conditions
the County or Township considers necessary to protect the interest
of the surrounding area).
b. A bond or letter of credit is established to ensure the removal of
stockpiled recycle material. The amount of the bond shall be
established by the County based on the volume of material stored
on-site.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 10 Mining
c. Processing of recycle material shall be done in compliance with
section 10-4 of this Chapter.
d. The maximum volume of recycle material on any one site shall not
exceed 30,000 cubic yards.
6. The operations covered by this Section shall be the mining, crushing,
washing, refining, or processing of sand, gravel, rock, black dirt, peat, and
soil and the removal thereof from the site.
7. For the purposes of this Chapter, mining shall not include the removal of
materials associated with the construction of a building, the removal of
excess materials in accordance with approved plats, utility or highway
construction, agricultural improvements within the property, sod removal
and minor wetland impacts under 20,000 square feet of cumulative
impacts (previous and proposed) that have received an approved “no loss”
or “exemption” determination from the local government unit administering
the Wetland Conservation Act.
8. Renewal of Mining Interim Use Permits. All property owners and residents
within one quarter (1/4) mile of the mining operation shall be notified of a
proposed mining interim use permit renewal request.
9. Annual Certificate of Permit Compliance. As a condition of any mining
interim use permit, the property owner and/or applicant shall annually
submit graphic and/or narrative information on the mining operation
demonstrating compliance with the approved interim use permit, progress
on restoration plans, and related conditions. Said compliance information
shall be submitted thirty (30) days prior to the anticipated opening date of
the mine each spring. The Planning Department shall review the
compliance information and conduct a field inspection to certify that the
mining operation is in compliance with the approved interim use permit
and financial guarantee or bonding are adequate to complete the
restoration. The certification shall be completed before mining begins.
Failure to submit the annual compliance information or violations of the
interim use permit may be grounds for revocation of the interim use
permit.
10-3 INFORMATION REQUIRED
The following information shall be provided by the person or agency requesting the
permit:
1. Name and address of person or agency requesting the mining permit.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 10 Mining
2. The legal property description and acreage of area to be mined.
3. The following maps of the entire site and including all areas within three
hundred fifty (350) feet of the site. All maps shall be drawn at a scale of
one (1) inch to one hundred (100) feet unless otherwise stated below.
Map A - Existing conditions to include:
a. Contour map (two (2) foot intervals).
b. Existing vegetation.
c. Wetlands and existing surface water drainage patterns.
d. Existing structures.
e. Existing wells.
Map B - Proposed Operations to include:
a. Structures to be erected.
b. Location of sites to be mined showing depth of proposed
excavation.
c. Location of machinery to be used in the mining operation.
d. Location of storage of mined materials, showing maximum
height of storage deposits.
e. Location of vehicle parking, access roads and local routes to
truck routes.
f. Location of storage of explosives.
g. Staging of mining activity.
h. Resource management plan.
Map C - End Use Plan to include:
a. Final grade of proposed site showing elevations and contour
lines at two (2) foot intervals.
b. Location and species of vegetation to be replanted.
c. Reclamation staging plan.
d. Proposed land use and development plan.
4. A plan for dust and noise control.
5. A complete description of all phases of the proposed operation to include
an estimate of duration of the mining operation, location and approximate
acreage of each stage, and time schedule for reclamation.
6. Any other information requested by the Planning Department, Planning
Advisory Commission and County Board.
10-4 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
For mining operations approved after the date of adoption of this Ordinance:
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 10 Mining
1. General Provisions. Weeds and any other unsightly or noxious vegetation
shall be cut or trimmed as may be necessary to preserve a reasonably
neat appearance and to minimize seeding on adjacent property. All
equipment used for mining and extraction operations shall be constructed,
maintained and operated in a manner to minimize, as far as practical,
noise, dust and vibrations adversely affecting the surrounding property.
2. Water Resources. The mining operation shall be conducted in such a
manner as to minimize interference with the surface water drainage
outside of the boundaries of the mining operation.
3. Safety Fencing. Safety fencing may be required around all or portions of
the mining operation at the discretion of the County.
4. Mining Access Roads. The location of the intersection of mining access
roads with any public roads shall be selected such that traffic on the
access roads will have a sufficient distance of public road in view so that
any turns onto the public road can be completed with a margin of safety as
determined by the Planning Department.
5. Screening Barrier. To minimize problems of dust and noise and to shield
mining operations from public view, a screening barrier may be required
between the mining site and adjacent properties. A screening barrier may
also be required between the mining site and any public road located
within five hundred (500) feet of any mining or processing operation. The
screening barrier shall be planted with a species of fast growing trees.
The tree species must be approved by the Planning Department.
6. Setback. Processing of minerals including recycle materials shall not be
conducted closer than one hundred (100) feet to the property line, nor
closer than five hundred (500) feet to any residential structures.
a. Mining operations shall not be conducted closer than two hundred
(200) feet to any residence or residential zoning district boundary
existing on the approval date of the mining interim use permit.
b. Mining operations shall not be conducted closer than thirty (30) feet
to any property line, or within thirty (30) feet of the right-of-way line
of any existing or platted street, road or highway, except that
excavating may be conducted within such limits in order to reduce
the elevation thereof in conformity to the existing or platted street,
road or highway engineering plans. Side slopes of the mining
operation shall be in conformance with the site plan.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 10 Mining
7. Appearance. All buildings, structures and equipment used for the
production or processing of sand and gravel shall be maintained in such a
manner as is practical and according to acceptable industrial practice to
assure that such buildings, structures and equipment will not become
dilapidated.
8. Hours of Operation. All hours of operation shall be set in the interim use
permit as approved by the County.
9. Access Roads. All access roads from mining operations to public
highways, roads or streets or to adjoining property, shall be paved or
otherwise maintained to control dust.
10. Mining Operations Within the Shoreland District. Mining and processing
operations shall be located consistent with setback standards for
structures from ordinary high water levels of public waters and from bluffs.
This distance does not apply to water pumps needed for mining
operations. However, appropriation of water shall require a permit from
the Department of Natural Resources, Division of Waters, if necessary.
10-5 LAND RECLAMATION
All mining sites shall be reclamated immediately after mining operations cease.
Reclamation shall be completed within one (1) year. The following standards shall
apply:
1. Within a period of three (3) months after the final termination of a mining
operation, or within three (3) months after abandonment of such operation
for a period of six (6) months, or within three (3) months after expiration of
a mining permit, all buildings, structures and plants incidental to such
operation shall be dismantled and removed by, and at the expense of, the
mining operator last operating such buildings, structures and plants. An
extension may be granted for those buildings, structures, machinery and
plants required to process previously mined materials stored on the site.
Security acceptable to the County shall be required. Such extension may
apply for only one (1) year, after which said buildings, structures,
machinery and plants shall be removed.
2. The peaks and depressions of the area shall be graded and back-filled to
a surface which will result in a gently rolling topography in substantial
conformity to the land area immediately surrounding, and which will
minimize erosion due to rainfall. No finished slope shall exceed twenty
(20) percent grade.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 10 Mining
3. Reclamation shall begin after the mining of twenty-five percent (25%) of
the total area to be mined or four (4) acres, whichever is less. Once these
areas have been depleted of the mine deposit they shall be sloped and
seeded in compliance with the end use plan.
4. Reclaimed areas shall be surfaced with soil of a quality at least equal to
the topsoil of land areas immediately surrounding, and to a depth of at
least six (6) inches. The topsoil shall be seeded, sodded, or planted.
Such planting shall adequately retard soil erosion.
5. The finished grade shall be such that it will not adversely affect the
surrounding land or future development of the site and shall be consistent
with the end use plan.
6. The above standards may be modified to provide for unique conditions.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 11 Signs
CHAPTER 11: SIGNS
11-1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Section is to regulate the placement and construction of signs for
the purposes of providing information and advertising in an orderly, effective, and safe
manner. Restrictions on type, location, and size of signs help preserve the character of
the County and protect the public from hazardous and distracting displays and to create
an attractive environment for the citizens and visitors alike which is conducive to
business, industry, and tourism.
11-2 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ALL ZONING DISTRICTS
All signs are subject to the following standards:
1. Setbacks. All signs shall be set back from the right-of-way of public roads
not less than ten (10) feet from the closest part of the sign. All signs shall
be set back ten (10) feet from adjacent property lines.
2. Placement near Railroad Crossings. No sign in excess of three (3) square
feet per surface with no more than two (2) surfaces shall be less than five
hundred (500) feet from the intersection of a public road and a railroad,
provided that advertising may be affixed to or located adjacent to a
building at such intersection in such a manner as not to cause any greater
obstruction of vision than that caused by the building itself.
3. Building and Electrical Permits. Any freestanding sign in excess of thirtytwo
(32) feet in area or any sign requiring footings shall require a building
permit. Any sign involving electrical components shall have the
appropriate electrical permit and approval by the state electrical inspector.
4. Signs on Public Property. Private signs are prohibited on all public
property (public land, right-of-way, dedicated easements, etc.), except the
following signs may be placed within public right-of-way provided they do
not interfere with traffic or visibility:
a. Public announcement signs for community events by civic and nonprofit
groups. Signs shall be removed within seven (7) days of the
event.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 11 Signs
b. Directional real estate signs for community-wide annual events
such as the “Parade of Homes”. Signs shall be removed within
seven (7) days of the event.
c. Street, warning, directional and other official signs erected by a
government agency.
d. Special event signs erected by the County.
5. Illuminated Signs. Illuminated signs may be permitted, but dynamic
display signs or devices giving off an intermittent or rotating beam of light
shall be prohibited. Flood lighting shall be focused upon the sign. No
lighting for signs shall directly reflect light beams onto any public street, or
residential structure. Signs may not be illuminated beyond any lot line.
11-3 SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS
Signs are a permitted accessory use in all zoning districts subject to the following
standards.
1. Real Estate Signs. A real estate sign for the purpose of selling, renting or
leasing a single parcel, not in excess of twelve (12) square feet per
surface and with no more than two (2) surfaces, may be placed within the
front yard of the property. Real estate signs exceeding twelve (12) square
feet per surface shall be allowed in Commercial and Industrial zoning
districts as provided in Section 11-5 of this Ordinance.
2. Temporary Signs. There shall be no more than one temporary sign on
any lot, and such sign shall not exceed twenty five (25) square feet per
surface with no more than two (2) surfaces, which may remain on site a
maximum of ten (10) days.
3. Election Signs. Election signs provided such signs are removed within ten
(10) days following the election to which the sign is related. No election
sign shall be permitted more than two (2) months preceding the election to
which the sign relates.
4. Ideological Signs. One ideological, non-commercial sign per parcel, which
does not advertise a product, service, or business, but expresses a
viewpoint, opinion, idea or non-commercial message such as a message
pertaining to politics, religion or charity, may be permitted but in no case
shall the total sign area exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per surface with
no more than two (2) surfaces. Such sign shall be maintained in a neat
and orderly manner.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 11 Signs
5. Identification Signs. One area identification sign, not to exceed thirty-two
(32) square feet per surface with no sign having more than two (2)
surfaces, shall be allowed for each street entrance to a development or
municipality. Sign permit required for sign in excess of twelve (12) square
feet.
11-4 SIGNS PERMITTED IN AGRICULTURAL, RURAL RESIDENTIAL,
RESIDENTIAL SUBURBAN, AND URBAN RESERVE DISTRICTS
1. One name plate sign for each dwelling unit not to exceed two (2) square
feet in area per surface, and no sign shall be so constructed as to have
more than two (2) surfaces.
2. One sign for each permitted non-residential use or use by conditional use
permit. Such signs shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area per
surface and no sign shall be so constructed as to have more than two (2)
surfaces. On principal arterial and minor arterial streets, signs in excess
of twelve (12) square feet may be permitted by conditional use permit, but
in no case shall the total square footage exceed sixty-four (64) square feet
per surface or one hundred twenty-eight (128) total square feet. Sign
permit required for signs in excess of twelve (12) square feet.
3. Symbols, statues, sculptures and integrated architectural features on
buildings may be illuminated by flood lights provided the source of light is
not visible from a public right-of-way or adjacent property.
4. No sign shall exceed ten (10) feet in height above the average grade level.
5. For the purpose of selling or promoting a residential project, one sign not
to exceed eighty (80) square feet per surface with no more than two (2)
surfaces may be erected on the project site. Sign permit required for sign
in excess of twelve (12) square feet.
6. Crop demonstration signs advertising the use of a particular variety,
brand, or type of agricultural plant, chemical or tillage.
7. Agricultural product signs indicating that the proprietor of a farm is a
dealer in seed, fertilizer, or other agricultural products only when such
dealership is incidental to the primary agricultural business of the farm.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 11 Signs
11-5 SIGNS PERMITTED IN COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
1. Total Sign Area. The aggregate square footage of sign space per lot,
including all sign surfaces, shall not exceed two hundred fifty (250) square
feet.
2. Free Standing Sign. One (1) free standing sign (pole or monument sign)
shall be allowed per lot.
a. Monument Sign. The total sign area of the monument sign shall
not exceed one hundred (100) square feet with a maximum of ten
(10) feet in height above the average grade. The monument sign
materials, color and related elements shall be consistent with the
overall site design and architecture of the principal building on the
lot and is subject to the approval of the Planning Department.
b. Pole Sign. The total sign area of the pole sign shall not exceed
seventy-five (75) square feet with a maximum height of twenty-five
(25) feet in height above the average grade.
c. Electronic Message Center (EMC). The total EMC sign area shall
not exceed 40% of the allowable square footage (per side for
double sided signs). Displays may not change or move more often
than once every ten (10) seconds, except one for which changes
are necessary to correct hour-and-minute, date, or temperature
information. Off-premises advertisements are prohibited.
Messages shall change instantaneously and shall not fade, change
color, dissolve, blink, or appear to simulate motion in any way. Use
of animation, frame effects, video and flashing components is
prohibited. The display must freeze in one position if a malfunction
occurs. The display must also be equipped with a means to
immediately discontinue the display if it malfunctions, and the sign
owner/operator must immediately stop the display when notified by
the County that it is not in compliance with this chapter.
3. Wall Sign. The total sign area of wall signage shall not exceed one (1)
square foot of sign area for each lineal foot of building frontage up to a
maximum of two hundred (200) square feet.
4. Real Estate Sign. For the purpose of selling or promoting a commercial or
an industrial project, one real estate sales sign not to exceed a total of one
hundred thirty (130) square feet with no more than two (2) surfaces, may
be erected upon the project site.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 11 Signs
11-6 PROHIBITED SIGNS
The following types of signs are expressly prohibited in all zoning districts:
1. No sign shall contain any indecent or obscene picture or wording.
2. Roof signs including signs mounted on a roof surface or projecting above
the roof line or a structure if either attached to the structure or cantilevered
over the structure.
3. Revolving and moving signs.
4. Flashing and animated signs.
5. No private sign shall be erected that resembles any official marker erected
by a government agency nor shall any private sign display words such as
"stop" or "danger", or otherwise constitute a traffic hazard.
6. Signs that obstruct the vision of pedestrians, cyclists, or motorists traveling
on or entering public streets.
7. No sign shall be painted directly on the roof or outside wall of a building.
Works of art that are not commercial messages are exempt.
8. Signs affixed to vehicles and/or trailers that are parked on a public right-ofway,
public property, or private property so as to be visible from a public
right-of-way where the apparent purpose is to advertise a product or direct
people to an activity located on the same or a nearby property shall be
prohibited. Signs affixed to vehicles where the sign is incidental to the use
of the vehicle are not prohibited.
9. No sign shall be painted on fences, rocks, or similar structures or features,
nor shall paper or similar signs be attached directly to a building wall with
adhesive or similar means.
10. Signs that obstruct any window, door, fire escape, stairway or opening
intended to provide light, air, ingress or egress of any building or structure.
11. Signs within the public right-of-way except for those listed in Section 11-2.
12. Balloon/inflatable signs. A flexible, inflated bag in various shapes and
colors.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 11 Signs
13. Banners, streamers, pennants signs. Attention-getting devices that are
composed of lightweight material.
14. Bench signs. A sign affixed to a bench.
15. Portable signs.
16. Projection signs. Wall signs shall be mounted parallel to the building and
shall not project more than eighteen (18) inches from the face of the
building.
17. No sign shall, by reason of position, shape or color interfere in any way
with the proper functioning or purpose of a traffic sign or signal.
18. Dynamic display signs.
19. Any other sign which is not in conformance with the regulations provided
herein.
11-7 ADVERTISING SIGNS/BILLBOARDS
1. Advertising signs/billboards may be permitted as a conditional use in the
industrial district along Interstate 35 or U.S. Highway 169 providing the
total square footage of both sides of the sign area is not more than six
hundred (600) square feet.
2. No advertising sign/billboard shall be located within five hundred (500) feet
of parks, historical sites, public picnic or rest areas, or within two hundred
(200) feet of church or school property.
3. No advertising sign/billboard shall be located closer than thirteen hundred
(1300) feet horizontal distance from any other advertising sign measured
in any direction. Advertising signs shall not exceed thirty (30) feet above
the average ground level at the base of sign.
4. Dynamic display advertising signs/billboards shall be prohibited.
11-8 SIGN REMOVAL
Any sign which is erected or maintained contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance; or
for which no permit has been obtained; or which is abandoned is hereby declared to be
public nuisance, illegal and non-conforming. The County may enter upon the land
where the sign is located and may remove and dispose such sign after a hearing as
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 11 Signs
provided by law, and after thirty (30) days notice to the owner and lessee, if known. No
compensation shall be paid for any sign to be removed or disposed of pursuant to this
Section. If the County receives any proceeds from the sign, the County shall first apply
the proceeds to reimburse the County for any expenses incurred, and refund the
remainder to the owner of the sign, if known. Any costs incurred by the County which
are not reimbursed may be assessed against the property upon which the sign was
located as a special assessment. For the application of these regulations, "abandoned"
shall be determined by the Planning Department.
11-9 SIGN MAINTENANCE
1. All signs shall be maintained in a safe, presentable and sound structural
condition at all times. Maintenance shall include painting, cleaning,
replacement or repair of defective or vandalized parts.
2. The owner of any sign shall be required to have such sign property
painted at least once every two (2) years, if needed, including all parts and
supports of the sign, unless such parts or supports are galvanized or
otherwise treated to prevent rust.
3. The owner or lessee of any sign, or the owner of the land on which the
sign is located shall keep the grass, weeds or other growth cut and the
area free from refuse between the sign and the street and also for a
distance of six (6) feet surrounding the sign.
11-10 OBSOLETE SIGNS
Any sign and its structure which is erected without a permit or no longer advertises a
bona fide business conducted, or a product no longer sold, shall be taken down and
removed by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building, or land
upon which the sign may be found within ten (10) days after written notification from the
Planning Department.
11-11 UNSAFE OR DANGEROUS SIGNS
Any sign which becomes structurally unsafe or endangers the safety of a building or
premises or endangers the public safety shall be taken down and removed by the
owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building or land upon which the
sign is located within ten (10) days after written notification from the Planning
Department.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 11 Signs
11-12 ADMINISTRATION/SIGN PERMITS
11-12-1 Sign Permit Requirements
1. No signs, except exempted signs, shall be erected, constructed, altered,
rebuilt, or relocated until a sign permit has been issued by the County.
The sign permit shall be reviewed and processed administratively subject
to the procedures and criteria outlined in Section 2-8 of this Ordinance. A
fee established by the County Board shall accompany each sign permit
application.
2. Complete permit application, signed and dated by applicant and
landowner.
3. Two (2) copies of an accurate survey or plot plan of the property, at such
scale as the Planning Department shall reasonably require. The Planning
Department may also require the applicant locate lot corners on the site to
verify the sign location.
4. An accurate indication on the survey or plot plan of the location, area, and
dimensions of each existing wall and freestanding sign, proposed sign,
and proposed future sign(s) of any type, whether requiring a permit or not.
The survey or plot plan shall identify the setback distances from property
lines and right-of-ways.
5. Two (2) copies of design specifications including: graphic representation
of the sign face, lighting, location of each sign on the building, sign
materials, and sign dimensions.
6. Plans, specifications, and method of construction or attachment to the
building or in the ground, including all dimensions, showing all light
sources, wattage, type and color lights, and details of any light shield or
shades.
7. If the proposed sign is along state trunk highway or interstate highway, the
application shall be accompanied by proof that the applicant has obtained
a permit from the State for the sign.
8. If the work authorized under a sign permit has not been completed within
twelve (12) months after the date of issuance, the permit shall lapse and
be of no further force and effect.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 11 Signs
11-12-2 Exemptions
The following is a list of signs exempt from obtaining a sign permit. These exemptions,
however, shall not be construed as relieving the owner of the sign from the
responsibility of its erection and maintenance, and its compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.
1. Name plate signs not exceeding two (2) square feet of display surface on
residential property stating only the name, address, and profession of the
occupant.
2. One (1) nameplate sign per occupant, not to exceed two (2) square feet
shall be allowed.
3. Names of buildings, dates of erection, commemorative tablets and the
like, when carved into stone, concrete or similar materials or made of
bronze, steel, aluminum, or other permanent type of construction and
made an integral part of the structure.
4. Real estate signs under twelve (12) square feet of surface area with no
more than two (2) surfaces.
5. Election signs.
6. Temporary signs.
7. Crop demonstration and agricultural product related signs.
8. Ideological, non-commercial signs.
9. Signs on private property requesting “No Trespassing”, “No Hunting”, etc.
10. The changing of the display surface on a painted or printed sign only.
This exemption, however, shall apply only to poster replacement or on-site
changed involving a sign painted elsewhere then directly on a building.
11. Construction signs under twelve (12) square feet of surface area with no
more than two (2) surfaces.
12. Any signs authorized by a governmental unit and approved by the County
such as directional, street name, traffic, safety, danger and parking signs.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 11 Signs
11-13 CALCULATING SIGN AREA
1. The area of a sign face shall be computed by means of the smallest
square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof that will
encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem or
other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of
the background or the display or used to differentiate the sign form the
backdrop or structure against which it is placed. The structural supports
for the sign, whether they are columns, pylons, or a building, or part
thereof, shall not be included in the calculation of the advertising display
area. Each sign face will be calculated separately.
2. Individual Letters. When attached to the surface of a building, canopy,
awning, wall or window, the sign area shall be calculated as that part of
the smallest rectangle or other geometric shape that encompasses all of
the letters or symbols. The sign area shall include all lettering, wording,
and accompanying designs or symbols.
Scott County Wind Energy Conversion Systems
Zoning Ordinance
Chapter 12
CHAPTER 12: ENERGY SYSTEMS (WIND AND SOLAR)
12-1 PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose of this Section is to regulate the installation and operation of Wind Energy
Conversion Systems (WECS) and Solar Energy Systems within Scott County not
otherwise subject to siting and oversight by the State of Minnesota under the Minnesota
Power Plant Siting Act (MS 116C.51-116C.697.)
The Scott County Comprehensive Plan supports the use of renewable and alternative
energy sources to reduce greenhouse gases and protect the natural environment. The
plan’s goal #XI-5 states that “efficient energy consumption, conservation, the use of
renewable technologies, and energy responsible land use decisions should be a priority
in Scott County.”
12-2 DEFINITIONS
WECS - Wind Energy Conversion System: An electrical generating facility comprised of
one or more wind turbines and accessory facilities, including but not limited to: power
lines, transformers and substations that operate by converting the kinetic energy of wind
into electrical energy. The energy maybe used on-site or distributed into the electrical
grid.
Commercial WECS - A WECS of equal to or greater than 40 kW in total name plate
generating capacity.
Non-Commercial WECS - A WECS of less than 40 kW in total name plate generating
Capacity.
Community Solar Energy System (also called a “Solar Garden”) – a solar-electric
(photovoltaic) array that provides retail electric power (or a financial proxy for retail
power) to multiple community members or businesses residing or located off-site from
the location of the solar energy system, under the provisions of Minn. Statutes
216B.1641 or successor statute.
Feeder Line - Any power line that carries electrical power from one or more wind
turbines or individual transformers associated with individual wind turbines to the point
of interconnection with the electric power grid, in the case of interconnection with the
high voltage transmission systems the point of interconnection shall be the substation
serving the WECS.
Passive Solar Energy System – see Definition in Chapter 1.
Scott County Wind Energy Conversion Systems
Zoning Ordinance
Chapter 12
Rotor diameter - The diameter of the circle described by the moving rotor blades.
Solar Array – Any number of solar photovoltaic modules or panels connected together
to increase voltage and/or power to the level required for a given system.
Solar Collector – see Definition in Chapter 1.
Solar Energy System – see Definition in Chapter 1.
Solar Energy System, Ground Mounted – A solar energy system mounted on a rack or
pole that sits on the ground or has its own foundation and is not attached to a building.
Solar Energy System, Roof-top – A solar energy system mounted on the roof of a
building and is accessory to the principal land use.
Solar Structure – see Definition in Chapter 1.
Total Height of WECS - The height shall be measured from the surrounding grade to the
rotor blade tip at its highest extension.
Tower for WECS - Towers include vertical structures that support the electrical
generator or rotor blades.
Wind Turbine - A wind turbine is any piece of electrical generating equipment that
converts the kinetic energy of blowing wind into electrical energy through the use of
airfoils or similar devices to capture the wind.
12-3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS - WECS
12-3-1 Safety Design Standards
1. Engineering Certification. For all WECS, the manufacture’s engineer or
another qualified engineer shall certify that the turbine, foundation and
tower design of the WECS is within accepted professional standards,
given local soil and climate conditions.
2. Clearance. Rotor blades or airfoils must maintain at least 12 feet of
clearance between their lowest point and the ground.
3. Warnings. For all Commercial WECS, a sign or signs shall be posted on
the tower, transformer and substation warning of high voltage.
4. Unauthorized Climbing. The WECS shall be guarded against
unauthorized climbing. The first twelve (12) feet of the tower shall be
Scott County Wind Energy Conversion Systems
Zoning Ordinance
Chapter 12
unclimbable by design or be enclosed by a six (6) foot high, unclimbable
fence with a secured access.
12-3-2 Standards
1. Number per Lot. No more than one (1) WECS per lot shall be permitted.
2. Tower configuration. All wind turbines, which are part of a Commercial
WECS, shall be installed with a tubular, monopole type tower. All wind
turbines that are Non-Commercial WECS shall be installed with monopole
or lattice tower type; no guyed towers shall be permitted.
3. Color and Finish. All wind turbines and towers that are part of a
Commercial WECS shall be white, grey or another non-obtrusive color.
Finishes shall be matt or non-reflective.
4. Lighting. Lighting, including lighting intensity and frequency of strobe,
shall adhere to but not exceed requirements established by Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) permits and regulations. Red strobe lights
are preferred for night-time illumination to reduce impacts on migrating
birds. Red pulsating incandescent lights should be avoided.
5. Other Signage. All signage on site shall comply with Chapter 11 of the
Scott County Ordinance. The manufacturers or owner’s company name
and/or logo may be placed upon the nacelle, compartment containing the
electrical generator, of the WECS.
6. Feeder Lines. All communications and feeder lines, equal to or less than
34.5 kV in capacity, installed as part of a WECS shall be buried where
reasonably feasible. Feeder lines installed as part of a WECS shall not be
considered an essential service.
7. Waste Disposal. Solid and Hazardous wastes, including but not limited to
crates, packaging materials, damaged or worn parts, as well as used oils
and lubricants, shall be removed from the site promptly and disposed of in
accordance with all applicable local, state and federal regulations.
8. Discontinuation and Decommissioning. A WECS shall be considered a
discontinued use after 45 days without energy production, unless a plan is
developed and submitted to the Scott County Planning Manager outlining
the steps and schedule for returning the WECS to service. All WECS and
accessory facilities shall be removed to four feet below ground level within
90 days of the discontinuation of use.
Scott County Wind Energy Conversion Systems
Zoning Ordinance
Chapter 12
Each Commercial WECS shall have a Decommissioning plan outlining the
anticipated means and cost of removing WECS at the end of their
serviceable life or upon becoming a discontinued use. The cost estimates
shall be made by a competent party; such as a Professional Engineer, a
contractor capable of decommissioning or a person with suitable expertise
or experience with decommissioning. The plan shall also identify the
financial resources that will be available to pay for the decommissioning
and removal of the WECS and accessory facilities.
9. Orderly Development. Upon issuance of a conditional use permit, all
Commercial WECS shall notify the Environmental Quality Board Power
Plant Siting Act program Staff of the project location and details on the
survey form specified by the Environmental Quality Board.
12-3-3 Performance Standards
1. Noise. All WECS shall comply with Minnesota Rules 7030 governing
noise.
2. Electrical Codes and Standards. All WECS and accessory equipment and
facilities shall comply with the National Electrical Code and other
applicable standards.
3. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). All WECS shall comply with FAA
standards and permits.
4. Minnesota State Building Code. All WECS shall comply with the
International Building Code as adopted by the State of Minnesota Building
Code.
5. Interference. The applicant shall minimize or mitigate interference with
electromagnetic communications, such as radio, telephone, microwaves,
or television signals cause by any WECS. The applicant shall notify all
communication tower operators within two miles of the proposed WECS
location upon application to the county for permits. No WECS shall be
constructed so as to interfere with County or Minnesota Department of
Transportation microwave transmissions.
6. Maximum Height. The maximum height for a non-commercial WECS shall
be 120 feet in all zoning districts. The maximum height for a commercial
WECS shall be 300 feet in the UER, UBR, and UTR zoning districts.
Scott County Wind Energy Conversion Systems
Zoning Ordinance
Chapter 12
12-4 REQUIRED PERMITS - WECS
No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct in place, re-erect, replace or make
structural repairs to any tower without making application for and receiving proper
zoning approval and building permit(s), when applicable. In all cases, review by the
Scott County Building Official for all required permits will be necessary. All necessary
zoning approvals shall be applied for and reviewed under the procedures established in
Chapter 2 of this Ordinance.
12-5 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS - WECS
1. The names of project applicant.
2. The name of the project owner.
3. The legal description and address of the project.
4. A description of the project including: Number, type, name plate
generating capacity, tower height, rotor diameter, and total height of all
wind turbines and means of interconnecting with the electrical grid.
5. Site layout, including the location of property lines, wind turbines, electrical
wires, interconnection points with the electrical grid, and all related
accessory structures. The site layout shall include distances and be
drawn to scale.
6. Engineer’s Minnesota State certification and project design specifications.
7. Documentation of land ownership or legal control of the property.
12-6 ADDITIONAL SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL WECS
1. The latitude and longitude of individual wind turbines.
2. A USGS topographical map, or map with similar data, of the property and
surrounding area, including any other WECS within 10 rotor diameters of
the Proposed WECS.
3. Location of wetlands, scenic, and natural areas including bluffs within
1,320 feet of the proposed WECS.
4. FAA Permit Application.
Scott County Wind Energy Conversion Systems
Zoning Ordinance
Chapter 12
5. Location of all known Communications Towers within 2 miles of the
proposed WECS.
6. Decommissioning Plan.
7. Description of potential impacts on nearby WECS and wind resources on
adjacent properties.
12-7 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
1. WECS shall be allowed in applicable zoning districts based on the
generating capacity and land compatibility as listed in Table 20-4.
12-8 SETBACKS - WIND TURBINES
1. In all zoning districts, the setback of any WECS or associated structures
from neighboring property lines and Right-of-Way shall be the distance of
1.1 times the total height.
12-9 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS – COMMUNITY SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
This section is established to protect and promote health, safety and general welfare
with the county through uniform standards, regulations and procedures governing the
type, size, structure, location, height, erection and use of Community Solar Energy
Systems.
12-9-1 Rooftop Community Solar Energy Systems
1. Building Permit. A rooftop community solar energy system is a permitted
accessory use in all zoning districts. The owner or contractor shall receive a
building permit and/or mechanical permit before installing a rooftop
community solar energy system. All rooftop systems shall meet the standards
of the Minnesota Building Code.
2. Placement. A rooftop community solar energy system shall be placed on the
roof to limit visibility from the public right-of-way or to blend into the roof
design, provided that minimizing visibility still allows the owner to reasonably
capture solar energy. Rooftop systems shall not exceed the maximum height
in any zoning district.
3. Pitched Roofs. On pitched roofs with a slope greater than 15%, solar panels
shall be flush-mounted and shall not exceed above the peak of the roof.
Scott County Wind Energy Conversion Systems
Zoning Ordinance
Chapter 12
4. Glare. All solar energy systems shall minimize glare that affects adjacent or
nearby properties. Steps to minimize glare nuisance may include selective
placement of the system, selective orientation of the panels, or rooftop
screening. All proposed projects shall conduct and submit a glare study to
identify potential impacts and mitigation strategies. To complete this glare
study, the applicant can use the Solar Glare Hazard Analysis Tool (SGHAT).
Once installed, if the solar energy system creates glare onto neighboring
properties and/or streets and highways and the County determines that such
glare constitutes a nuisance, the County shall require a more detailed glare
study – prepared by a third-party consultant mutually acceptable to the
County, Township and applicant – to identify additional actions and/or
screening that may be required to substantially eliminate or block the glare
from entering the neighboring property and/or street and highway.
12-9-2 Ground Mounted Community Solar Energy Systems
1. Use. A ground mounted community solar system, as an accessory or a
principal use, shall be allowed under a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) or
Interim Use Permit (IUP) in applicable zoning districts as listed in Table 20-4.
2. Prohibitions. Ground mounted community solar energy systems are
prohibited in the following areas:
a. Shoreland and Floodplain Districts as designated by the Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and the Scott County Zoning
Ordinance.
b. Within 600 feet of any property designated or protected from
development by Federal, State or County agencies as wildlife habitat
and wildlife management areas. Property designated as public
parkland or park reserve shall not be subject to this setback
requirement.
c. Within wetlands to the extent prohibited by the Minnesota Wetlands
Conservation Act.
d. Within any safety zones identified in an Airport Zoning Ordinance.
e. Within the Bluff Overlay District per Chapter 6 of this Ordinance.
f. Within any recorded easement - such as but not limited to utility, ditch,
conservation, or storm water - unless authorized in writing by the
easement holder.
Scott County Wind Energy Conversion Systems
Zoning Ordinance
Chapter 12
g. Within Orderly Annexation Agreement (OAA) areas and the City of
Jordan’s anticipated 2030 growth boundary, as amended over time.
h. Within a Metropolitan Urban Service Area (MUSA). This includes
Undesignated, Undesignated Reserve, 2030, 2040, and future adopted
MUSA boundaries.
i. Within two (2) miles of a proposed or permitted Community Solar
Energy System site as defined under this Chapter. Separation will be
measured from the parcel boundary with the permitted community
solar garden to the nearest parcel boundary of the proposed
community solar garden.
3. Maximum Size and Capacity. No more than one (1) Community Solar Garden
System per parcel shall be permitted, and the one (1) System or co-location
of Systems shall have a maximum power capacity of one (1) megawatt AC
and shall be no greater than ten (10) acres in size.
4. Site Access. Any driveway or site access off a state, county or township road
shall meet the requirements of Section 5-2 of this Ordinance.
5. Signage. No advertising signage is allowed. Manufacture and equipment
information, warning, security or indication of ownership signage on the site
shall comply with Chapter 11 of the Scott County Ordinance.
6. Power and Communication Lines. All on-site power and communication lines
running between banks of solar panels and buildings, and all off-site lines
running between the solar energy system to electric substations or
interconnections, shall be buried underground. Exemptions may be granted
in instances where shallow bedrock, water courses, or other elements of the
natural landscape interfere with the ability to bury lines.
7. Waste Disposal. Solid and Hazardous wastes, including but not limited to
crates, packaging materials, damaged or worn parts, as well as used oils and
lubricants, shall be removed from the site promptly and disposed of in
accordance with all applicable local, state and federal regulations.
8. Stormwater Management and Erosion Control. Systems shall meet the
requirements for stormwater management and erosion and sediment control
as per Chapter 6 of this Ordinance. Any System that will result in the creation
of one (1) or more acres of new impervious surface will require a Resource
Management Plan per Chapter 6 of this Ordinance.
Scott County Wind Energy Conversion Systems
Zoning Ordinance
Chapter 12
9. Interconnection. The owner, developer or operator of the Community Solar
Energy System must submit an executed interconnection agreement with the
electric utility in whose service territory the system is located prior to the
County issuing any building permits associated with the System. Off-grid
systems are exempt from this requirement. The interconnections shall
require no more than two (2) utility poles and a ground utility cabinet or three
(3) utility poles total.
10. Decommissioning Plan. A decommissioning plan shall be required to ensure
that facilities are properly removed after their useful life and that the site is
properly restored. Decommissioning of solar panels must occur in the event
they are not in use for twelve (12) consecutive months. The plan shall include
provisions for removal of all structures and foundations, restoration of soil and
vegetation and a plan ensuring financial resources will be available to fully
decommission the site. Disposal of structures and/or foundations shall meet
the provisions of Scott County Solid Waste Ordinance. The County will
require the posting of a bond, letter of credit or the establishment of an
escrow account to ensure proper decommissioning, equal to 125% of the
estimated amount.
11. Noise. All Community Solar Energy Systems shall comply with Minnesota
Rules 7030 governing noise.
12. Electrical Codes and Standards. All Community Solar Energy Systems and
accessory equipment shall comply with the National Electrical Code and other
applicable standards. Photovoltaic solar energy system components must
have an Underwriters Laboratory (UL) listing or other third-party certification
provided by an American National Standards Institute accredited
organization.
13. Minnesota State Building Code. All Community Solar Energy System
structures shall comply with the International Building Code as adopted by the
State of Minnesota Building Code.
14. Maximum Height. Ground mounted systems shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet
in height at maximum design tilt.
15. Glare. All solar energy systems shall minimize glare that affects adjacent or
nearby properties. Steps to minimize glare nuisance may include selective
placement of the system, selective orientation of the panels, or site screening,
berming, or buffering. All proposed projects shall conduct and submit a glare
study to identify potential impacts and mitigation strategies. To complete this
glare study, the applicant can use the Solar Glare Hazard Analysis Tool
(SGHAT). Once installed, if the solar energy system creates glare onto
neighboring properties and/or streets and highways and the County
Scott County Wind Energy Conversion Systems
Zoning Ordinance
Chapter 12
determines that such glare constitutes a nuisance, the County shall require a
more detailed glare study – prepared by a third-party consultant mutually
acceptable to the County, Township and applicant – to identify additional
actions and/or screening that may be required to substantially eliminate or
block the glare from entering the neighboring property and/or street and
highway.
16. Setbacks. All equipment and structures shall meet the front, side and rear
yard setbacks for principal structures for the zoning district in which the
system in located.
17. Security Fencing. All boundary line fencing shall be located entirely upon the
property of the System. Fences shall consist of open fencing such as chain
link or barbed wire. Fences shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height, which
includes barbed wire toppings.
18. Screening. A berm (2:1 maximum slope with supplemental plant materials
including trees, shrubs, and groundcovers) and/or a continuous evergreen
vegetative buffer shall be provided and maintained at all times around the
perimeter of the fencing that faces (a.) public road right-of-way, b.) an existing
residence or farmstead not on the subject parcel, or c.) residentially zoned or
platted property. The evergreen vegetative buffer shall be composed of
evergreen trees or shrubs of a type which at time of planting shall be a
minimum of four (4) feet in height and which shall be maintained at maturity at
a height of eight (8) feet in height to screen the fence.
12-10 REQUIRED PERMITS – COMMUNITY SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct in place, re-erect, replace or make
structural repairs to any community solar energy system without making application for
and receiving proper zoning approval and building permit(s), when applicable. In all
cases, review by the Scott County Building Official for all required permits will be
necessary. All necessary zoning approvals shall be applied for and reviewed under the
procedures established in Chapter 2 of this Ordinance.
12-11 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS – COMMUNITY SOLAR GARDEN SYSTEMS
1. The names of project applicant.
2. The name of the project owner.
3. The legal description and address of the project.
Scott County Wind Energy Conversion Systems
Zoning Ordinance
Chapter 12
4. Documentation of land ownership or legal control of the property.
5. A description of the project including: ownership or lease arrangement, the
proposed installed maximum capacity, in kilowatts, for the site, proposed type
of mounting and racking systems, along with manufactures specifications or
engineering designs for mounting and racking, the method of connecting the
system to the electric load; the types of panels that will be installed.
6. Site Plan, drawn to scale, including:
a. existing and proposed structures;
b. property lines;
c. existing and proposed fencing;
d. surface water drainage patterns;
e. the location of county and private tile drainage systems;
f. floodplains;
g. wetlands;
h. shore land zones;
i. topography at two (two) foot intervals, and bluffs;
j. the location, size and spacing of solar panels,
k. the location of existing and proposed access roads,
l. the location of underground or overhead electric line connections,
m. existing easements on the property,
n. in-use wells and sewage treatment systems,
o. abandoned wells, sewage treatment sites and dumpsites
p. all other characteristics requested by the County.
7. Existing vegetation (list type and percentage of coverage) and soils
information for the proposed site.
8. Landscape and Screening Plan prepared by a licensed landscape architect
and include a narrative describing the overarching landscape architecture
elements and how the design and placement of plant types and materials will
complement the form and function of the developed site and blend into the
surrounding environment.
9. Erosion/Sediment Control Plan or Resource Management Plan, if required.
Include details on any proposed native grasses or plantings on the site.
10. Glare Study, if required
11. A copy of the interconnection agreement with the local electric utility
12. Decommissioning Plan.
Scott County Wireless Communication
Zoning Ordinance Towers and Antennas
Chapter 13
CHAPTER 13: WIRELESS COMMUNICATION TOWERS AND
ANTENNAS
13-1 PURPOSE
The County of Scott acknowledges the legal right of wireless communications providers
to locate within the County. However, the County wishes to implement its legal
authority to adopt zoning requirements which are nondiscriminatory, not intended to
prohibit telecommunications service, and not based on health effects of radio frequency
emissions. In order to establish uniform, nondiscriminatory regulations that protect the
public health, safety and general welfare of the County, these regulations are intended
to:
1. Minimize adverse visual effects of towers through careful design,
landscaping, and siting standards.
2. Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure and
weather related occurrences through structural standards and setback
requirements.
3. Maximize the use of existing and approved towers and buildings to
accommodate new wireless telecommunication antennas in order to
reduce the number of towers needed to serve the community.
4. Utilize business, industrial and public land, buildings and structures for
wireless communications whenever possible and/or appropriate.
5. Provide for the appropriate location and development of towers and
antennas to accommodate the communication needs of the residents and
businesses in Scott County.
a. Towers are a permitted use with an administrative permit and
issuance of a Certificate of Compliance for the following:
(1) Towers and/or antennas erected temporarily for test
purposes, or for emergency communications or interim
periods.
(2) Adjustment, placement or replacement of the elements of an
antenna array affixed to a tower or antenna.
Scott County Wireless Communication
Zoning Ordinance Towers and Antennas
Chapter 13
b. Conditional use permits shall be required for towers in the following
areas:
(1) Rural Residential Reserve, Urban Business Reserve, Urban
Expansion Reserve, and Urban Transition Reserve Zoning
Districts limited to monopoles not to exceed one hundred
fifty (150) feet in height.
(2) Government, church, institutional and public land or
structures.
(3) Athletic complexes.
(4) Parks and golf courses, when compatible with the nature of
the park or course.
(5) Parking lots where a required monopole replicates,
incorporates or substantially blends with the overall lighting
standards of the parking lot.
c. Antenna Co-Locations are a Permitted Use with the Issuance of an
administrative permit for the following locations:
(1) Water towers.
(2) Co-location on existing telecommunications towers.
(3) Sides or roofs of structures over two stories.
(4) Church steeples.
(5) Existing power or phone pole structures.
(6) Existing towers supporting amateur radio antennas in the
agricultural districts.
13-2 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1. General wireless communication towers shall be of a monopole design.
This provision does not apply to amateur radio towers or commercial and
public radio or television towers.
Scott County Wireless Communication
Zoning Ordinance Towers and Antennas
Chapter 13
2. No tower shall exceed two hundred (200) feet in height, including the
extension of any antenna or apparatus within the Agricultural, General
Commercial, and Rural Industrial Zoning Districts. No tower shall exceed
one hundred fifty (150) feet in height including the extension of any
antenna or apparatus within the Rural Residential Reserve and Urban
Reserve Zoning Districts.
3. Proposed towers up to one hundred twenty-five (125) feet tall shall be
designed structurally, and in all other respects, to accommodate both the
applicant’s antenna and compatible antennas for at least one (1) other
wireless provider. Towers in excess of one hundred twenty-five (125) feet
shall provide for a minimum of three (3) wireless users. Towers must be
designed to allow for future arrangement of antennas upon the tower, to
accept antennas mounted at suitable heights, and to locate all ground
equipment of each provider within a single enclosed structure.
4. All communication towers, antennas, accessory structures, and
associated equipment shall be insured against injury or property damage
caused by structural failure of the tower or associated equipment. The
applicant shall show proof of such insurance during the permitting
process.
5. No part of any tower or antenna, nor any lines, cables, equipment, wires
or braces shall at any time extend across or over any part of the right-ofway
of a public street or a property line without approval by the County
through the conditional use permit.
6. No tower shall be located within any utility or drainage easement.
7. No advertising or identification of any kind intended to be visible from the
ground or other structures is permitted, except applicable warning and
equipment information signage required by the manufacturer or by federal,
state, or local authorities.
8. A signed lease, memorandum of lease, or document requiring the removal
of towers and antennas as indicated in Section 13-6.
9. All towers, antennas, and accessory structures shall be in compliance with
all County and State Building Codes, as applicable, and shall obtain
necessary permits.
10. Structure design, mounting and installation of the tower and antenna shall
be in compliance with the manufacture’s specifications. The plans shall
be approved and certified by a licensed professional engineer.
Scott County Wireless Communication
Zoning Ordinance Towers and Antennas
Chapter 13
11. When applicable, written authorization for tower and antenna erection
shall be provided by the property owner.
12. Tower and antennas shall be grounded for protection against a direct
strike by lightning and shall comply, as to electrical wiring and
connections, with all applicable provisions of all State codes.
13. All towers shall be constructed of corrosive-resistant steel or other
corrosive-resistant, non-combustible materials.
14. All towers, tower anchors and tower accessory buildings, shall be
surrounded by security fences six (6) feet in height with a locked gate
unless waived by the Planning Advisory Commission. The Planning
Advisory Commission may require that a monopole be fenced.
15. Gravel or other durable surface, or other weed prevention measures, shall
be applied within the fenced area surrounding the tower and anchors to
prevent the growth of weeds, if required by the Planning Advisory
Commission.
16. All transmitting, receiving and switching equipment shall be housed within
a structure or cabinet whenever possible. If a new tower accessory
building is necessary to house such equipment, it shall be architecturally
designed to blend in with the surrounding environment, and shall be
screened from view by landscaping where applicable.
17. The tower shall have an exterior finish of lighter blue, gray or other color
which minimizes visibility off-site, unless otherwise required by FAA
regulations.
18. No tower or antenna shall have lights, reflectors, flashers, daytime strobe
lights, night- time red lights, or other illuminating devices affixed or
attached, unless required by the FAA or FCC.
19. Existing vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent
possible.
20. The Planning Department is authorized to employ, on behalf of the
County, an independent technical expert to review technical materials
submitted by the applicant, or to determine if additional information is
necessary. The applicant shall pay the cost of such review and/or
independent analysis.
21. Any tower, antenna and related equipment shall comply with all federal,
state and local regulations.
Scott County Wireless Communication
Zoning Ordinance Towers and Antennas
Chapter 13
13-3 REQUIRED PERMITS
No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct in place, re-erect, replace or make
structural repairs to any tower without making application for and receiving an proper
zoning approval and building permit, when applicable. In all cases, review by the Scott
County Building Official for all required permits will be necessary.
13-4 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
1. Township recommendation.
2. Legal description of the property.
3. Survey and/or general site plan consistent with Section 2-10 of this
Ordinance of the tower and related facilities, as determined by the
Planning Department.
4. One or more color computer generated photographs depicting the
proposed tower located on the site.
5. If a co-locator, information on non-interference.
6. Information on non-interference with public safety telecommunications.
7. Proof of insurance against injury and property damage.
8. Written authorization by the owner of the land for the tower construction.
9. A recordable agreement, lease or other instrument imposing liability and
responsibility upon the owner of the property and the owner of the tower
for the removal of the tower upon cessation of use.
10. Documentation that the telecommunications equipment planned for the
proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved
tower or structure within one (1) mile radius.
11. A plan illustrating all known future location sites for communication towers
and/or antennas.
12. Information to indicate that construction, installation, and maintenance of
the tower will not create a safety hazard or damage to adjacent properties.
13. Copies of all required federal, state and local licenses.
Scott County Wireless Communication
Zoning Ordinance Towers and Antennas
Chapter 13
14. A capacity analysis and coverage analysis, as required, prepared by a
qualified radio frequency analyst, showing alternate sites considered and
the proposed tower site is necessary to meet the needs of the system, and
that the tower cannot be located in a less restrictive district, or be
accommodated by co-location on an existing tower or structure.
15. Landscape and/or screening plan, if necessary.
16. Any additional information as deemed necessary by the Planning
Department.
13-5 NON-INTERFERENCE
1. No provider shall interfere with the operation of radios, televisions,
telephones, facsimile machines, computer modems, telephone answering
machines, and other electronic devices. Any such interference shall be
corrected as soon as possible by the provider.
2. No new or existing telecommunications service shall interfere with public
safety telecommunications. Before the introduction of new service or
changes in existing service, telecommunication providers shall notify the
County at least ten (10) calendar days in advance of such changes and
allow the County to monitor interference levels during the testing process.
All costs incurred by the County to monitor interference levels during the
testing process shall be paid to the County by the applicant.
13-6 REMOVAL OF ABANDONED OR UNUSED TOWERS OR PORTIONS OF
TOWERS
Any tower and/or antenna which is not used for six (6) successive months shall be
deemed abandoned and may be required to be removed from the property. All
abandoned or unused towers and associated facilities shall be removed within twelve
(12) months of the cessation of operations at the site unless a time extension is
approved in writing by the Planning Department. After the facilities are removed, the
site shall be restored to its original or an improved state. If a tower is not removed
within twelve (12) months after the cessation of operations at a site, the tower and
associated facilities may be removed by the County and the costs of removal assessed
against the property. The owner of the tower and the owner of the property are both
responsible for removal of the tower as required by this section.
13-7 CO-LOCATION REQUIREMENTS
Scott County Wireless Communication
Zoning Ordinance Towers and Antennas
Chapter 13
1. The placement of wireless telecommunication antennas or satellite dishes
on roofs, walls, and existing towers may be approved by the Planning
Department with a certificate of compliance, after submittal of a site plan
and construction plans, and the submittal of a report, prepared by a
licensed professional engineer indicating the existing structure or tower’s
suitability to accept the antenna, and the proposed method of affixing
antenna to the structure.
2. The height of any rooftop or wall antenna, or satellite dishes, including its
support structure, shall not exceed fifty (50%) percent of the total building
height or fifteen (15) feet above the highest point of the roof, whichever is
less.
3. Any proposed tower shall be designed, structurally, electrically and in all
other respects, to accommodate both the applicant’s antennas and
comparable antennas for one or more additional users if the tower is 100
feet or more in height, or for at least one additional user if the tower is over
75 feet and less than 100 feet in height. Towers must be designed to
allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accept
antennas mounted at suitable heights.
4. Submission of a coverage analysis as indicated in 13-9.4 of this Chapter.
5. Accessory equipment associated with a rooftop antenna, satellite dishes,
or wall antenna shall be located within the building, cabinet, or within a
roof or ground enclosure which is constructed of materials and color
scheme compatible with the principal building.
13-8 LIGHTS AND OTHER ATTACHMENTS
Towers shall not be illuminated by artificial means and shall not have affixed or attached
to it in any way, except during time of repair or installation, any lights, reflectors,
flashers, or other illuminating device, except as required by the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) or the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) or state
agency, nor shall any tower have constructed thereon, or attached thereto, in any way,
any platform, catwalk, crow’s nest, or like structure, except during periods of
construction or repair. When incorporated into the approved design of the tower, light
fixtures used to illuminate ball fields, parking lots, or similar areas may be attached to
the tower.
Scott County Wireless Communication
Zoning Ordinance Towers and Antennas
Chapter 13
13-9 NEW TOWER REQUIREMENTS
A proposal for a new personal wireless service tower shall not be approved unless it
can be documented by the applicant to the satisfaction of the Planning Department that
the telecommunications equipment planned for the proposed tower cannot be
accommodated on an existing or approved tower or structure within a one (1) mile
radius, transcending municipal, county or township borders, of the proposed tower due
to one or more of the following reasons:
1. The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of an
existing or approved tower or building, as documented by a licensed
professional engineer, and any existing or approved tower or structure
cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate planned or
equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost.
2. The planned equipment would cause interference with other existing or
planned equipment at the tower or structure.
3. Existing or approved towers and structures within a one (1) mile radius
cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary for
reasonable function.
4. The applicant has demonstrated that location of the antennas, as
proposed is necessary to provide adequate coverage and capacity to
areas which cannot be adequately served by locating the antennas in a
less restrictive district or an existing structure. Information provided as
part of the county-wide capacity analysis, that is a trade secret, pursuant
to Minnesota Statute 13.37, shall be classified as non-public data.
5. Other unforeseen reasons that make it unfeasible to locate the
telecommunications equipment upon an existing or approved tower or
building.
13-10 EXISTING AND DAMAGED TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
Towers, antennas and tower accessory buildings in existence as of the date of adoption
of this Chapter which do not conform to or comply with this Ordinance are subject to the
following provisions:
1. Towers, antennas and tower accessory buildings in existence as of the
date of adoption of this Chapter may continue for the purpose now used
and as now existing.
Scott County Wireless Communication
Zoning Ordinance Towers and Antennas
Chapter 13
2. If such towers are damaged or destroyed due to any reason or cause
whatsoever, the tower may be repaired and restored to its former use,
location and physical dimensions upon obtaining a building permit, but
without otherwise complying with this Chapter. Provided, however, that if
the cost of repairing or restoring such damaged or destroyed tower or
antenna would be fifty percent (50%) or more, as estimated by the County,
of the cost of purchasing and erecting a new tower or antenna of like kind
and quality and to the former use, physical dimensions and location, then
the tower or antenna may not be repaired or restored except in full
compliance with this Chapter.
13-11 TEMPORARY MOBILE CELL SITES
Temporary mobile cell sites are permitted with a certificate of compliance in the case of
equipment failure or testing, or interim period after administrative approval and permits
are approved. Such interim situations shall be limited to no more than thirty (30) days
from the date of issuance of the conditional use permit or certificate of compliance.
Temporary mobile cell sites shall be removed within seventy-two (72) hours following
completion of testing, the installation of the permanent tower, or resolution of equipment
failure.
13-12 REQUIRED SETBACKS
1. In all zoning districts, the setback of any tower or antenna shall comply
with the minimum setback requirements of the district in which the tower is
to be located, or the distance determined as the fall zone of the tower by a
licensed professional engineer, whichever is greater.
2. In all zoning districts, no monopole shall be located within two hundred
fifty (250) feet of an existing residence, or the proposed home location on
an approved preliminary plat. No other type of tower shall be located
within five hundred (500) feet of an existing residence, or the proposed
home location of an approved preliminary plat.
3. Guy wires and anchors need not meet the required setbacks.
4. All towers shall be located in the side or rear yard of a principal structure
of a property, whenever applicable.
Scott County Sexually Oriented Uses
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 14
CHAPTER 14: SEXUALLY ORIENTED USES
14-1 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE
Studies conducted by the Minnesota Attorney General, the American Planning Association,
and cities such as St. Paul, Minnesota; Indianapolis, Indiana; Rochester, Minnesota; Phoenix,
Arizona; Los Angeles, California; and Seattle, Washington have studied the impacts that
adult establishments have on those communities. These studies have concluded that adult
establishments have adverse impacts on the surrounding neighborhoods. These impacts
include increased crime rates, lower property values, increased transiency, neighborhood
blight, and potential health risks. Based on these studies and findings, the Scott County
Board of Commissioners concludes:
1. Adult establishments have adverse secondary impacts of the types set forth
above.
2. The adverse impacts caused by adult establishments tend to diminish if adult
establishments are governed by geographic, licensing, and health
requirements.
3. It is not the intent of the County Board to prohibit adult establishments from
having a reasonable opportunity to locate in the County.
4. Minnesota Statutes, section 394.21, allows the County to adopt regulations to
promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare.
5. The public health, safety, morals and general welfare will be promoted by the
County adopting regulations governing adult establishments.
14-2 ADULT USE DEFINITIONS
Sexually Oriented Uses. Uses which include a sexually oriented arcade; sexually oriented
bookstore, sexually oriented video store; sexually oriented store; sexually oriented cabaret;
sexually oriented conversation/rap parlor; sexually oriented massage parlor; sexually oriented
motel; sexually oriented motion picture theater; sexually oriented steam room, bath house or
sauna; sexually oriented theater; escort agency; nude model studio; sexual encounter center
and other premises, enterprises, establishments, businesses, or places open to some or all
members of the public, at or in which there is an emphasis on the presentation, display,
depiction, or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” which
are capable of being seen by members of the public. Activities classified as “obscene” as
defined by Minnesota Statutes, section 617.241 are not included.
1. Specified Anatomical Area - means any of the following:
Scott County Sexually Oriented Uses
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 14
a. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, or female breast below a point immediately above the
top of the areola;
b. Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state even if opaquely
covered.
2. Specified Sexual Activities - includes any of the following:
a. The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
b. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse,
oral copulation, or sodomy;
c. Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
d. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in (a) through (c) above.
3. Sexually Oriented Uses – Accessory - The offering of retail goods for sale which
are classified as sexually oriented uses on a limited scale and which are
incidental to the primary activity, and goods and/or services offered by the
establishment. Examples of such items include the sale of sexually oriented
books or magazines, or the sale and/or rental of sexually oriented motion
pictures, the sale of sexually oriented novelties.
4. Sexually Oriented Uses – Principal - The offering of goods and/or services
which are classified as sexually oriented uses as a primary or sole activity of a
business, organization or establishment and include, but are not limited to the
following:
a. Escort - A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
b. Escort Agency - A person or business association who furnishes, offers
to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
c. Establishment/Business/Organization - Means and includes any of the
following:
(1) The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business
as a new business;
Scott County Sexually Oriented Uses
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 14
(2) The conversion of an existing business; whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business.
(3) The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other
existing sexually oriented business; or
(4) The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
d. Nude Model Studio - Any place where a person who appears in a state
of nudity or displays “specified anatomical area” is provided to be
observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or
similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of
consideration.
e. Nudity or State of Nudity - Nudity or State of Nudity is described as
follows:
(1) The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, genitals, or
female breasts; or
(2) The state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human buttock,
anus, genitals, or areola of the female breast.
f. Semi-Nude - A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well as
portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
g. Sexual Encounter Center - A business or commercial enterprise that, as
one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration:
(1) Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling in a sexual
manner between persons of the opposite sex; or
(2) Activities between persons when one or more of the persons is in
a state of nudity or semi-nude.
h. Sexually Oriented Arcade - Any place to which the public is permitted or
invited wherein coin-operated or token-operated or electronically, or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or
other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5)
or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or
describing of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.
i. Sexually Oriented Bookstore, Sexually Oriented Video Store, or Sexually
Oriented Store - A commercial establishment which as a principal
Scott County Sexually Oriented Uses
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 14
business purpose offers for sale or rental, for any form of consideration,
any one or more of the following:
(1) Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films motion pictures, video cassettes or video
reproductions, compact discs, computer software, digital
recordings, slides, or other visual representations which depict or
describe “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas”, or
(2) Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia, which are designed for, or
use in connection with “specified sexual activities”.
j. Sexually Oriented Cabaret - A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features:
(1) Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or
(2) Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
“specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual activities”, or
(3) Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, compact discs,
computer software, digital recordings or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas”.
k. Sexually Oriented Conversation/Rap Parlor - A conversation/rap parlor
which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides for any form
of consideration, the service of engaging in or listening to conversation,
talk, or discussion between an employee of the establishment and a
customer, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.
l. Sexually Oriented Massage Parlor - A massage parlor which excludes
minors by reason of age, or which provides for any form of consideration,
the rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping, or rolling of the body, if the
service provided by the massage parlor is distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas”.
m. Sexually Oriented Motel - A hotel, motel or similar commercial
establishment which:
(1) Offers accommodations to the public, for any form of
consideration, provides patrons with closed-circuit television
transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or
other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the
Scott County Sexually Oriented Uses
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 14
depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or specified
anatomical areas”, and has a sign visible from the public right-ofway
which advertises the availability of this adult type of
photographic reproductions; or
(2) Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less
than ten (10) hours; or
(3) Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the
room for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.
n. Sexually Oriented Motion Picture Theater - A commercial establishment
which excludes minors by reason of age, or where, for any form of
consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar
photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized
by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas”.
o. Sexually Oriented Sauna - A sauna which excludes minors by reason of
age, or which provides, for any form of consideration, a steam bath or
heat bathing room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxing, or reducing,
utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing, or reducing agent, if the
service provided by the sauna is characterized by an emphasis on
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.
p. Sexually Oriented Theater - A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear
in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities”.
14-3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1. Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish provisions for the
opportunity as well as controls of sexually oriented uses within the County of
Scott.
2. General Provisions. Sexually oriented uses as defined in this ordinance shall
be subject to the following general provisions:
a. Activities classified as obscene as defined by Minn. Stat. § 617.241 are
not permitted and are prohibited.
b. Sexually oriented uses, either principal or accessory, shall be prohibited
from locating in any building, which is also used for residential purposes.
Scott County Sexually Oriented Uses
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 14
c. Sexually oriented uses, either principal or accessory, shall be prohibited
from locating in any building, which is also licensed to sell intoxicating
liquor, non-intoxicating malt liquor, or wine.
d. A sexually oriented use which does not qualify as a sexually oriented
use-accessory, shall be classified as a sexually oriented use-principal.
14-4 SEXUALLY ORIENTED USES - PRINCIPAL
Sexually Oriented Uses-Principal are permitted with a Conditional Use Permit in the I-1 (Rural
Industrial) District, subject to the following conditions:
1. Sexually oriented uses-principal shall be located at least one thousand (1,000)
radial feet, as measured in a straight line from the closest point of the property
line of the building in which the sexually oriented use-principal is located, to the
property line of:
a. Property zoned A-1, A-2, A-3, RR-1, RR-1C, RR-2, RR-3, UER, UER-C
UTR, UTR-C and UBR.
b. Another sexually oriented use-principal.
c. Property used for residential purposes.
d. Church or cemetery.
e. Schools.
f. Day cares.
g. Public library.
h. Government Buildings.
i. Medical Buildings.
j. Campgrounds.
k. Public parks/trails.
l. State or Federal Wildlife refuge.
m. On/off sale liquor establishments.
2. Sexually oriented use-principal shall be located at least five hundred (500) feet,
as measured in a straight line from the closest point of the property line of the
building in which the sexually oriented use-principal is located, to the right-ofScott
County Sexually Oriented Uses
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 14
way of a street with an average daily traffic count of 10,000 or more, as noted
on the most recent Traffic Volume Map from the Minnesota Department of
Transportation and Scott County.
3. Sexually oriented use-principal activities, as defined by this ordinance, shall be
classified as one use. No two (2) sexually oriented uses-principal shall be
located in the same building or upon the same property and each use shall be
subject to subsection (1) above.
4. Sexually oriented uses-principal shall, in addition to other sign requirements
established by County code or ordinance, also adhere to the following signing
regulations:
a. Sign messages shall be generic in nature, not use any sexually oriented
materials or entertainment and shall only identify the type of business
which is being conducted.
b. Sign shall not contain material classified as advertising.
c. Signs shall comply with requirements of size and number of the district in
which they are located.
5. Both the owner and manager of a Sexually Oriented Uses-Principal shall be
responsible for the conduct of their employees and for compliance with this
section.
6. No owner or manager of a Sexually Oriented Uses-Principal shall employ a
person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
7. No owner, manager, or employee of a Sexually Oriented Uses-Principal shall
have been convicted of violating this section two (2) or more times within
twenty-four (24) months or a similar ordinance or code of another jurisdiction.
8. No owner, manager, or employee of a Sexually Oriented Uses-Principal shall
have been convicted of a sex crime, as identified in Minnesota Statutes
Sections 609.293 through 609.352, 609.746 through 609.749, 609.79, 518B.01,
or related statute dealing with sexual assault, sexual conduct, harassment,
obscenity, or domestic abuse.
9. The business owner, manager, or employee of a Sexually Oriented Uses-
Principal shall ensure that no person under the age of eighteen (18) years
enters the business.
10. No owner, manager, or employee of a Sexually Oriented Uses-Principal shall
allow any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to have access to
sexually oriented materials, whether by sight, purchase, touch, or any other
means.
Scott County Sexually Oriented Uses
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 14
11. No owner, manager, or employee of a Sexually Oriented Uses-Principal may
sell or display for sale any sexually oriented material except in original,
unopened packages.
12. No owner, manager, or employee of a Sexually Oriented Uses-Principal shall
allow sexually oriented materials or entertainment to be visible or perceivable in
any manner, including aurally, at any time from outside of the business.
13. A Sexually Oriented Uses-Principal shall only be open between 7:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m., local time, Monday through Saturday.
14. No Sexually Oriented Uses-Principal shall have any booths, stalls or partitions
which separate any area from a general public room. The restrictions of this
paragraph do not apply to restrooms, storage rooms, or private offices of the
owner, manager or employees of the business, if such storage rooms are used
solely for the running of the business and no person other than the owner,
manager, and employees are allowed in the storage rooms or offices.
15. Each Sexually Oriented Uses-Principal shall display a sign on its main entrance
door, which reads: “This business sells sexually oriented materials or
entertainment. Persons under the age of eighteen (18) years are prohibited
from entering.” The sign letters shall be a minimum of two (2) inches high.
16. A Sexually Oriented Cabaret shall adhere to the following standards and
regulations:
a. An owner, operator, or manager of a Sexually Oriented Cabaret may not
allow any dancer or other live entertainer to display specified anatomical
areas or to display or perform specified sexual activities on the premises
of the Sexually Oriented Cabaret.
b. A dancer, live entertainer, performer, patron, or any other person may
not display specified anatomical areas in a Sexually Oriented Cabaret.
c. The owner, operator, or manager of a Sexually Oriented Cabaret must
provide the following information to the County concerning any person
who dances or performs live entertainment at the Sexually Oriented
Cabaret: the person’s name, home address, home telephone number,
date of birth, and any aliases.
d. A dancer, live entertainer, performer may not be under eighteen (18)
years old.
e. Dancing or live entertainment must occur on a platform intended for that
Purpose and that is raised at least two (2) feet from the level of the floor.
Scott County Sexually Oriented Uses
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 14
f. A dancer or performer may not perform a dance or live
entertainment closer than ten (10) feet from any patron.
g. A dancer or performer may not fondle or caress any patron, or
other dancer or performer, and no patron may fondle or caress any
dancer or performer.
h. A patron may not pay or give a gratuity to any dancer or performer,
and
i. A dancer or performer may not solicit or accept any pay or gratuity
from any patron.
14-5 SEXUALLY ORIENTED USES - ACCESSORY
Sexually oriented Uses-Accessory are allowed as a permitted uses in the C-1 (General
Commercial) and I-1 (Rural Industrial) District subject to the following conditions:
1. Sexually oriented uses-accessory shall:
a. Comprise no more than five percent (5%) of the floor area of the
establishment in which it is located; provided that the maximum
floor area used for sexually oriented uses-accessory may not
exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet.
b. Comprise no more than ten percent (10%) of the gross receipts of
the entire business operation.
c. Not involve or include any activity except the sale or rental of
merchandise.
2. Sexually oriented uses-accessory shall be restricted from and prohibit
access to minors by the physical separation of such items from areas of
general public access:
a. Movie Rentals. Display areas shall be restricted from general view
and shall be located within a separate room, the access of which is
in clear view and under the control of the persons responsible for
the operation of the business, or shall be in catalogs under the
direct control and distribution of the operator.
b. Magazines. Publications classified or qualifying as sexually
oriented shall not be physically accessible to minors and shall be
Scott County Sexually Oriented Uses
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 14
covered with a wrapper or other means to prevent display of any
material other than the publication title.
c. Other Use. Sexually oriented uses-accessory not specifically cited
shall comply with the intent of this Chapter subject to the approval
of the County’s Planning Manager.
3. Sexually oriented uses-accessory shall be prohibited from both internal
and external advertising and signing of sexually oriented materials and
products.
4. Sexually oriented uses-accessory activities, including sale or display of
instruments, devices or paraphernalia, which are used or designed for use
in connection with specified sexual activities, shall be prohibited at any
public show, movie, caravan, circus, carnival, theatrical, or other
performance or exhibition presented to the general public where minors
are admitted.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 15 Large Assemblies
CHAPTER 15: LARGE ASSEMBLIES
15-1 PURPOSE
This Chapter is intended to ensure that large gatherings or assemblies of 250 or more
individuals as defined by this Ordinance are conducted in accordance with proper and
acceptable sanitary, police, fire, and other health and safety considerations and
procedures to ensure the protection of the health, safety and general welfare of the
public and of the people attending or taking part in the assembly.
This Chapter shall not apply to the following:
1. Any permanent place of worship, stadium, athletic field, arena, auditorium,
coliseum or government-sponsored events including meetings, polling and
other assemblies.
2. Gatherings or activities permitted or licensed by other State laws or
regulations of the County of Scott, including the State Parks System and
the Scott County and Three Rivers Regional Park System.
3. Activities by persons operating under other permit or license issued by
other state agency or the County. Other permit or license for purposes of
this subdivision, does not include a permit or license issued by the
Minnesota Department of Health.
4. Family celebratory gathering taking place entirely upon the premises of a
family member.
15-2 PERMIT REQUIRED
No individual, except those specifically exempted in accordance with Section 15.1
herein, shall permit, maintain, conduct, promote, advertise, organize, manage or sell or
give away tickets to, an actual or reasonably anticipated assembly of 250 or more
individuals, whether upon public or private property, without a permit duly approved by
the County in accordance with this Chapter.
1. Permit. A permit shall be required for each event or series of events and
for each location individuals assemble, or can reasonably be anticipated to
assemble.
2. Non-transferability. Each permit granted to an applicant under this
Chapter shall be non-transferable.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 15 Large Assemblies
15-3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
Before any permit under this Chapter may be issued, the applicant shall demonstrate
that the proposed assembly shall satisfy the following requirements:
1. Maximum Numbers of Individuals. A permit shall only permit the
assembly of individuals of up to the maximum number of persons stated in
the permit. The County may impose restrictions on the maximum number
of individuals which shall be assembled as deemed necessary to protect
the health, safety and welfare of those persons who shall be in
attendance, the residents of the community in which the assembly shall be
held, and other residents of the County. The applicant shall not sell tickets
to, nor permit to assemble at the premises, more than the maximum
permissible number of individuals stated in the permit.
2. Fenced Grounds. A fence or barrier shall enclose the assembly area,
being not less than four feet in height and of sufficient strength to prevent
individuals from gaining unauthorized access to the assembly area, and
having sufficient entrances and exits to allow safe and easy movement
into and out of the assembly area. Parking areas intended to
accommodate vehicles shall be exempted from inclusion within the
fencing requirement, but shall be considered to be a part of the permit
premises.
3. Noise Limitations. All necessary precautions shall be taken to ensure that
the sound of the assembly shall comply with state noise rules and not
carry unreasonably beyond the Premises. Outdoor events that utilize
amplified sound may be permitted between the hours of 8:00 AM and
10:00 PM. Outdoor events held on Friday and Saturday nights with
amplified sound may be extended until 11:00 PM, provided the applicant
has arranged to have a Sheriff’s deputy present on site to monitor sound.
4. Toilets. Enclosed toilets allowing for separate use by males and females,
sufficient to accommodate the maximum number of individuals to be
assembled, shall be provided and shall be conveniently located
throughout the premises. Such facilities shall be provided in accordance
with the Minnesota State Department of Health Regulations and
Standards.
5. Solid Waste Disposal. The applicant shall maintain the premises in a neat
and orderly manner and shall provide a sanitary method of disposing of
solid waste which shall comply with all applicable State and local laws and
regulations. This method of disposal shall be designed to be of sufficient
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 15 Large Assemblies
size to contain the solid waste production of the maximum number of
individuals to be assembled at the rate of at least two and one-half (2.5)
pounds of solid waste per person, per day. The County shall retain the
right to increase the permitted premises solid waste disposal capacity
requirement as deemed appropriate. Applicant shall also provide a plan
for collecting and removal of all such solid waste at least once each day of
the assembly.
6. Parking. The applicant shall, at a minimum, provide a parking area of
sufficient size to provide parking space for the maximum number of
individuals authorized to be assembled, based upon a calculated rate of at
least one parking space for every three individuals. At a minimum,
adequate handicapped designated parking spaces shall be provided in
accordance with applicable Minnesota Rules governing the provision of
such.
7. Administrative Control Center. An administrative control center shall be
provided by the applicant which shall be equipped with a telephone by
which local authorities shall be able to contact the applicant and/or any
law enforcement personnel inside the assembly area.
8. Financial Security.
a. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall provide cash or
an irrevocable Letter of Credit in an amount to be determined by
the Planning Department. The applicant shall indemnify and hold
harmless the County of Scott or any of its agents, officials,
servants, employees, or volunteer workers from any liability, claims,
or causes of action which might arise; for payment of employees or
services provided by The County of Scott; and for any cost incurred
in cleaning up, removal and disposal of any solid waste or other
material produced or left by the Assembly.
b. In the event an applicant is found to have violated any term or
condition upon which the applicant was granted a permit, the
County may call the Letter of Credit. No portion of the Letter of
Credit shall be released to the applicant until all provisions of the
permit have been resolved to the satisfaction of the County
Planning Department.
9. Insurance. The applicant shall file with the County Planning Department,
a Certificate of Insurance demonstrating/identifying that the applicant has
obtained a policy of insurance in amount not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000) for bodily injury or death of one person, and not less than
one million dollars ($1,000,000) for bodily injury or death of two or more
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 15 Large Assemblies
persons in any one incident, and not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000) for damage to property, insuring the applicant against liability
for injury, death or property damage arising out of the assembly.
10. Medical Facilities. The applicant shall ensure the availability of at least
one state licensed emergency attendant and one registered nurse
licensed to practice in Minnesota, together with an enclosed, airconditioned
facility on the premises wherein medical treatment may be
rendered, containing at least one bed for each 500 persons. For
assemblies in excess of 1,000 persons, the necessity of additional medical
facilities and personnel shall be determined by the County in consultation
with the emergency medical providers for the assembly.
11. Security. The applicant shall prepare and implement a security, traffic,
emergency communications, and weather emergency plan which shall
meet the requirements of local authorities. The plan shall provide for
security guards who may be law enforcement officers. At least one (1)
security guard for the first 250 individuals to assemble shall be provided.
Additional security personnel shall be provided as deemed necessary by
the County Sheriff’s Office in review of the security plan. Law
enforcement personnel shall be provided as determined and deemed
appropriate by the Scott County Sheriff.
12. Fire Protection. The applicant shall submit for approval to the Fire
Marshall or Fire Chief of the Fire Department service the location of the
assembly, a plan providing for fire protection equipment, alarms and
trained personnel. A copy of the fire protection plan shall be a part of the
application.
13. Lighting. Assemblies occurring during hours of darkness shall provide
sufficient illumination to safely light the entire area of the premises
accessible to the public, but in no case less than at the rate of at least five
foot candles. Such illumination shall not unreasonably extend beyond the
boundaries of the premises.
14. Duration of Assembly. If the assembly is reasonably expected to continue
for four (4) or more consecutive hours, the applicant shall provide the
following:
a. Potable Water. Meeting all Federal and State requirements for
sanitary quality, sufficient to provide drinking water for the
maximum number of people to be assembled at the rate of at least
one (1) gallon per person per day.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 15 Large Assemblies
b. Public Telephones. Public telephones connected to outside lines
sufficient to provide services to the maximum number of people to
be assembled at the rate of at least one separate line and receiver
for every 5,000 persons or any incremental portion in excess
thereof.
15. Cleanup Plan. A plan for the removal and disposition of litter, staging,
fixtures, and other paraphernalia located within or upon the premises shall
be provided by the applicant.
16. Liquor License. Existing Liquor License may need to be amended for
outdoor sales and/or consumption.
17. Food Preparation Permit. If required receive a food preparation permit
from Minnesota State Department of Health.
18. Overnight Camping. Except for security personal no overnight camping
shall be allowed as part of a large assembly.
15-4 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
1. Application. A completed application for a large assembly permit in Scott
County requiring only an administrative review shall be made in writing on
a form provided by the County Planning Office at least forty-five (45) days
in advance of such assembly. All other large assembly permit applications
shall follow the Interim Use Permit process in Section 2-7 of this
Ordinance.
2. Verification. The application shall be signed and verified by the applicant.
In the case of an incorporated entity, the application shall be signed by the
Chair of the Board of Directors of the corporation. In the case of an
unincorporated association, society, or group, the application shall be
signed by all officers, or, if there are no officers, by all members. In the
event the assembly is to occur on property belonging to other than the
applicant, the application shall be signed by the applicant, as well as
include a notarized signature of the landlord. Alternatively, the applicant
may produce a written lease, whose term encompasses the date(s) of the
assembly, signed by the landlord granting the applicant use of the
premises and which does not covenant against the use of the premises for
an assembly.
3. Fee. The application fees for each permit issued under this Chapter shall
be in accordance with the County fee schedule as adopted by the Scott
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 15 Large Assemblies
County Board of Commissioners. The non-refundable application fee
shall be paid at the time of application.
4. Contents. The applicant shall supply all information requested on the
application form, including the following:
a. The name, date of birth, residence, and mailing address of the
applicant, and of each individual required by Section 15-4 above to
sign the application. For corporate applicants, a certified copy of
the Articles of Incorporation must be submitted with the application,
together with the names and addresses of each officer and any
stockholder holding ten (10) percent or more of the capital stock of
the corporation.
b. The address and legal description of the premises, together with
the name, residence, and mailing address of the record owner(s) of
all such property. Where the owner(s) of the property is not the
applicant, either a landlord’s written and notarized statement that
the applicant has permission to use the premises for an assembly
shall be provided except when the premises are subject to a written
lease as provided in Section 15-4.
c. The nature or purpose of the assembly.
d. The dates and times during which the Assembly is to be conducted.
e. Detailed information as to how the applicant will ensure that the
assembly will comply with all the requirements of Section 15-3 of
this Chapter.
5. Letter of Credit. The Letter of Credit and Certificate of Insurance required
by Section 15-3 of this Chapter shall accompany the application.
15-5 LOCAL APPROVAL
The applicant shall provide the County with a copy of the Town Board Resolution from
the Township wherein the event is to be held, confirming that the applicant has met all
Township requirements and that the Township has approved and authorized the event.
15-6 REVOCATION OF PERMIT
1. Revocation. Any permit issued pursuant to this Chapter may be revoked
by the County Sheriff’s Office or Planning Department for violation of any
of the provisions of this Chapter or to protect the health, welfare and
safety of the public.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 16 Uses
CHAPTER 16: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARD
16-1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Chapter is to list (in alphabetical order as it appears on Table 20-4,
define, and provide regulations specific to land uses allowed, whether permitted,
administrative, interim, conditional or accessory, in one or more zoning districts. In
many cases, one or more regulations related to a specific land use are then provided.
The standards in this Chapter shall apply in addition to all other applicable regulations of
this Ordinance. This Chapter also provides standards for open space outlots and natural
area conservation easements.
16-2 ALLOWED USES, DEFINITIONS, AND STANDARDS
1. Accessory Dwelling Unit, as defined in Chapter 1 and regulated by Chapter 7 of
this Ordinance.
2. Agricultural Building - A structure designed and constructed to house farm
implements, hay, grain, other horticultural products, poultry, or livestock, excluding
equine. This structure shall not be a place of human habitation, nor shall it be a
place used by the public. The structure may be used as a place where principal
agricultural products grown on site are processed, treated or packaged, but not on
a large industrial scale.
3. Agricultural Use - The use of land for the growing and/or production, wholesale or
seasonal-share distribution, and/or temporary on-site sale of value-added
agricultural products, field crops, livestock, and livestock products for the
production of income or own use, including but not limited to the following:
a. Field crops, including but not limited to, barley, beans, corn, hay, oats,
potatoes, rye, sorghum, and sunflowers.
b. Livestock, including but not limited to, dairy and beef cattle, goats, sheep,
hogs, poultry, game birds and other animals including deer, rabbits and mink.
c. Livestock and dairy products, including but not limited to, milk, butter, cheese,
eggs, meat, fur and honey.
d. Poultry and poultry products
e. Trees, shrubs, bushes, and plants for wholesale distribution.
f. Sod farming.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 16 Uses
g. Orchards, flowers, fruits and vegetables.
h. Agricultural seed sales.
i. Temporary roadside stand for sale of in-season agricultural products or valueadded
agricultural products planted and completely grown on the premises,
including seasonal “u-pick” sites and community supported agriculture (CSA)
operations.
4. Agricultural Machine Shop - The use of a structure, including but not limited to, the
repairing, machining, welding or sheet metal work of an agriculturally related
machine or component. This does not include the sale of new or used
components and machines.
5. Agricultural Tourism – Activities conducted for profit, year round on a regular basis,
on and accessory to a working farm and offered to the public or to invited groups
for the purpose of visitation, recreation, education, enjoyment or active involvement
in the farm operation. Activities held year round and on a regular basis can
include, but not limited to, farm stays, farm tours, hayrides, pony rides, petting
zoos, and educational events. (It does not include Farm Wineries and Vineyards,
which is listed as a separate use in this Chapter)
a. The parcel on which the agricultural tourism use is located shall be at least
twenty (20) acres in size and be actively farmed.
b. The owner or operator of the agricultural tourism use shall be the same
person or family member that owns and homesteads the property on which
the use is located.
c. The site shall be accessed by a hard surfaced road unless access via a
gravel road is approved by the local road authority.
d. On-site parking shall be provided in conformance with Chapter 5 in the
Zoning Ordinance.
e. An Individual Sewage Treatment System (ISTS) shall be provided for the
use that complies with the Scott County ISTS Ordinance No. 4
f. All buildings used in conjunction with the use shall meet the requirements of
the State Building Code
g. Any outdoor lighting shall comply with Chapter 4 of the Zoning Ordinance
h. Hours of operation shall be set as conditions by the County.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 16 Uses
i. All non-agricultural equipment and vehicles associated with the use shall be
stored within an enclosed structure, expect in agricultural zoning districts
where outdoor storage may be allowed under Chapter 8.
j. All signage shall comply with Chapter 11 of the Zoning Ordinance.
k. Additional conditions may be imposed by Staff, the Township, the Planning
Advisory Commission and County Board to ensure that the proposed use is
compatible with the surrounding land uses.
6. Animal Hospital – a place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical
treatment by a licensed veterinarian. In the C-1, General Commercial Zoning
District an animal kennel can be permitted as a use accessory to the animal
hospital provided that:
a. The number of animals boarded shall not exceed twenty (25).
b. Animal exercise areas (indoor or outdoor) may be allowed through the
Conditional Use Permit. All exercise areas must meet required property line
setbacks. Screening may be required for dog exercise areas or for exercise
areas immediately adjacent to an existing residential use.
c. A ventilation system shall be designed so that no odors or organisms will
spread between wards or to the outside air and will be capable of completely
exchanging internal air at a rate of at least twice per hour. Air temperature
must be maintained between sixty and seventy-five (60 - 75) degrees
Fahrenheit.
d. A room separate from the kennel area shall be provided of sufficient size to
adequately separate animals that are sick or injured from healthy animals.
e. Indoor animal kennel floors and walls shall be made of non-porous materials or
sealed concrete to make it non-porous.
f. Animal wastes shall be flushed down an existing sanitary sewer system or
enclosed in a container of sufficient construction to eliminate odors and
organisms and shall be properly disposed of at least once a day.
g. All State Health Department and Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
requirements for such facilities are met.
7. Animal Shelter – A facility that houses homeless, lost, abandoned, or unwanted
animals and that is operated or maintained by an entity including, but not limited to,
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 16 Uses
a humane society, animal welfare organization, or any other organization operating
for the purposes of finding permanent adoptive homes for animals.
a. The site and facility shall be in compliance with the district performance
standards of the C-1, General Commercial Zoning District and the commercial
building standards in Chapter 4 of this Ordinance.
b. An exercise area shall be provided to accommodate the periodic exercising of
animals at the shelter. An outdoor exercise area shall be fenced and hours of
use for the outdoor exercise area will be set through the CUP. An outdoor
exercise area shall be set back at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from any
residence or residential zoning district boundary, whichever is greater, existing
on the approval date of the CUP.
c. A room separate from the kennel area shall be provided of sufficient size to
adequately separate animals that are sick or injured from healthy animals.
d. Indoor animal kennel floors and walls shall be made of non-porous materials or
sealed concrete to make it non-porous.
e. A disposal plan for animal waste that describes how waste will be handled,
stored, and disposed of for the maximum number of animals at the facility shall
be approved by staff.
f. The kennel structure shall be designed to the construction methods and
specifications necessary to minimize any noise, odors, or other issues related
to the use.
g. The operator shall submit an emergency response plan to safeguard people
and animals in case of an emergency. The building shall be fitted with smoke
and carbon monoxide detectors and fire extinguishers.
h. The maximum number of animals boarded at the shelter facility shall be set in
the CUP through the review of the site plan, building plan, and adjacent land
uses. The building plan, drawn to scale, shall show the dimensions for the
animal confinement area, isolation/quarantine area, examination area, office
area, training area, and storage/equipment area. The maximum number of
dogs boarded in the shelter facility shall not exceed one hundred (100). A
shelter can exceed this number of dogs if set higher through the review and
evaluation of the CUP.
i. The animal shelter shall comply with all federal, state, and local regulations.
The operator shall provide a copy of the state’s annual kennel inspection report
each year to the Planning Department.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 16 Uses
8. Auction house, flea market – the use of a building or land for the storage and
auction or sale on premise of new and/or used goods, generally on a limited or
temporary basis.
9. Auto, farm implements, heavy equipment, truck and recreational vehicle sales,
rental and/or service. Outdoor sales/rental lot provided:
a. Sales area is delineated with a paved surface. No sales display or storage
shall occur outside the delineated sales area.
b. Sales lot must be accompanied with a building having a minimum floor area of
one thousand (1,000) square feet.
c. All lighting must comply with Chapter 4 of this Ordinance.
d. All sales items shall meet the off-street parking setbacks of Chapter 5 of this
Ordinance.
e. The sales lots shall be landscaped in accordance with Chapter 4 of this
Ordinance.
10. Auto, truck major repair, body shop - General repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of
engines, motor vehicles or trailers, including body work, framework, welding and
major painting services performed on licensed vehicles.
11. Bed & Breakfast Establishment - A business in a residential structure in which
lodging and meals are provided for compensation and which is open to the
traveling public, as regulated by Chapter 7 of this Ordinance.
12. Billboards and advertising signs, as regulated by Chapter 11 of this Ordinance.
13. Boarding or renting of rooms to not more than four (4) individuals per principal
single family dwelling sharing common facilities for living, cooking, and eating.
14. Cemetery
15. Church - A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where persons
regularly assemble for religious worship and which building, together with its
accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body
organized to sustain public worship.
16. Commercial accessory buildings -
a. Buildings not exceeding thirty (30) percent of the gross floor space of a
principal building are allowed through an administrative permit.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 16 Uses
b. Commercial accessory buildings larger than thirty (30) percent of the gross
floor space of the principal building are allowed through a conditional use
permit provided the accessory building does not exceed seventy (70) percent
of the gross floor space of the principal building.
c. Accessory buildings shall not exceed the height of the principal building.
17. Commercial Bulk Liquid Storage – Liquid storage in containers with a capacity of
ten thousand (10,000) gallons or more of oil, gasoline, liquid fertilizer, chemicals,
and similar liquids.
18. Commercial Freestanding Satellite Dishes – Commercial freestanding satellite
dishes may be allowed as permitted uses as an Administrative Use in the
Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts, and as a conditional use in the
Agricultural Zoning Districts subject to the following requirements:
a. Accessory equipment associated with a commercial freestanding satellite dish
shall be located within the principal building or within an enclosure which is
constructed of materials and color scheme compatible with the principal
building.
b. Commercial freestanding satellite dishes and any accessory equipment
enclosures shall meet the setback requirements for accessory structures
within the zoning district they are to be located.
c. No commercial freestanding satellite dishes and accessory equipment
enclosures shall be located within any utility or drainage easement.
19. Commercial Livestock Experiment Station
20. Commercial Nursery or Greenhouse - A business growing and selling trees,
flowering, decorative and/or edible plants which may be conducted in or outside a
building.
21. Community Solar Energy System, Rooftop, as regulated by Chapter 12 of this
Ordinance.
22. Community Solar Energy System, Ground Mounted, as regulated by Chapter 12 of
this Ordinance.
23. Concrete mixing plant.
24. Contractor Yard – A site used for storage of equipment and supplies used by a
contractor in operation of the business.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 16 Uses
25. Convenience Store-Gas Sales Station - An establishment whose principal
business includes the sale of foods and grocery items, and the sale of gas and oil
products from service islands. These establishments do not offer automobile
repair services such as mechanical work on engines or auto body work.
a. Pump islands and canopies shall be set back a minimum of fifty (50) feet from
public road rights-of-way.
b. When adjacent to residential property, there shall be a landscape screen in
accordance with Chapter 4 of this Ordinance.
c. All areas utilized for the storage of solid waste trash, debris, and similar items
shall be fully screened from adjacent properties and public roads. All structures
and grounds shall be maintained in an orderly, clean, and safe manner.
d. The storage/display of items for sale outside the building shall be displayed in
specially designated racks and containers and be limited to areas as
determined by the conditional use permit.
e. The convenience store-gas station shall comply with all Local County, State,
and Federal licensing regulations.
f. All exterior lighting is to be directed so as not to cast glare toward or onto the
public right-of-way or adjacent properties in accordance with Chapter 4 of this
Ordinance.
g. Business activities not listed in the definition of motor vehicle service stations in
this Ordinance and not incidental to the business are not permitted on the
premises of a motor vehicle service station unless a conditional use permit or
license is obtained specifically for such business. Such activities include, but
are not limited to, rental of vehicles, equipment, or trailers, general retail sales
and restaurant.
26. Daycare Center- Any State licensed facility, public or private, which for gain or
otherwise regularly provides one or more persons with care, training, supervision,
habilitation, rehabilitation, or developmental guidance on a regular basis, for
periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours per day, in a place other than the
person’s own home. Day care facilities include, but are not limited to, family day
care homes, group family day care homes, day care centers, day nurseries,
nursery schools, daytime activity center, day treatment programs, and other “nonresidential
programs” as defined by Minnesota Statutes, Section 245A.02,
Subdivision 10.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 16 Uses
27. Daycare, In Home – A day care service which takes place in, and is an accessory
use in a principal single family detached dwelling that is occupied by the owner or
operator of the service, which for gain or otherwise, regularly provides one or more
persons with care, training, supervision, habilitation, rehabilitation, or development
guidance on a regular basis, for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours per
day, and serves twelve (12) or fewer persons.
28. Drainage Systems/Flood Control
29. Essential Services (Governmental uses, buildings, and storage) - Governmental
services such as office buildings, garages, temporary open space, open storage
when not a principal use, fire/police stations, solid waste facilities, household
hazardous waste facilities, recreational areas, training centers, correctional
facilities or other essential uses proposed by federal, state, local, special districts
and school districts, except that schools shall not be permitted under this provision.
30. Essential Services (Infrastructure) - Underground or overhead electrical, gas,
steam or water distribution systems, collection, communications, supply or disposal
system, including poles, wire, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire
alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants or other similar equipment
and accessories; but not including buildings or transmission services.
31. Essential Services (Transmission/Utilities/Substations) - Transmission service such
as electrical power lines of a voltage of 35 KV or greater, or bulk gas or fuel being
transferred from station to station and not intended for enroute consumption or
other similar equipment and accessories. Includes substations and utility
structures. The following standards shall apply to all utility structures and
substations:
a. Utility buildings and structures such as substations shall be located not less
than fifty (50) feet from any property line.
b. An operations plan shall be submitted which, when approved, will become part
of the Conditional Use Permit.
c. Building exteriors and landscaping shall be consistent with required building
exterior and landscaping standards identified in Chapter 4 of this Ordinance.
d. The facility shall be fenced to prevent a public hazard, and adequate access
and onsite parking must be provided.
e. A deed restriction must be recorded on the parcel stating no other use other
than a utility use is permitted.
f. Lots created for utility services and equipment may be exempted from the
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 16 Uses
zoning district minimum lot performance standards.
32. Fair & Fairgrounds - Public or private event that includes all of the following:
exhibitions, buying and selling of goods, competitions, games, and entertainment,
and provided all traffic, noise, screening, and development/use compatibility issues
are addressed. The site where the fair is held shall be designated the fairgrounds.
33. Farm Equipment Sales (excluding individual farm auctions).
34. Farm Market – The sale of agricultural products or value-added agricultural
products year-round directly to the consumer from a site on a working farm.
a. The owner or operator of the farm market shall be the same person or family
member that owns and homesteads the property on which the use is located.
b. A minimum of fifty-one (51) percent of the product or value-added product for
sale in the farm market shall be agricultural and grown or produced on the farm
site.
c. The market shall be accessed by a hard surfaced road unless access via a
gravel road is approved by the local road authority.
d. On-site parking shall be provided in conformance with Chapter 5 in the Zoning
Ordinance.
e. An Individual Sewage Treatment System (ISTS) shall be provided for the use
that complies with the Scott County ISTS Ordinance No. 4
f. All buildings used in conjunction with the use shall meet the requirements of the
State Building Code
g. Hours of operation shall be set as conditions by the County.
h. All signage shall comply with Chapter 11 of the Zoning Ordinance.
i. Additional conditions may be imposed by the Staff, Township, Planning
Advisory Commission and County Board to ensure that the proposed use is
compatible with the surrounding land uses.
35. Farm Wineries and Vineyards – A farm property that grows fruits, produces and
sells wine on-site.
a. The minimum lot size for each winery and vineyard shall be 20 acres.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 16 Uses
b. A minimum of five (5) acres of the fresh fruits or agricultural products used in
the farm winery for the production of wine shall be grown or produced on the
farm.
c. Limited food preparation will be allowed on site.
d. Special events shall be permitted up to ten (10) times per year. For the
purposes of this section, a special event is one conducted at a farm winery on a
single day for which attendance is expected to exceed one-hundred fifty (150)
persons. Special events can be related to the making and marketing of wine
and/or agricultural products or can include conferences, wedding receptions,
private parties or similar events.
e. There shall be no outside amplified music – except for music performed during
a wedding ceremony – associated with any size special event.
f. All building used in conjunction with the farm winery shall meet the
requirements of the State Building Code.
g. The site shall be accessed by a hard surfaced road unless access via a gravel
road is approved by the road authority. If the use is accessed directly off a
county or state highway, turn- and/or by-pass lanes will be required and
installed prior to operation.
h. All signage shall comply with Chapter 11 in the Zoning Ordinance.
i. On-site parking shall be provided in conformance with Chapter 5 in the Zoning
Ordinance.
j. An individual Sewage Treatment system shall be provided for the farm winery
that complies with the Scott County Individual Sewage Treatment Ordinance
No. 4.
k. All winery structures, tasting room, and outdoor use areas shall be a minimum
of 100 feet from all property lines.
l. Hours of operation for the daily operation and for special events shall be set by
the County.
m. Erosion control and stormwater management shall comply with Chapter 6 of the
Zoning Ordinance.
n. With any Conditional Use Permit application additional conditions, such as
maximum attendance for special events, may be imposed by the Planning
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 16 Uses
Advisory Commission and County Board to ensure that the proposed use is
compatible with the surrounding land uses.
36. Feed mills.
37. Feedlot – A lot or building, or combination of lots and buildings, intended for the
confined feeding, breeding, raising or holding of animals and specifically designed
as a confinement area in which manure may accumulate, or where the
concentration of animals is such that a vegetative cover cannot be maintained
within the enclosure.
New Feedlot – A feedlot constructed and operated at a site where no feedlot
existed previously or where a pre-existing feedlot has been abandoned or unused
for a period of one (1) year.
All feedlots are regulated by Chapter 9 of this Ordinance.
38. Fences – Any partition, structure, wall or gate erected as a divider, marker, barrier
or enclosure and located along the boundary, or within the required yard setback,
as regulated by Chapter 4 of this Ordinance.
39. Fish and Frog Farm/Hatchery.
40. Forest and Game Management Area.
41. Freight transportation terminal – A building or area in which freight brought by a
motor truck is transferred and/or stored for movement by truck.
42. Golf Courses/Driving Ranges.
43. Grading, as regulated by Chapter 6 of this Ordinance.
44. Grain terminal.
45. Group Care Facility - A facility licensed by the State of Minnesota to provide 24-
hour-a-day care, supervision, food, lodging, rehabilitation, training, education,
habilitation or treatment outside a patient's own home.
46. Home Extended Business - An occupation or profession engaged in by the
occupant of a dwelling unit, within said dwelling unit or accessory structure, which
involves the storage of a limited amount of vehicles and equipment; repair, service
or assembly requiring equipment other than customarily found in a home; or the
storage of stock in trade incidental to the performance of a service. The proposed
activity shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the
premises, and shall only include the sale of merchandise incidental to the Home
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 16 Uses
Extended Business. As regulated by Chapter 8 of this Ordinance.
47. Home Occupation - An occupation or profession engaged in by the occupant of a
dwelling, which is clearly secondary to the principal use, when carried on within the
dwelling unit and not in an accessory building, and which shows no activity other
than activity normally present in a residential dwelling unit. As regulated by
Chapter 8 of this Ordinance.
48. Indoor commercial recreation such as bowling, billiards, and skating rinks.
49. Indoor storage space or garage rental.
50. Industrial accessory buildings and structures -
a. Buildings not exceeding fifty (50) percent of the gross floor space of a principal
building are allowed through an administrative permit.
b. Industrial accessory buildings larger than fifty (50) percent of the gross floor
space of the principal building are allowed through a conditional use permit
provided the accessory building does not exceed seventy (70) percent of the
gross floor space of the principal building.
c. Accessory buildings shall not exceed the height of the principal building.
51. Information center associated with a residential development – An Information
Center may be allowed in a residential development containing at least thirty (30)
residential lots in a final plat upon the issuance of an Administrative Permit subject
to the following conditions:
a. The building shall be limited to one-story with no basement.
b. Maximum building size is 1,000 square feet.
c. A Building Permit Application shall be submitted and building permit obtained.
Structural plans for the proposed and future (if proposed to be converted to
an accessory structure after construction of a principal structure) usage shall
be submitted. The plans shall state the building exterior type. The building
shall have handicapped accessibility (entrance, route, and bathroom). If
conversion to a residential accessory structure is intended, the exterior shall
be of the same material and color of the residence.
d. The exterior of the building shall be compatible with the structures on
adjacent parcels.
e. The driveway and parking area shall be paved.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 16 Uses
f. A landscaping plan for the building shall be submitted for staff review and
approval.
g. The septic sites on the residential lot shall be protected. A Septic Permit for a
holding tank with a pumping agreement may be allowed for the Informational
Center.
h. A letter of credit shall be filed for the estimated cost of the building
conversion, demolition, or removal.
i. The duration of the Administrative Permit shall be for a maximum of three (3)
years, unless extended by the County.
j. Said Administrative Permit shall be recorded with the Scott County
Recorder’s Office.
52. Kennels (serving 5 to 25 dogs) - Any structure or premises, private or public, in
which five (5) or more dogs over four (4) months of age are boarded, bred, trained,
or offered for sale.
53. Large assemblies, as regulated by Chapter 15 of this Ordinance.
54. Limited Livestock Raising – The confining, breeding, or raising of animals provided
the animal density does not exceed the thresholds under Section 9-2-3. This
activity is subject to regulation on parcels less than 40 acres or one quarter/quarter
section in size. Livestock raising is regulated by Chapter 9 of this Ordinance.
55. Lumber yard and landscape supply.
56. Manufacturing, processing, packaging, or assembly of products and materials.
57. Mining - The extraction of sand, gravel, rock, black dirt, peat, soil and other
material from the land and the removal thereof from the site as regulated by
Chapter 10 of this Ordinance.
58. Mobile home for family member, as regulated by Chapter 7 of this Ordinance.
59. Mobile home for full time farm employment, as regulated by Chapter 7 of this
Ordinance.
60. Mobile home while building a home, as regulated by Chapter 7 of this Ordinance.
61. Motor vehicle fuel sales and service station – A building or any portion thereof
designed primarily for the supplying of motor fuel, oil, lubrications, and accessories
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 16 Uses
for use in motor vehicles including installation and minor incidental services
provided that:
a. Pump islands and canopies shall be set back a minimum of fifty (50) feet from
public road rights-of-way.
b. When adjacent to residential property, there shall be a landscape screen in
accordance with Chapter 4 of this Ordinance.
c. All areas utilized for the storage of solid waste trash, debris, discarded parts,
used tires or batteries, and similar items shall be fully screened from adjacent
properties and public roads. All structures and grounds shall be maintained in
an orderly, clean, and safe manner.
d. The storage/display of tires, batteries, and other such items for sale outside the
building shall be displayed in specially designated racks and containers and be
limited to areas as determined by the conditional use permit.
e. The motor vehicle service station shall comply with all Local County, State, and
Federal licensing regulations.
f. All exterior lighting is to be directed so as not to cast glare toward or onto the
public right-of-way or adjacent properties in accordance with Chapter 4 of this
Ordinance.
g. Business activities not listed in the definition of motor vehicle service stations in
this Ordinance and not incidental to the business are not permitted on the
premises of a motor vehicle service station unless a conditional use permit or
license is obtained specifically for such business. Such activities include, but
are not limited to, rental of vehicles, equipment, or trailers, general retail sales
and restaurant.
h. Gas pumps located at and as part of other types of business establishments
shall require a conditional use permit.
62. Offices and professional buildings.
63. On-site loading and parking, as regulated by Chapter 5 of this Ordinance.
64. Open outdoor sales, rental or display area - Any land used or occupied for the
purpose of buying and selling goods, materials, or merchandise and/or for the
storing of same under the open sky prior to sale. These sales, rental, or display
areas shall be allowed as an accessory use in association with an allowed principal
use provided that:
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 16 Uses
a. The area so occupied shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the principal
building.
b. No storage or display of merchandise shall be permitted in required rear, side,
or front yards.
c. The outdoor sales, rental, or display area shall be included in the calculations
for parking spaces required for the use and shall not occupy space required for
parking as stipulated by Chapter 4 of this Ordinance, except as may be
exempted for cause by the Planning Department.
65. Outdoor Commercial Recreational Use – Limited to day-parks, shooting and
hunting clubs, archery ranges, and skating rinks.
66. Outdoor parking of semi-tractor trailers.
67. Outdoor storage within the industrial districts shall be an allowed accessory use
under the following conditions:
a. The outdoor storage area occupies space other than a required front yard
setback.
b. The outdoor storage area shall be fenced, screened and/or landscaped
according to a plan in compliance with Chapter 4 of this Ordinance and subject
to the approval of the Planning Department.
c. Subject to the approval of the Planning Department, the outdoor storage area is
surfaced with crushed rock, crushed concrete, Class V, asphalt, or concrete
paving or other similar materials approved by the County Planning Department
to control surface dust.
d. All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source shall not be
visible from the public right-of-way or from neighboring residences and shall be
in compliance with Chapter 4 of this Ordinance.
e. The outdoor storage area shall not encroach upon required parking space or
required loading space as required by this Ordinance.
f. The outdoor storage area shall not encroach into the required rear yard or
side yard setback area if abutting a rural residential, residential suburban or
urban expansion district.
68. Paintball Ranges – A field or property on which players use compressed-gas
powered guns to fire pellets containing paint “paintballs” at opposing players.
Paintball ranges usually consist of several fields of play within a single complex or
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 16 Uses
property. The fields generally have staging and spectator areas separated from
the playing field by netting or other physical barriers.
a. The minimum lot size for each outdoor paintball range shall be 10 acres.
b. A minimum 20-foot buffer zone between the property line of the outdoor
paintball range and the playing, staging, and spectator areas shall be
maintained.
c. A minimum 12-foot high, nylon mesh screen or other barrier shall be installed
to separate the playing areas from the 20 foot buffer zone. This screen shall
be anchored at the bottom and secure by a non-stretchable cable at the top
and bottom. If a nylon mesh screen is not incorporated into fencing, a 200-
foot buffer zone between the property lines and the playing areas shall be
maintained unless other agreements exist with adjacent landowners.
d. No outdoor lighting shall be allowed other than for building access, parking
area, driveway and signage. Nighttime use of a paintball range may be
permitted if in the opinion of the Planning Advisory Commission such use will
not be disruptive to the surrounding area. In these cases, playing, staging,
and spectator areas will be required to be lighted per Chapter 4 of this
Ordinance.
e. Only non-toxic paintballs shall be used at the paintball facility.
f. A description on the procedures for storage, maintenance and use of C02 and
other compressed air fuel stations. No long-term outside storage of CO2 and
other compressed air fuel equipment shall be allowed.
g. The outdoor paintball range operator shall carry field liability insurance and a
copy of the insurance shall be filed with the Planning Department.
h. Any vehicles brought onto the range for use as props shall require prior
approval by the Planning Department and the applicant shall submit a surety,
at a type and amount determined by the Planning Department, to insure the
vehicles are removed when the conditional use permit expires or terminates.
i. Off-street parking shall be provided per the requirements of Chapter 5 of this
Ordinance.
69. Park & Ride Facility - A surfaced parking area utilized as a congregating location
where persons can leave their personal vehicle while participating in a private or
public "car-pool" or other mass transit operation.
70. Play & Recreational Facilities – Only accessory to an existing principal permitted
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 16 Uses
use on the same lot and that are operated for the enjoyment and convenience of
the residents of the principal use and their occasional guests, except as otherwise
permitted.
71. Portable concrete and asphalt mixing plants within a permitted mining operation,
as regulated by Chapter 10 of this Ordinance.
72. Private Airport or Heliport - Any land or structure which is used or intended for use,
for the landing and take-off of aircraft, and for appurtenant land or structures used
or intended for use for port buildings or other port structures.
73. Private Campground – Overnight primitive, independent and dependent camping
activities.
74. Private Day Park - Day recreational activities which do not include overnight
camping of any type.
75. Private Garages – An accessory structure or accessory portion of the principal
structure that is intended for and used to store personal vehicles.
76. Private Horse Riding Arena, as regulated by Chapter 9 of this Ordinance.
77. Private Stable – A place where equine are kept for personal use or a place where
3 or less equine are boarded belonging to a person other than the owner or
occupant of the property for the private use of the owner of the horse being
boarded, as regulated by Chapter 9 of this Ordinance.
78. Properties with more than one (1) principal structure provided that:
a. The property shall have a properly designed and sized private well and
independent sewage treatment system to accommodate multiple principal
structures.
b. Off-street parking and loading shall comply with the performance standards of
Chapter 5 of this Ordinance.
c. The site shall be under single private ownership. The property owner shall be
responsible for site operations and maintenance.
d. All buildings must meet the industrial building type and construction standards
of Chapter 4 of this Ordinance.
e. Any change of building occupancy or use may be grounds for conditional use
permit review to determine if the site remains in compliance with the
performance standards of this Ordinance.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 16 Uses
79. Public Park, Campground, Recreation Areas, and Historic Monuments.
80. Public Stable - A place (contiguous property) where equine are kept for use by the
public, which shall include, but not be limited to, riding academies, rental, auction
houses, boarding, breeding, training and conditioning as regulated by Chapter 9 of
this Ordinance.
81. Railroad Right-of-Way.
82. Railroad Yard.
83. Recycling Center.
84. Residential Care Facility serving six (6) or fewer persons in a single family
detached dwelling.
85. Residential Care Facility not exempted by State Statutes.
86. Restaurants including fast food and drinking establishments.
87. Retail commercial establishment to include, but not limited to:
a. Retail establishments such as grocery, hardware, drug, clothing, and furniture
stores, convenience store and on-sale liquor establishments.
b. Personal services such as laundry, barber, shoe repair shop, and
photography studios.
c. Professional services such as medical and dental clinics, architects and
attorneys offices.
d. Repair services such as jewelry and radio and television repair shops.
e. Finance, insurance and real estate services.
88. Recreational vehicle and equipment parking and storage for private use of the
property owner/occupant.
89. Sales, rental, or display (indoor and outdoor) as an accessory use in association
with an allowed principal use provided that:
a. The area so occupied shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the principal
building.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 16 Uses
b. No storage or display of merchandise shall be permitted in required rear, side
or front yard setbacks.
c. The outdoor sales, rental or display area shall be included in the calculations
for parking spaces required for the use and shall not occupy space required
for parking as stipulated by Chapter 4 of this Ordinance, except as may be
exempted for cause by the Planning Department.
90. Salvage Yard - A lot, yard and/or building where vehicles or remains thereof, are
kept for the purpose of dismantling, wrecking, crushing, repairing, rebuilding, sale
of parts, sale as scrap, and/or storage, or where waste, used or secondhand
materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or
handled, including but not limited to scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags,
rubber, tires, and bottles. This definition does not include licensed sanitary or
demolition landfills.
91. Sanitary or demolition landfill.
92. Satellite dishes and antennas.
93. School and School Facilities serving fewer than 150 students.
94. Security Structure – A structure for security purposes accessory to the principal
use of the site provided the structure complies with all applicable building and fire
codes.
95. Sexually Oriented Uses, as regulated by Chapter 14 of this Ordinance.
94. Signs - Any letters, words, figures, design, symbol, trademark, or numbers,
illuminated or non-illuminated, which is intended to attract attention to any place,
business, subject, person, firm, corporation, public performance, article, machine
or merchandise whatsoever, which is painted, printed, or constructed and
displayed in any manner visible to the general public out of doors for recognized
advertising purposes, as regulated by Chapter 11 of this Ordinance.
a. Advertising/Billboard - A sign which directs attention to a business, or to a
commodity, service, or entertainment sold or offered at a location other than
the premises where the sign is located.
b. Business/Industrial - A sign which directs attention to a business or
profession, or to a commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered upon
the premises where the sign is located.
c. Construction - A sign placed at a construction site identifying the project, or
the name of the architect, engineer, contractor, or other involved parties.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 16 Uses
d. Directory - A sign or group of signs attached to a building or free standing
which identifies the business, owner, address or occupation of a group of
businesses but contains no advertising.
e. Dynamic Display - Any characteristics of a sign that appear to have
movement or that appear to change, caused by any method other than
physically removing and replacing the sign or its components, whether the
apparent movement or change is in the display, the sign structure itself, or
any other component of the sign. This includes a display that incorporates a
technology or method allowing the sign face to change the image without
having to physically or mechanically replace the sign face or its
components. This also includes any rotating, revolving, moving, flashing,
blinking, or animated display and any display that incorporates rotating
panels, LED lights manipulated through digital input, "digital ink" or any
other method or technology that allows the sign face to present a series of
images or displays.
f. Electronic Message Center – A sign whose electronic, non-pictorial
message may be changed at intervals by electronic process or remote
control and whose only movement is the periodic changing of information
having a constant light level.
g. Free Standing - A self-supported sign not affixed to another structure.
h. Illuminated - Any sign which is lighted by an artificial light source either
directed upon it or illuminated from an interior source.
i. Institutional – A sign placed at a premises having a use such as a school,
place of worship, library, post office, or public government facility.
Institutional signs shall be regulated by Chapter 11-5 of this ordinance.
j. Integral - A sign carrying the name of a building, date of erection, citations,
commemorative tablets or the like carved in stone, concrete or similar
material or made of bronze, aluminum or other permanent type of
construction and made an integral part of the structure.
k. Monument Sign - Any freestanding sign with its sign face mounted on the
ground or mounted on a base at least as wide as the sign and solid from the
grade to the top of the sign. The sign structure is typically encased or
supported by masonry materials.
l. Nameplate - A sign which states the name or address, or both, of an
occupant or business on the lot where the sign is located.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 16 Uses
m. Portable - A sign so designed as to be moveable from one location to
another and which is not permanently attached to the ground or any
structure.
n. Real Estate - A sign placed upon a property advertising that particular
property for sale, rent or lease.
o. Temporary or Seasonal - A sign placed on a lot or parcel of land for a period
not to exceed ten (10) days out of any twelve (12) month period.
95. Single Family Detached Dwellings.
96. Solid and hazardous waste transfer station.
97. Solid waste processing facility.
98. Swimming pools – Any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that
contains water over 24 inches deep shall require a building permit and shall be
subject to the following requirements and standards:
a. Outdoor swimming pools shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from any
property line, and on a corner lot shall be set back a minimum of fifteen (15)
feet from the side yard street property line. Any associated pool patio,
walkway, ground level deck, or other associated improved space shall be
located a minimum of five (5) feet from any property line. No swimming pool
shall be located within a required front yard area or within any recorded
easement.
b. All outdoor swimming pools shall comply with the International Building Code
(IBC) for pool barrier requirements.
c. A swimming pool that is totally contained within a residential structure and
surrounded on all four sides by walls of said structure shall be considered an
indoor pool and shall be required to meet required structure setbacks.
99. Temporary, outdoor promotional events and sales provided that:
a. The event shall not exceed fourteen (14) consecutive calendar days.
b. No more than three (3) events per calendar year per site.
c. A certificate of insurance may be required as part of the administrative permit.
100. Temporary structures provided that:
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 16 Uses
a. The temporary structure may be utilized for not more than thirty (30)
consecutive calendar days.
b. Temporary structures may be used for three (3) events during a calendar year.
c. A certificate of insurance may be required as part of the administrative permit.
101. Towers less than 35 feet in height for private use.
102. Truck Stop - A motor fuel station devoted principally to the needs of semitractor/
trailer units and trucks, and which may include eating and/or sleeping
facilities, but not to include a motel or a hotel.
103. Warehousing.
104. Wholesaling.
105. Wind Energy Conversion Systems - Any device such as a wind charger, windmill,
or wind turbine, which converts wind energy to a form of useable energy, as
regulated by Chapter 12 of this Ordinance.
106. Wireless communication towers and antennas as regulated by Chapter 13 of this
Ordinance.
107. Wireless communication antennas and related accessory buildings located upon a
public or quasi-public structure or existing tower as regulated by Chapter 13 of this
Ordinance.
108. Yard and tree waste composting site.
16-3 OPEN SPACE OUTLOTS
This section includes standards and requirements for the four types of open space
outlots that can be designated through the land development process: Future
Development, Recreation, Natural Area, and Agriculture.
1. Future Development Outlots:
a. The minimum acreage of buildable land required for Future Development
outlots is established under the open space performance standards in all
applicable cluster zoning districts.
b. The following uses are permitted in designated Future Development outlots in
the UER-C and UTR-C zoning districts: agricultural uses, pastures, trails,
community gardens, informal turf play areas, orchards, domestic sewage
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 16 Uses
disposal systems under an approved OSD or PUD.
c. The following uses are permitted in designated Future Development outlots in
the RR-1C and RR-2 zoning districts: agricultural uses, pastures, private
stables, trails, community gardens, informal turf play areas, orchards,
domestic sewage disposal systems under and approved OSD or PUD. In
addition, accessory buildings are permitted under the following conditions:
(1) The outlot must be owned in common with the adjacent lot.
(2) The accessory building on the outlot shall be located no farther than
100 feet from the principal home on the adjacent lot.
(3) The maximum size and height of the accessory building on the
outlot shall conform to the adjacent lot’s size and height requirements.
(4) The accessory building shall be used for personal storage only.
d. Future Development outlots may be owned by an individual or in common. If
owned in common, management of the outlot shall be the responsibility of
that subdivision’s homeowner association. In the case where at least one (1)
outlot of open space is held in common ownership, a homeowner association
shall be established for that subdivision. Membership in the association by all
property owners in the subdivision shall be mandatory.
e. Open space easements or deed restrictions shall not limit or prevent the
ability to develop Future Development outlots when urban services are
available or the Comprehensive Plan supports further development.
f. Deed restrictions shall be placed on all newly created cluster lots informing
the potential buyer that the adjoining Future Development outlot is intended
for future urban development when public utilities become available or future
rural development when rezoning occurs.
g. The location of Future Development outlots should be related to the
residential cluster subdivision in a manner that best represents a logical
expansion of the development pattern, extension of streets, utilities and other
support infrastructure.
h. A build out plan (ghost plat) shall be required for all Future Development
outlots describing and illustrating how the interim rural cluster development
will be integrated with future development. The build out plan shall include
and illustrate:
(1) How the Future Development outlot(s) will be subdivided into urban
residential lots in the future if in urban expansion or urban transition
areas; or into rural lots in rural residential areas.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 16 Uses
(2) How the interim rural residential lots could be re-subdivided into
urban residential lots in the future, if in urban expansion or urban
transition areas.
(3) The layout of future streets or extensions.
(4) Easements for the extension of utilities and stormwater
management.
(5) Provide information on agreements, escrow accounts, subordinate
service districts, or other funding mechanisms to cover the future
costs for converting the interim rural development to an ultimate
urban development if in urban expansion or urban transition areas.
(6) For Future Development outlots in urban expansion or transition
areas, the build out plan shall conform to the land use densities
established in the nearest city’s comprehensive plan. If a land use
category is not defined, the build out plan shall demonstrate an
overall density of three (3) units per acre for the entire parcel.
2. Recreation Outlots.
a. The location and amount of land designated as Recreation outlots shall be
established through the land development review and approval process.
b. Recreation outlots shall be located such that they are an integral part of the
neighborhood, at an elevation appropriate to their intended recreational use,
defined by coherent boundaries, and accessible to all neighborhood
residents. Neighborhood recreation open spaces may include, but are not
limited to, greens, commons, playgrounds, ball fields, gardens, trails, or other
recreational areas.
c. Recreation outlots intended as public parks or public trails shall be deeded to
the County or Township. Management and maintenance of the public
Recreation outlots shall be the responsibility of the County or Township.
Private Recreation outlots intended to serve only the residents of the
neighborhood shall be under common ownership of a homeowners
association. Management and maintenance of private Recreation outlots shall
be the responsibility of the homeowners association.
3. Natural Areas Outlots:
a. The location and amount of land designated as Natural Area outlots shall be
established through the land development review and approval process.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 16 Uses
b. Natural Area outlots are intended to provide permanent protection of unique
natural resources and wildlife habitat land located within Natural Area
Corridors as defined in the Comprehensive Plan. Conservation easements
are required to ensure development of the land is restricted and long-term
maintenance and monitoring is enforced as established in Section 16-4.
4. Agricultural Outlots.
a. The location and size of an Agricultural outlot shall be established through the
land development review and approval process.
b. The following uses are permitted in designated Agricultural outlots:
agricultural uses, orchards, storm water management areas.
c. Agricultural outlots are intended to provide long-term farmland use until future
development options are available.
5. Homeowners Associations: A homeowners association shall be established for
the purpose of maintaining any commonly-owned land or facilities. Membership
in the association is mandatory for all purchasers of homes in the development
and their successors. A homeowners association agreement, guaranteeing
continuing maintenance shall be submitted to the County as part of the
application submittals required for land development approval. The homeowners
association documents or the declaration of covenants, conditions and
restrictions shall contain the following information:
a. The legal description of the common lands or facilities.
b. The restrictions placed upon the use and enjoyment of the lands or
facilities including the persons or entities entitled to enforce the
restrictions.
c. A mechanism for resolving disputes among the owners or association
members.
d. A mechanism to assess and enforce the common expenses for the land or
facilities including upkeep and maintenance expenses, real estate taxes
and insurance premiums.
e. The conditions and timing of the transfer of ownership and control of land
or facilities to the association or to common ownership.
f. Any other matter the developer deems appropriate.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 16 Uses
16-4 NATURAL AREA CONSERVATION EASEMENTS
The following requirements apply for all easements intended for conserving Natural
Area Corridors (see Chapter 6 for requirements applied to wetland buffer conservation
easements).
1. Acquisition of Easements. The County may acquire Natural Area conservation
easements over any eligible platted or unplatted land within the county by
voluntary dedication, purchase, gift, grant, bequest, devise, covenant or contract.
2. Easements as Public Values. In some cases, voluntary dedication of a Natural
Area conservation easement shall be considered a public value, and a
negotiated part of the County’s Planned Unit Development (PUD) process.
3. Nature of Restrictions. Natural Area conservation easements shall be permanent.
The specific terms of the easement shall be negotiated on a case-by-case basis.
The terms shall be designed to protect the property’s resource values, as
identified through the land development review and approval process.
4. Holding of Easements. At the directions of the County Board, Natural Area
conservation easements shall be held by Scott County. A co-hold arrangement
with a third party (such as a land trust or similar organization authorized to hold
interest in real property pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Section 84C.0405) will
be considered on a case-by-case based depending on the will of the landowner.
5. Documentation. Natural Area conservation easements must be shown on a
preliminary plat or provided under a legal description. Easement documents
must be recorded. The values that the conservation easement is intended to
protect are defined and recorded in the baseline documentation consisting of a
baseline property and ecological report. At the time the easement is recorded,
documentation of the property, and its existing natural resources and ecological
condition shall be conducted and prepared into a baseline property and
ecological report. It shall include, at a minimum, a site map and an evaluation
and discussion of land cover, plant communities and water resources, invasive
species survey and mapping, identification of rare natural resource features, and
an evaluation of the ecological condition of the property. The report shall be
prepared using aerial photographs, maps, site visits, field surveys, a review of
existing natural resource inventories and rare features records. The natural
resource and ecological evaluation shall be conducted by a professional
ecologist approved by County staff. Such documentation shall be updated
periodically by the easement holder(s). Such studies and monitoring shall be
conducted according to commonly accepted best practices.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 16 Uses
6. Easement Costs: Any costs related to the surveying, creating legal descriptions,
preparing a baseline property and ecological report, creating a stewardship plan,
closing and recording of conservation easements will be the responsibility of the
landowner or developer.
7. Easement Stewardship Plan. As part of the conservation easement negotiation
and documentation process, an easement stewardship plan will be required. The
terms and conditions of the easement stewardship plan shall be determined on a
case-by-case basis. At a minimum, a stewardship plan will include an ecological
evaluation of the property (as required in the baseline property and ecological
report) and a schedule of maintenance activities to sustain the ecological value
of the property and to control noxious weeds, estimated costs and an
identification of roles and responsibilities and funding sources.
8. Easement Endowment Fund. To fund the on-going administrative activities
associated with the easement, an endowment shall be required. The amount of
this endowment will be calculated using the County’s conservation easement
project cost analysis. The endowment fund will be held by the holder of the
conservation easement.
9. Monitoring. Natural Area conservation easements shall be monitored on a
regular basis to ensure compliance. Monitoring may include a site visit. The
County may contract with an outside organization to document and monitor
easements, or the HOA may be responsible for monitoring and reporting to the
County.
10. Monuments: All areas protected by a conservation easement shall be marked
with permanent markets or monuments to ensure easement boundaries can be
identified in the field.
11. Enforcement. If the terms of the conservation easement are violated, the
easement holder(s) may pursue all legal remedies available, including, but not
limited to, correction of the violation.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 20 General Zoning District Provisions
CHAPTERS 17-19: RESERVED
CHAPTER 20: GENERAL ZONING DISTRICT PROVISIONS
20-1 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
In order to classify, regulate and restrict the location of trade and industry, and the
location of buildings designated for specific uses, to protect residential uses, to regulate
and limit the height and bulk of buildings hereafter erected or altered, to regulate and
limit the intensity of the use of lot areas, and to regulate and determine the areas of
yards and open space within and surrounding such buildings, Scott County is hereby
divided into zoning districts. The use, height and area regulations shall be uniform in
each district, and said districts shall be known as:
20-1-1 Agricultural/Rural Districts
1. A-1, Agricultural Preservation District.
2. A-2, Agricultural Woodlands District.
3. A-3, Agricultural Preservation Density District.
20-1-2 Urban Reserve Districts
1. UER, Urban Expansion Reserve District.
2. UER-C, Urban Expansion Reserve Cluster District.
3. UBR, Urban Business Reserve District.
4. UTR, Urban Transition Reserve District.
5. UTR-C, Urban Transition Reserve Cluster District.
20-1-3 Residential Districts
1. RR-1, Rural Residential Reserve District.
2. RR-1C, Rural Residential Reserve Cluster District.
3. RR-2, Rural Residential Single Family District.
4. RR-3, Residential Suburban Single Family District.
20-1-4 Commercial Districts
1. C-1, General Commercial District.
20-1-5 Industrial Districts
1. I-1, Rural Industrial District.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 20 General Zoning District Provisions
20-1-6 Overlay Districts
1. SL, Shoreland District.
2. FP, Floodplain District.
3. PUD, Planned Unit Development District.
20-2 ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
Zoning district boundary lines established by this Ordinance generally follow lot lines,
the centerlines of railroad rights-of-way, street rights-of-way, water courses or the
corporate limit lines, all as they exist upon the effective date of this Ordinance.
20-2-1 Appeals
Appeals concerning the exact location of a zoning district boundary line shall be heard
by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals pursuant to Section 2-2 of this Ordinance.
20-2-2 Road Vacation
Whenever any road, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the county
or township, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley or public way
shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation, and all areas included in
the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all appropriate regulations of the
extended districts.
20-2-3 Rights-of-Way
All roads, alleys, public ways and railroad rights-of-way, if not otherwise specifically
designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the property in the most
restrictive classification immediately abutting upon such alleys, roads, public ways or
railroad rights-of-way. Where the centerline of a road, alley, public way or railroad rightof-
way serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such area, unless otherwise
specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property
up to such centerline.
20-2-4 Water Areas
All areas within the County that are under water and which are not shown as included
within any zone shall be subject to all regulations of the zone which immediately adjoins
such water area. If such water area adjoins two or more zones, the boundaries of each
zone shall be construed to be extended into the water area in a straight line until they
meet the other district at the half way point and/or to the corporate limits.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 20 General Zoning District Provisions
20-3 ZONING MAP
The location and boundaries of the districts established by this text and hereby set forth
on the zoning map entitled “Scott County Zoning Map.” Said map shall be on file with
the Planning Department and hereinafter referred to as the “zoning map.” Said map
and all the notations, references and other information shown thereon shall have the
same force and effect as if fully set forth herein and thereby made a part of this
Ordinance by reference. It is the responsibility of the Planning Department to maintain
the Scott County Zoning Map, and amendments thereto shall be recorded on said map.
The official Scott County Zoning Map shall be kept on file in the County Courthouse.
20-4 USES TABLE
UNION PACIFICRAILROAD
UNION PACIFIC RAILROAD
UNION
PACIFIC
RAILROAD
UNION PACIFIC RAILROAD
CANADIAN PACIFIC
UNION PACIFIC R.R.
River
Porter
Minnesota
Minnesota
River
Minnesota
River
Minnesota River
Minnesota
River
Minnesota
River
Raven
Stream
Raven
Stream
Raven
Stream
Creek
Sand
Creek
Creek
Sand
Porter
Creek
Vermillion
River
Sand
Creek
River
Credit
Robert
Creek
Big Possum
Creek
Creek
Sand
Lake
Fish
Lake
Pik e
Howard
Lake
Cedar
Lake
Strunks
Lake
Giffor d
Lake
Dea n
Lake
Cedar
Lake
St. Catherine
Lake
McMahon
L ake
Rice
Lake
Lenn on
Lake
Cynthia
Lake
Pleasant
Lake
Clarks
Lake
Geis
Lake
Swamp Lake
Thole
Lake
Lake
O'Dowd
Blue
Lake
Rice
Lake
Lower Prior Lake
Upp er Prior Lake
Markley
Lake
Crystal
Lake
Cleary Lake
Hanrehan
L ake
Murph y
Lake
Sutton
Lake
Buck
Lake
Kane
Lak e
Horseshoe
Lake
Browns
Lak e
Alswede
Lake
Fisher
Lake
Spring Lake
Rice
Lake
Hickey
Lake
Campbell
Lake
Lake
Schneider
GïWXGïWX
GÏWXGÏWX
GïWXGïWX
GqWXGqWX
)y)y
GÝWXGÝWX
GpWXGpWX
GWXÏ GWXo SÎ )y
?±A@?±A@
)y)y
?ÌA@?ÌA@
GWXÏ GWXr
SÌSÌ
GpWXGpWX GpWXGpWX
?±A@?±A@
GWXØ GWXØ GWXp GWX|
SÈSÈ GÝWXGÝWX
GWX± GWX± GWXr GWX± GWX±
SÄSÄ SÎSÎ GqWXGqWX
GuWXGuWX
GnWXGnWX GnWXGnWX
GoWXGoWX SÎSÎ
GÝWXGÝWX
GWXqGWXÜ GWXÜ
)y)y G|WXG|WX
GWX³ GWX³
GuWXGuWX
SÐSÐ
GuWXGuWX
SÅ GWXk
?±@A SÖ
GwWXGwWX
SÎ GWXu GqWXGqWX G|WXG|WX
?ÒA@?ÒA@
GWXo ?±@A
GuWXGuWX
)y SÖ
GWXÎ GWXÎ
?º@A SÆ SÖ ?ÒA@?ÒA@ GåWXGåWX
SÐ GWXw
GiWXGiWX GiWXGiWX GiWXGiWX
SÎ GWXå GWXÎ SÁ GWXi GWXi GÅWXGÅWX
GWXo SÖ
SÐSÐ
S¼
SÁ GWXj GWXg
SË GWXg GWXg GWXg ?¾@A GWXo !"$` GWXe ?±@A SÖ GWX¸
S¿ SØ Ss S¿ GWXw
?¾A@?A@
)y GWXå
GWXe GWXd GWXf S¿ S¿ S¿ Ss G`WXG`WX
GbWXGbWX GdWXGdWX
S¿ GWX| GWX`S»
S¿ S½ S½
GjWXGjWX
S» S± S¼ ?º@A S´ S½ S½
GÅWXGÅWX SÖSÖ
GfWXGfWX
S¬ GWX` GWXc GWX¸ S´ S´
GdWXGdWX
GfWXGfWX
SØSØ GwWXGwWX GåWXGåWX
Sö GWXa GWXa GWXa GWXa S¼ SÚ GWXa
GoWXGoWX
SÔSÔ
S¬ )y)y S± GoWXGoWX !"`$!"`$
G©WXGWX
GWXb GWXf GWXj ?º@A GWX© SØ ?±@A SÚ GWX¸
G|WXG|WX
GdWXGdWX
GwWXGwWX
?¸@A ?¸@A ?¸@A ?±@A ?¸@A ?¸@A GWXà GWXà GWXà
GbWXGbWX GdWXGdWX
GpWXGpWX
GpWXGpWX
?ÒA@?ÒA@
GuWXGuWX
GuWXGuWX
Cedar
Lake Twp
St.
Lawrence
Twp
Louisville
Twp
Jordan Credit
River
Twp
Savage
Sand
Creek Twp
Elko New
Market
Spring
Lake
Twp
Belle
Plaine
Twp
New
Prague
Shakopee
Jackson Twp
New
Market
Twp
Prior Lake
Helena Twp
Belle Plaine
Blakeley Twp
This map is a legally recorded document. It it a compilation of records, information, and data located in various county, township,
city, and state offices, and other sources affecting the area shown, and is to be used for reference purposes only.
This is not a survey and is not intended to be used as one. Scott County is not responsible for any inaccuracies herein contained.
If discrepancies are found, please contact Scott County Zoning Administration or the Scott County Surveyors Office.
Scott County Zoning
SCOTT COUNTY COMMUNITY SERVICES DIVISION Scott County Zoning Districts
Zoning Administration
200 Fourth Avenue West, Shakopee, Minnesota 55379-1220
(952) 496-8475 - Fax (952) 496-8496 - Web: www.scott.mn.us
Ü
0 1 2 4 6
Miles
Zoning Districts
UTR-C Urban Transition Reserve Cluster
A-1 Agricultural Preservation District
A-2 Agricultural Woodlands District
A-3 Agricultural Preservation Density District
UER Urban Expansion Reserve
UER-C Urban Expansion Reserve Cluster
UBR Urban Business Reserve
RR-1 Rural Residential Reserve District
RR-1C Rural Residential Reserve Cluster District
RR-2 Rural Residential Single Family District
RR-3 Residential Suburban Single Family District
C-1 General Commercial District
I-1 Rural Industrial District
Lakes
Overlay Districts
PUD Planned Unit Development
UTR Urban Transition Reserve
Effective: January 20, 2010
Updated: January 1, 2017
City Zoning Authority
Municipalities
Table 20-4
Use A-1 A-2 A-3 UER UER-C UBR UTR UTR-C RR-1 RR-1C RR-2 RR-3 C-1 I-1
Accessory Dwelling Unit, Attached AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD
Accessory Dwelling Unit, Detached I I I I I I I I I I I I
Agricultural buildings P P P P P-10 P P P-10 P P-10 P P
Agricultural uses P P P P P P P P P P P P
Agricultural machine shop C C C I I-10 I C C-10 C C-10
Agricultural Tourism C C C I I I I C
Animal hospital C C C C C C C AD
Animal shelter C
Auction house, flea market C
Auto, implements, heavy equipment, truck, RV sales C
Auto, truck major repair, body shop C
Bed and breakfast establishment C C C C C C C C C C
Billboard/Advertising Signs C
Boarding or renting of rooms AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC
Cemetery C C C C C C C C C C C
Church C C C C C C C C C C C
Commercial accessory building up to 30% gross sq ft AC
Commercial accessory building 30-70% gross sq ft C
Commercial bulk liquid storage C C I I I I C
Commercial freestanding satellite dish C C C P P
Commercial livestock experiment station C C
Commercial nursery or greenhouse C C C I C C C C
Community solar energy system, rooftop AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC
Community solar energy system, ground mounted C C C I I I I I I
Concrete mixing plant C
Contractor yard C
Convenience Store-Gas Sales Station C
Daycare center AD
Daycare, In Home AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC
Drainage systems/flood control P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Essential services - Government uses, buildings, storage C C C C C C C C C C C C C
Essential services - Infrastructure P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Essential services - Transmission/Utilities/Substations C C C C C C C C C C C C C
Fair and fairgrounds C C
Farm equipment sales I I I I I I
P = Permitted Use C = Conditional Use I = Interim Use AD= Administrative Use AC = Accessory Use Blank = Prohibited Use
P-10, C-10, I-10 = Use is allowed only on parcels 10 acres or greater
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 20 General Zoning District Provisions
Table 20-4
Use A-1 A-2 A-3 UER UER-C UBR UTR UTR-C RR-1 RR-1C RR-2 RR-3 C-1 I-1
Farm Markets C C C I I I I C
Farm wineries and vineyards C C C I I I I C
Feed mills AD
Feedlots (new) greater than 50 animal units P P C C P
Feedlots greater than 250 animal units P P C C C C
Feedlots greater than 500 animal units C C C
Fences AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC
Fences taller than maximum height standards AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD
Fish and frog farm/hatchery C I I I C
Forest or game management P P P P P P P P P P
Freight transportation terminal C
Golf courses/driving ranges C C C C C C C C C C
Grading permit AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD
Grain terminal C
Group care facility C C
Home extended business C C C I I-10 I I I-10 I I-10 I-10
Home occupations AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD
Indoor commercial recreation AD AD
Indoor storage space or garage rental AD AD
Industrial accessory building 50-70% gross sq ft C
Industrial accessory building up to 50% gross sq ft AC
Informational center with residential subdivision AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD
Large assembly for 250-499 individuals AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD
Large assembly for greater than 500 individuals I I I I I I I I I
Kennel with 5 to 25 dogs C C C I I I C
Limited livestock raising P P P P P-10 P P P-10 P P-10 P-10
Lumber yard and landscape supply C C
Manufacturing, processing, packaging or assembly AD
Mining I I I I I I I I I
Mobile home for infirmed family member I I I I I I I
Mobile home for full time farm employment I I I I I I I
Mobile home while building new home I I I I I I I
Motor vehicle fuel sales and service C
Motor vehicle repair garage C
Offices and professional buildings AD AD
P = Permitted Use C = Conditional Use I = Interim Use AD= Administrative Use AC = Accessory Use Blank = Prohibited Use
P-10, C-10, I-10 = Use is allowed only on parcels 10 acres or greater
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 20 General Zoning District Provisions
Table 20-4
Use A-1 A-2 A-3 UER UER-C UBR UTR UTR-C RR-1 RR-1C RR-2 RR-3 C-1 I-1
On-site parking and loading AC AC
Open outdoor sales, rental, or display area AD
Outdoor commercial recreation C C C C
Outdoor parking of semi-tractor trailers AC
Outdoor storage accessory to principal use AC
Paintball range C C C C
Park and ride facility C C C C AD
Play and recreational facilities AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC
Portable concrete and asphalt mixing plants I I I I I I I
Private airport or heliport C C C C C
Private campground/day park C C C I I I I C I I
Private garages and on-site parking AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC
Private stable P P P P P-10 P P P-10 P P-10 P-10
Private stable with excess animal units C C C C
Properties with more than one principal structure C C
Public parks, campgrounds, rec. areas P P P P P P P P P P P P
Public stable C C C I I-10 C C I-10 I-10
Railroad ROW P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Railroad yard C
Recycling center C
Residential care facility with 6 or fewer persons P P P P P P P P P P P P
Residential care facility not exempted by state statutes C C
Restaurant including fast food and drinking establishment C
Retail commercial establishment AD
RV parking and storage for private use AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC
Sales display access. to principal use (in/outdoor) AD AD
Salvage yard C
Sanitary or demolition landfill C
Satellite dishes and antennas AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC
School and facilities serving less than 150 students C
Security structure AD AD
Sexually Oriented Uses C
Signs AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC
Single family detached dwellings P P P P P P P P P P P P
Solid and hazardous waste transfer station C
P-10, C-10, I-10 = Use is allowed only on parcels 10 acres or greater
P = Permitted Use C = Conditional Use I = Interim Use AD= Administrative Use AC = Accessory Use Blank = Prohibited Use
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 20 General Zoning District Provisions
Table 20-4
Use A-1 A-2 A-3 UER UER-C UBR UTR UTR-C RR-1 RR-1C RR-2 RR-3 C-1 I-1
Solid waste processing facility C
Swimming pools AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC
Temporary outdoor promotional event and sales AD AD
Temporary roadside stand for ag sales AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC
Temporary structure AD AD
Towers less than 35 feet in height for personal use AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD
Truck stop C
Warehousing AD
Wholesaling AD
Wind energy conversion systems - commercial C C C C C C C C C
Wind energy conversion systems - non-commercial AD AD AD AD AD AD AD-10 AD AD
Wireless communication antennas AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD AD
Wireless communication towers and antennas (see Chapter 13) C C C C C C C AD AD
Yard and tree waste composting site C
P = Permitted Use C = Conditional Use I = Interim Use AD= Administrative Use AC = Accessory Use Blank = Prohibited Use
P-10, C-10, I-10 = Use is allowed only on parcels 10 acres or greater
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 20 General Zoning District Provisions
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 21 Official Map
CHAPTER 21: OFFICIAL MAP
21-1 PURPOSE
Land that is needed for future street and highway purposes and as sites for other
necessary public facilities including public facilities such as parks, playgrounds, schools
and other public buildings, civic centers, and travel service facilities is frequently
diverted to non-public which could have been located on other lands without hardship or
inconvenience to the owners. When this happens, public uses of land may be denied or
may be obtained only at prohibitive costs or at the expense of dislocating the owners
and occupants of the land. Identification on an official map of land needed for future
public uses permits both the public and private property owners to adjust their building
plans equitably and conveniently before investments are made which will make such
adjustments difficult to accomplish. It is the purpose of this ordinance to establish a
uniform procedure for the proper use of official maps as authorized by Minnesota
Statutes 394.
21-2 OFFICIAL MAP DEFINITION
"Official Map" as used in this ordinance means a map adopted in accordance with this
ordinance showing existing county roads and county state aid highways, proposed
future county roads and highways, the area needed for widening of existing county
roads and highways, and existing future state trunk highway right-of-ways. An official
map may also show the location of existing public lands and facilities and other land
needed for future public purposes, including public facilities such as parks, playgrounds,
schools and other public buildings, civic centers and travel service facilities.
21-3 INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS
Proceedings for adoption, amendment or repeal of an official map or any part thereof
may be initiated by (1) a recommendation of the Planning Commission or (2) action by
the County Board on its own initiative, recommendations of an advisory commission or
the request of an outside governmental body.
21-4 SKETCH MAPS AND REPORTS
Every proposal or request for an official map or its amendment or repeal however
initiated, shall be accompanied by a sketch map or plat showing the lands proposed to
be included and the public purpose to be served. The County Board may request a
report of the Planning Commission as to the feasibility of any construction involved.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 21 Official Map
21-5 REFERENCE TO PLANNING COMMISSION
Except when proceedings have been initiated by recommendations of Planning
Commission, every proposed official map or change in a map shall be referred to the
Planning Commission for advice and recommendations for adoption by the County
Board.
21-6 NOTICE
Public hearings on proposed official maps and amendments shall be held in accordance
with Minnesota Statutes 394.26 and Scott County Zoning Ordinance 2-5-2. In addition,
at least 10 days prior to the hearing, a copy of the notice shall be sent to the governing
bodies of all towns and municipalities located within the county within 2 miles of the
affected property.
21-7 PREPARATION AND FILING OF MAPS
The official map or maps shall be prepared in sufficient detail to permit the
establishment of future acquisition lines on the ground. In unplatted areas, a centerline
survey shall be made prior to the preparation of the final draft of the official map. The
accuracy of the future acquisition line shown on the official map shall be attested to by
the county surveyor. After enactment of any ordinance adopting an official map or
amending or repealing a previous official map ordinance, a certified copy of the official
map or section to which the ordinance relates together with an attached copy of the
ordinance shall be filed with the County Auditor who shall file a certified copy thereof
with the County Recorder for record. In addition, one copy of the official map or section
to which the ordinance relates, together with an attached copy of the ordinance shall be
furnished to the town clerk of each affected town.
21-8 EFFECT
After an official map has been adopted and filed, the issuance of land use permits,
building permits, or zoning permits shall be subject to the provisions of this ordinance.
The county shall deny every application for a permit to construct a new building or
structure or expand an existing building or structure within any area designated on the
official map. Whenever any street or highway is widened or improved or any new street
is opened or any interest in land for other public purposes is acquired by the county, the
county is not required in such proceedings to pay for any building or structure placed
without a permit or in violation of conditions of a permit within the limits of area identified
on the official map for public purposes. The adoption of an official map does not give
the county any right, title or interest in areas identified for public purposes thereon, but
the adoption of the map does authorize the county to acquire such interest without
paying compensation for buildings or structures erected in those areas without a permit
or in violations of the conditions of a permit. This does not apply to the buildings or
structures in existence prior to the filing of the official map.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 21 Official Map
21-9 APPEALS
Whenever a building permit is denied pursuant to this ordinance, the owner may appeal
to the Scott County Board of Adjustment & Appeals pursuant to Minnesota Statute 394
and Section 2-2-2 of the Scott County Zoning Ordinance. If the board of adjustment
authorizes the issuance of a permit the board shall have six months from the date of the
decision of the board of adjustment to institute proceedings to acquire such land or
interest therein, and if no such proceedings are started within that time, the officer
responsible shall issue a permit in accordance with the conditions stated in the
authorization specifying the exact location, ground area, height and other details as to
the extent and character of the building for which the permit is granted.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 25 A-1, Agricultural Preservation District
CHAPTERS 22-24: RESERVED
CHAPTER 25: A-1, AGRICULTURAL PRESERVATION DISTRICT
25-1 PURPOSE
This district is intended primarily for application in those areas of Scott County where it
is desirable, because of the high quality of soils, availability of water and highly
productive capability of the land, to preserve, promote, maintain and enhance the use of
land for agricultural purposes and to protect this land from encroachment by nonagricultural
uses, structures and activities.
25-2 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, INTERIM, ADMINISTRATIVE AND ACCESSORY
USES
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this Ordinance, refer to
Table 20-4 for a list of permitted, conditional, interim, administrative, and accessory
uses in the A-1, Agricultural Preservation District.
25-3 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
The following performance standards shall be observed in the A-1, Agricultural
Preservation District subject to the additional requirements, exceptions, and
modifications set forth in this Ordinance:
1. Platting Required for Institutional Uses. No building shall be constructed
on unplatted property, except for the addition of accessory structures or
additions to existing buildings.
2. Density Maximum. One (1) dwelling unit per forty (40) acres, or quarterquarter
section.
3. Lot Size Minimum. Forty (40) acres or one quarter-quarter section for a
single family detached dwelling.
4. Lot Width Minimum. Six hundred (600) feet measured at the building site
for parcels created prior to March 2, 1996. Parcels created after March 2,
1996 must have six hundred (600) feet in width maintained at the front
setback line and extending to the location of the principal structure.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 25 A-1, Agricultural Preservation District
5. Front Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. One hundred fifty (150)
feet from the centerline of a County or State road or one hundred (100)
feet from the County or State road right-of-way, whichever is greater, or
one hundred (100) feet from the centerline of the local public street, or
sixty-seven (67) feet from the local public street right-of-way, whichever is
greater. On lots less than two (2) acres, thirty-five (35) feet from the road
right-of-way on a local street, one hundred (100) feet from the right-of-way
on other public roads.
6. Side Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. Thirty (30) feet. On lots
of record less than two (2) acres, fifteen (15) feet. Front yard setbacks
shall apply to side yards adjoining a street on corner lots.
7. Rear Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. Sixty (60) feet. On lots
of record less than two (2) acres, thirty (30) feet.
8. Accessory Structure Setbacks.
a. For lots two (2) acres or greater in area, accessory structures shall
meet minimum principal structure setback standards.
b. For lots less than two (2) acres in area, accessory structures shall
maintain the following minimum setbacks:
(1) Front Yard. Same as principal structure.
(2) Side Yard. Five (5) feet.
(3) Rear Yard. Eight (8) feet.
9. No structure shall be located within an easement.
10. Impervious Surface Lot Coverage. No more than thirty (30) percent of the
lot.
11. Principal Building Height Maximum. Thirty-five (35) feet.
12. Accessory Structure Area and Height.
a. Detached garages, buildings, and additional accessory structures,
individual and combined, shall be subject to the maximums listed in
the following table.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 25 A-1, Agricultural Preservation District
Lot Size Maximum
Building Area
Maximum
Building Height
Less than 1 acre 1,000 square feet 15 feet
1 – 1.99 acres 1,600 square feet 18 feet
2 – 4.99 acres 2,000 square feet 18 feet
5 – 7.99 acres 2,600 square feet 20 feet
8 – 9.99 acres 3,200 square feet 20 feet
10 – 19.99 acres 4,000 square feet 24 feet
20 – 39.99 acres 5,000 square feet 24 feet
Exceptions.
(1) Existing or proposed agricultural buildings currently used for
agricultural purposes, as verified by the Planning
Department.
(2) Existing agricultural buildings previously used for agricultural
purposes shall not be included in area calculation
requirements of this table, unless they are suitable for use as
garages or residential accessory structures (such as a
machine shed), as determined by the Planning Department.
b. Outside wall dimensions will be used to determine maximum
building area, except where a roof projects out greater than two (2)
feet from the side wall, roof area will be used to determine
maximum building area.
13. A lot of record of less than ten (10) acres created by an instrument and
recorded in the Office of the County Recorder on or before October 29,
1971 that can meet all other minimum lot requirements and standards of
this Ordinance shall be considered buildable subject to normal building
permit requirements. Lots of record more than ten (10) acres and less
than forty (40) acres created by an instrument and recorded in the Office
of the County Recorder on or before January 4, 1977 that can meet all
other minimum lot requirements and standards of this Ordinance shall be
considered buildable subject to normal building permit requirements.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 26 A-2, Agricultural Woodlands District
CHAPTER 26: A-2, AGRICULTURAL WOODLANDS DISTRICT
26-1 PURPOSE
In this district, the predominant land use remains agriculture, but there exists
concentrations of heavily wooded land and/or land having non-productive soils. Due to
these circumstances, rural residential development at a density of one (1) unit per ten
(10) acres has been deemed appropriate for existing conditions. This zoning district
was applied when a minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the total parcel was
wooded land, and/or land having soils in capability classes IV through VIII. Development
will not be provided with an urban level of service.
26-2 APPLICATION
The regulations of this Chapter shall only apply to existing parcels zoned A-2,
Agricultural Woodlands District. No further rezoning to the A-2, Agricultural Woodlands
District shall be allowed for consistency with the Comprehensive Plan.
26-3 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, INTERIM, ADMINISTRATIVE, AND ACCESSORY
USES
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this Ordinance, refer to
Table 20-4 for a list of permitted, conditional, interim, administrative, and accessory
uses in the A-2, Agricultural Woodlands District:
26-4 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
The following performance standards shall be observed in an A-2, Agricultural
Woodlands District subject to the additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications
set forth in this Ordinance:
1. Platting Required for Institutional Uses. No building shall be constructed
on unplatted property, except for the addition of accessory structures or
additions to existing buildings.
2. Density Maximum. Four (4) dwelling units per forty (40) acres or quarterquarter
section.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 26 A-2, Agricultural Woodlands District
3. Lot Size Minimum. Ten (10) acres or a quarter-quarter-quarter section
with at least one (1) acre of non-hydric soils. Each lot must demonstrate
sufficient area to accommodate two individual sewage treatment systems.
4. Lot Width Minimum. Three hundred (300) feet measured at the building
site for lots created prior to March 2, 1996. For parcels created after
March 2, 1996, three hundred (300) feet shall be maintained at the front
setback line and extending to the location of the principal structure.
5. Front Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. One hundred fifty (150)
feet from the centerline of a County or State road or one hundred (100)
feet from the County or State road right-of-way, whichever is greater. One
hundred (100) feet from the centerline of a local public street, or sixtyseven
(67) feet from the local public street right-of-way, whichever is
greater. On lots of record less than two (2) acres, thirty-five (35) feet from
the road right-of-way on a local street, one hundred (100) feet from the
right-of-way on other public roads.
6. Side Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. Thirty (30) feet. On lots
of record less than two (2) acres, fifteen (15) feet. Front yard setbacks
shall apply to side yards adjoining a street on corner lots.
7. Rear Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. Sixty (60) feet. On lots
of record less than two (2) acres, thirty (30) feet.
8. Accessory Structure Setbacks.
a. For lots two (2) acres or greater in area, accessory structures shall
meet minimum principal structure setback standards.
b. For lots less than two (2) acres in area, accessory structures shall
maintain the following minimum setbacks:
(1) Front Yard. Same as principal structure.
(2) Side Yard. Five (5) feet.
(3) Rear Yard. Eight (8) feet.
9. No structure shall be located within an easement.
10. Impervious Surface Lot Coverage. No more than thirty (30) percent of the
lot.
11. Principal Structure Height Maximum. Thirty-five (35) feet.
12. Accessory Structure Area and Height.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 26 A-2, Agricultural Woodlands District
a. Detached garages, buildings, and additional accessory structures,
individual and combined, shall be subject to the maximums listed in
the following table.
Lot Size Maximum
Building Area
Maximum
Building Height
Less than 1 acre 1,000 square feet 15 feet
1 – 1.99 acres 1,600 square feet 18 feet
2 – 4.99 acres 2,000 square feet 18 feet
5 – 7.99 acres 2,600 square feet 20 feet
8 – 9.99 acres 3,200 square feet 20 feet
10 – 19.99 acres 4,000 square feet 24 feet
20 – 39.99 acres 5,000 square feet 24 feet
Exceptions.
(1) Existing or proposed agricultural buildings currently used for
agricultural purposes, as verified by the Planning
Department.
(2) Existing agricultural buildings previously used for agricultural
purposes shall not be included in area calculation
requirements of this table, unless they are suitable for use as
garages or residential accessory structures (such as a
machine shed), as determined by the Planning Department.
b. Outside wall dimensions will be used to determine maximum
building area, except where a roof projects out greater than two (2)
feet from the side wall, roof area will be used to determine
maximum building area.
13. A lot of record created by an instrument and recorded in the Office of the
County Recorder on or before October 29, 1971 that can meet all other
minimum lot requirements and standards of this Ordinance shall be
buildable subject to normal building permit requirements.
Scott County A-3 Agricultural Preservation
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 27 Density District
CHAPTER 27: A-3, AGRICULTURAL PRESERVATION DENSITY
DISTRICT
27-1 PURPOSE
This district is intended for application in those areas of Scott County where it is
desirable because of the high quality of soils, availability of water and highly productive
capability of the land, to preserve, promote, maintain and enhance the use of land for
long-term agricultural purposes. Single family dwellings at very-low rural densities are
encouraged to be clustered to preserve larger tracts of land for long-term agricultural
uses. An overlay zoning district may apply to this district.
27-2 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, INTERIM, ADMINISTRATIVE, AND ACCESSORY
USES
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this Ordinance, refer to
Table 20-4 for a list of permitted, conditional, interim, administrative, and accessory
uses in the A-3, Agricultural Preservation Density District.
27-3 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
The following performance standards shall be observed in an A-3, Agricultural
Preservation Density District, subject to the additional requirements, exceptions, and
modifications set forth in this Ordinance:
1. Platting Required for Institutional Uses. No building shall be constructed
on unplatted property, except for the addition of accessory structures or
additions to existing buildings.
2. Density Maximum.
a. One (1) dwelling unit per forty (40) acres or quarter-quarter section.
b. Where applicable per the Comprehensive Plan, the density for a
residential cluster Planned Unit Development (PUD) subdivision
shall be up to four (4) dwelling units per forty (40) acres, based on
the gross acreage of the subdivision as negotiated through the
Public Values Incentive Program as established in Chapter 81 of
this Ordinance, and shall meet all open space performance
standards in Section 27-4.
Scott County A-3 Agricultural Preservation
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 27 Density District
3. Lot Size.
a. Existing Farmstead. The minimum lot size for an existing
farmstead shall be determined by the topography of the property,
the ability to locate the principal dwelling, any accessory structures,
and two (2) individual sewage treatment systems, which all meet
applicable setback requirements.
b. Non-Farmstead. The minimum lot size for a new single family
dwelling shall be one (1) acre of non-hydric land. The maximum lot
size shall be two and one-half (2.5) acres. Where independent
sewage treatment systems are proposed, each lot shall
demonstrate sufficient land area to accommodate two (2)
independent sewage treatment systems.
4. Lot Width Minimum.
a. Existing Farmstead. Three hundred (300) feet at the building site.
Parcels created after March 2, 1996 must be at least three hundred
(300) feet in width shall be maintained at the minimum building
setback line and extending to the location of the principal structure.
b. Non-Farmstead. One hundred fifty (150) feet at the building site.
Parcels created after March 2, 1996, must be at least one hundred
fifty (150) feet in width shall be maintained at the minimum building
setback line and extending to the location of the principal structure.
5. Front Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. One hundred fifty (150)
feet from the centerline of a County road or one hundred (100) feet from
the County road right-of-way, whichever is greater, one hundred (100) feet
from the centerline of a local public street, or sixty-seven (67) feet from the
local public street right-of-way, whichever is greater. On lots less than two
(2) acres, thirty-five (35) feet from the road right-of-way on a local street,
one hundred (100) feet from the right-of-way on other public roads.
6. Side Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. Thirty (30) feet. On lots
less than two (2) acres, fifteen (15) feet. Front yard setbacks shall apply
to side yards adjoining a street on corner lots.
7. Rear Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. Sixty (60) feet. On lots
less than two (2) acres, thirty (30) feet.
8. Accessory Structure Setbacks.
Scott County A-3 Agricultural Preservation
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 27 Density District
a. For lots two (2) acres or greater in area, accessory structures shall
meet minimum principal structure setback standards.
b. For lots less than two (2) acres in area, accessory structures shall
maintain the following minimum setbacks:
(1) Front Yard. Same as principal structure.
(2) Side Yard. Five (5) feet.
(3) Rear Yard. Eight (8) feet.
9. No structure shall be located within an easement.
10. Impervious Surface Lot Coverage. No more than thirty (30) percent of the
lot.
11. Principal Structure Height Maximum. Thirty-five (35) feet.
12. Accessory Structure Area and Height.
a. Detached garages, buildings, and additional accessory structures,
individual and combined, shall be subject to the maximums listed in
the following table.
Lot Size Maximum
Building Area
Maximum
Building Height
Less than 1 acre 1,000 square feet 15 feet
1 – 1.99 acres 1,600 square feet 18 feet
2 – 4.99 acres 2,000 square feet 18 feet
5 – 7.99 acres 2,600 square feet 20 feet
8 – 9.99 acres 3,200 square feet 20 feet
10 – 19.99 acres 4,000 square feet 24 feet
20 – 39.99 acres 5,000 square feet 24 feet
Exceptions.
(1) Existing or proposed agricultural buildings currently used for
agricultural purposes, as verified by the Planning
Department.
(2) Existing agricultural buildings previously used for agricultural
purposes shall not be included in area calculation
requirements of this table, unless they are suitable for use as
garages or residential accessory structures (such as a
machine shed), as determined by the Planning Department.
Scott County A-3 Agricultural Preservation
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 27 Density District
b. Outside wall dimensions will be used to determine maximum
building area, except where a roof projects out greater than two (2)
feet from the side wall, roof area will be used to determine
maximum building area.
27-4 OPEN SPACE STANDARDS
The following performance standards are intended to promote the creation of open
space through residential clustering in the A-3, Agricultural Preservation Density District
as a means for accomplishing one of the following objectives: a) preserving farmland
to accommodate future development in long-term urban growth areas, b) preserving
significant natural resources within Natural Area Corridors as defined in the
Comprehensive Plan, or c) creating open spaces for passive and/or active recreational
uses.
1. All designated open space in the A-3, Agricultural Preservation Density
District shall be either platted as Agriculture, Natural Area or Recreation
outlots or preserved through open space easements, and shall conform to
the type, use, location, performance, ownership, management, and
restrictions as specified in Chapter 16 of this Ordinance.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 30 UER, Urban Expansion Reserve District
CHAPTERS 28-29: RESERVED
CHAPTER 30: UER, URBAN EXPANSION RESERVE DISTRICT
30-1 PURPOSE
This district is to preserve land in those areas of Scott County identified in its
Comprehensive Plan for logical future extension of urban land uses served by public
utilities. This zoning district is intended to preserve these areas of the County in very
low rural development densities or clustered residential developments that may be
compatibly integrated with future urban development. This district is also meant to
perform the following functions:
1. To conserve land in a viable economic status until such time as public
utilities may be extended and urban development densities may be
supported.
2. To reduce the possibility of urban/rural land use conflicts in both the use of
the land and future extension of public utilities and other infrastructure
items.
30-2 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, INTERIM, ADMINISTRATIVE, AND ACCESSORY
USES
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this Ordinance, refer to
Table 20-4 for a list of permitted, conditional, interim, administrative, and accessory
uses in the UER, Urban Expansion Reserve District:
30-3 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
The following performance standards shall be observed in an UER, Urban Expansion
Reserve District, subject to the additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications
set forth in this Ordinance.
1. Platting Required for Institutional Uses. No building shall be constructed
on unplatted property, except for the addition of accessory structures or
additions to existing buildings.
2. Density Maximum. One (1) dwelling unit per forty (40) acres of land or
quarter-quarter section.
3. Lot Size Minimum. Forty (40) acres or quarter-quarter section.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 30 UER, Urban Expansion Reserve District
4. Lot Width Minimum. For lots of record established prior to March 2, 1996,
six hundred (600) feet measured at the building site. For lots created after
March 2, 1996, six hundred (600) feet shall be maintained at the minimum
front yard setback extending to the location of the principal structure.
5. Front Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. One hundred fifty (150)
feet measured from the centerline of a County road or one hundred (100)
feet from the County road right-of-way, whichever is greater. One
hundred (100) feet from the centerline of a local public street, or sixtyseven
(67) feet from the local public street right-of-way, whichever is
greater. On lots less than two (2) acres, thirty-five (35) feet from the road
right-of-way on a local street, one hundred (100) feet from the right-of-way
on other public roads.
6. Side Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. Thirty (30) feet. On lots
of record less than two (2) acres, fifteen (15) feet. On corner lots, the side
yard setback abutting the road shall be the same as the front yard
setback.
7. Rear Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. Sixty (60) feet. On lots
of record less than two (2) acres, thirty (30) feet.
8. Accessory Structure Setbacks.
a. On lots two (2) acres or greater in area, accessory structures shall
meet minimum principal structure setback standards.
b. For lots less than two (2) acres in area, accessory structures shall
maintain the following minimum setbacks:
(1) Front Yard. Same as principal structure.
(2) Side Yard. Five (5) feet.
(3) Rear Yard. Eight (8) feet.
9. No structure shall be located within an easement.
10. Impervious Surface Lot Coverage. No more than thirty (30) percent of the
lot.
11. Principal Structure Height Maximum: Thirty-five (35) feet.
12. Accessory Structure Area and Height.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 30 UER, Urban Expansion Reserve District
a. Detached garages, buildings, and additional accessory structures,
individual and combined, shall be subject to the maximums listed in
the following table.
Lot Size Maximum
Building Area
Maximum
Building Height
Less than 1 acre 1,000 square feet 15 feet
1 – 1.99 acres 1,600 square feet 18 feet
2 – 4.99 acres 2,000 square feet 18 feet
5 – 7.99 acres 2,600 square feet 20 feet
8 – 9.99 acres 3,200 square feet 20 feet
10 – 19.99 acres 4,000 square feet 24 feet
20 – 39.99 acres 5,000 square feet 24 feet
Exceptions.
(1) Existing or proposed agricultural buildings currently used for
agricultural purposes, as verified by the Planning
Department.
(2) Existing agricultural buildings previously used for agricultural
purposes shall not be included in area calculation
requirements of this table, unless they are suitable for use as
garages or residential accessory structures (such as a
machine shed), as determined by the Planning Department.
b. Outside wall dimensions will be used to determine maximum
building area, except where a roof projects out greater than two (2)
feet from the side wall, roof area will be used to determine
maximum building area.
13. A lot of record of less than ten (10) acres created by an instrument and
recorded in the Office of the County Recorder on or before October 29,
1971 that can meet all other minimum lot requirements and standards of
this Ordinance shall be considered buildable subject to normal building
permit requirements. Lots of record more than ten (10) acres and less
than forty (40) acres created by an instrument and recorded in the Office
of the County Recorder on or before January 4, 1977 that can meet all
other minimum lot requirements and standards of this Ordinance shall be
considered buildable subject to normal building permit requirements.
Scott County UER-C, Urban Expansion
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 31 Reserve Cluster District
CHAPTER 31: UER-C, URBAN EXPANSION RESERVE CLUSTER
DISTRICT
31-1 PURPOSE
This district is intended to preserve land in those areas of Scott County identified in its
Comprehensive Plan for logical future extension of urban land uses served by public
utilities. This zoning district is intended to preserve these areas of the County in
clustered residential developments that may be compatibly integrated with future urban
development. This district is also meant to perform the following functions:
1. To conserve the majority of land in a viable economic status until such
time as public utilities may be extended and urban development densities
may be supported.
2. To reduce the possibility of urban/rural land use conflicts in both the use of
the land and future extension of public utilities and other infrastructure
items.
3. To regulate residential development in a cluster subdivision design that
preserves open space for future development when public utilities become
available.
31-2 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, INTERIM, ADMINISTRATIVE AND ACCESSORY
USES
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this Ordinance, refer to
Table 20-4 for a list of permitted, conditional, interim, administrative, and accessory
uses in the UER-C, Urban Expansion Reserve Cluster District:
31-3 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
The following performance standards shall be observed in the UER-C, Urban Expansion
Reserve Cluster District for cluster subdivisions subject to the additional requirements,
exceptions, and modifications set forth in this Ordinance.
1. Platting Required for Institutional Uses. No building shall be constructed
on unplatted property, except for the addition of accessory structures or
additions to existing buildings.
2. Density Maximum.
Scott County UER-C, Urban Expansion
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 31 Reserve Cluster District
a. One (1) dwelling unit per forty (40) acres or quarter-quarter section.
b. The density for a residential cluster Planned Unit Development
(PUD) subdivision shall be up to one (1) unit per ten (10) acres, or
up to one (1) unit per five (5) acres with publicly managed utilities,
based on the gross acreage of the subdivision as negotiated
through the Public Values Incentive Program as established in
Chapter 81 of this Ordinance, and shall meet all open space
performance standards in Section 31-4.
3. Street Access. Temporary lot access to County roads may only be
permitted provided all lots in residential clusters are designed to receive
permanent access from a future local public street.
4. Lot Size Minimum. One (1) acre of non-hydric land. Where independent
sewage treatment systems are proposed, each lot shall demonstrate
sufficient land area to accommodate two (2) independent sewage
treatment systems.
5. Lot Width Minimum. One hundred (100) feet shall be maintained at the
required front yard setback, and extending to the location of the principal
structure.
6. Front Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. One hundred fifty (150)
feet from the centerline of a County or State road or one hundred (100)
feet from the County or State road right-of-way, whichever is greater.
Thirty (30) feet measured from the local street right-of-way.
7. Side Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. Fifteen (15) feet.
Where a side yard adjoins a public road right-of-way, the front yard
setbacks shall apply.
8. Rear Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. Thirty (30) feet.
9. Accessory Structure Setbacks.
a. On lots two (2) acres or greater in area, accessory structures shall
meet minimum principal structure setback standards.
b. For lots less than two (2) acres in area, accessory structures shall
maintain the following minimum setbacks:
(1) Front Yard. Same as principal structure.
(2) Side Yard. Five (5) feet.
Scott County UER-C, Urban Expansion
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 31 Reserve Cluster District
(3) Rear Yard. Eight (8) feet.
10. No structure shall be located within an easement.
11. Impervious Surface Lot Coverage. No more than thirty (30) percent of the
lot.
12. Principal Structure Height Maximum. Thirty-five (35) feet.
13. Accessory Structure Area and Height.
a. Detached garages, buildings, and additional accessory structures,
individual and combined, shall be subject to the maximums listed in
the following table.
Lot Size Maximum
Building Area
Maximum
Building Height
Less than 1 acre 1,000 square feet 15 feet
1 – 1.99 acres 1,600 square feet 18 feet
2 – 4.99 acres 2,000 square feet 18 feet
5 – 7.99 acres 2,600 square feet 20 feet
8 – 9.99 acres 3,200 square feet 20 feet
10 – 19.99 acres 4,000 square feet 24 feet
20 – 39.99 acres 5,000 square feet 24 feet
Exceptions.
(1) Existing or proposed agricultural buildings currently used for
agricultural purposes, as verified by the Planning
Department.
(2) Existing agricultural buildings previously used for agricultural
purposes shall not be included in area calculation
requirements of this table, unless they are suitable for use as
garages or residential accessory structures (such as a
machine shed), as determined by the Planning Department.
b. Outside wall dimensions will be used to determine maximum
building area, except where a roof projects out greater than two (2)
feet from the side wall, roof area will be used to determine
maximum building area.
Scott County UER-C, Urban Expansion
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 31 Reserve Cluster District
31-4 OPEN SPACE STANDARDS
The following performance standards are intended to promote the creation of open
space through residential clustering in the UER-C, Urban Expansion Reserve Cluster
District as a means for accomplishing one of the following objectives: a) reserving
buildable land to accommodate future development in urban growth areas, b)
preserving significant natural resources within Natural Area Corridors as defined in the
Comprehensive Plan, or c) creating open spaces for passive and/or active recreational
uses.
1. All designated open space in the UER-C, Urban Expansion Reserve
Cluster District shall be either platted as Future Development, Natural
Area or Recreation outlots or preserved through open space easements,
and shall conform to the type, use, location, performance, ownership,
management, and restrictions as specified in Chapter 16 of this
Ordinance.
2. In all residential cluster PUDs in the UER-C, Urban Expansion Reserve
Cluster District, at least either seventy (70) percent of more of the nonhydric
land or eighty (80) percent of more of the non-wetland land in the
subdivision shall be preserved as a Future Development outlot(s).
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 32 UBR, Urban Business Reserve District
CHAPTER 32: UBR, URBAN BUSINESS RESERVE DISTRICT
32-1 PURPOSE
This district is intended to preserve land in those areas of Scott County identified in its
Comprehensive Plan for the logical extension of urban commercial and industrial land
uses served by public utilities. This district is intended to preserve a very low rural
residential density until such time as the land is needed for future urban commercial or
industrial use and public utilities are available. This district is also meant to perform the
following functions:
1. To conserve land in a viable economic status until such time as public
utilities are available and the site may accommodate intense urban
commercial or industrial land uses.
2. To reduce the possibility of urban/rural land use conflicts in both the use of
the land and future extension of public utilities and other infrastructure
items.
3. The ultimate land use may change with the introduction of utilities and
annexation of the land by an adjoining city.
32-2 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, INTERIM, ADMINISTRATIVE, AND ACCESSORY
USES
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this Ordinance, refer to
Table 20-4 for a list of permitted, conditional, interim, administrative, and accessory
uses in the UBR, Urban Business Reserve District.
32-3 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
The following performance standards shall be observed in an UBR, Urban Business
Reserve District subject to the additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications
set forth in this Ordinance.
1. Platting Required for Institutional Uses. No building shall be constructed
on unplatted property, except for the addition of accessory structures or
additions to existing buildings.
2. Density Maximum. One (1) dwelling unit per forty (40) acres of land or
quarter-quarter section.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 32 UBR, Urban Business Reserve District
3. Lot Size Minimum. Forty (40) acres or quarter-quarter section.
4. Lot Width Minimum. For lots of record established prior to March 2, 1996,
six hundred (600) feet measured at the building site. For lots created after
March 2, 1996, six hundred (600) feet shall be maintained at the minimum
front yard setback and extending to the location of the principal structure.
5. Front Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. One hundred fifty (150)
feet measured from the centerline of a public road or one hundred (100)
feet from the public road right-of-way, whichever is greater. One hundred
(100) feet from the centerline of a local street, or sixty-seven (67) feet from
the local public street right-of-way, whichever is greater. On lots less than
two (2) acres, thirty-five (35) feet from the road right-of-way on a local
street, one hundred (100) feet from the right-of-way on other public roads.
6. Side Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. Thirty (30) feet. On lots
of record less than two (2) acres, fifteen (15) feet. On corner lots, the side
yard setback abutting the road shall be the same as the front yard
setback.
7. Rear Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. Sixty (60) feet. On lots
of record less than two (2) acres, thirty (30) feet.
8. Accessory Structure Setbacks.
a. For lots two (2) acres or greater in area, accessory structures shall
meet minimum principal structure setback standards.
b. For lots less than two (2) acres in area, accessory structures shall
maintain the following minimum setbacks:
(1) Front Yard. Same as principal structure.
(2) Side Yard. Five (5) feet.
(3) Rear Yard. Eight (8) feet.
9. No structure shall be located within an easement.
10. Impervious Surface Lot Coverage. No more than thirty (30) percent of the
lot.
11. Principal Structure Height Maximum. Thirty-five (35) feet.
12. Accessory Structure Area and Height.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 32 UBR, Urban Business Reserve District
a. Detached garages, buildings, and additional accessory structures,
individual and combined, shall be subject to the maximums listed in
the following table.
Lot Size Maximum
Building Area
Maximum
Building Height
Less than 1 acre 1,000 square feet 15 feet
1 – 1.99 acres 1,600 square feet 18 feet
2 – 4.99 acres 2,000 square feet 18 feet
5 – 7.99 acres 2,600 square feet 20 feet
8 – 9.99 acres 3,200 square feet 20 feet
10 – 19.99 acres 4,000 square feet 24 feet
20 – 39.99 acres 5,000 square feet 24 feet
Exceptions.
(1) Existing or proposed agricultural buildings currently used for
agricultural purposes, as verified by the Planning
Department.
(2) Existing agricultural buildings previously used for agricultural
purposes shall not be included in area calculation
requirements of this table, unless they are suitable for use as
garages or residential accessory structures (such as a
machine shed), as determined by the Planning Department.
b. Outside wall dimensions will be used to determine maximum
building area, except where a roof projects out greater than two (2)
feet from the side wall, roof area will be used to determine
maximum building area.
13. Service Streets. Uses fronting on an arterial street shall have a service
street to provide access to the arterial street at specified intersections.
14. A lot of record of less than ten (10) acres created by an instrument and
recorded in the Office of the County Recorder on or before October 29,
1971 that can meet all other minimum lot requirements and standards of
this Ordinance shall be considered buildable subject to normal building
permit requirements. Lots of record more than ten (10) acres and less
than forty (40) acres created by an instrument and recorded in the Office
of the County Recorder on or before January 4, 1977 that can meet all
other minimum lot requirements and standards of this Ordinance shall be
considered buildable subject to normal building permit requirements.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 33 UTR, Urban Transition Reserve District
CHAPTER 33: UTR, URBAN TRANSITION RESERVE DISTRICT
33-1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this district is to preserve land in those areas of Scott County identified
in its Comprehensive Plan for long-term future extension of urban land uses served by
public utilities beyond the 2030 planning horizon. This zoning district is intended to
preserve these areas of the County in low rural development densities and allow interim
agriculturally related land uses prior to ultimate urban development. This district is also
meant to perform the following functions:
1. To conserve land in a viable economic status until such time as public
utilities may be extended and urban development densities may be
supported.
2. To reduce the possibility of urban/rural land use conflicts in both the use of
the land and future extension of public utilities and other infrastructure
items.
33-2 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, INTERIM, ADMINISTRATIVE, AND ACCESSORY
USES
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this Ordinance, refer to
Table 20-4 for a list of permitted, conditional, interim, administrative, and accessory
uses in the UTR, Urban Transition Reserve District.
33-3 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
The following performance standards shall be observed in an UTR, Urban Transition
Reserve District, subject to the additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications
set forth in this Ordinance.
1. Platting Required for Institutional Uses. No building shall be constructed
on unplatted property, except for the addition of accessory structures or
additions to existing buildings.
2. Density Maximum. One (1) dwelling unit per forty (40) acres of land or
quarter-quarter section.
3. Lot Size Minimum. Forty (40) acres or quarter-quarter section.
4. Lot Width Minimum. For lots of record established prior to March 2, 1996,
six hundred (600) feet measured at the building site. For lots created after
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 33 UTR, Urban Transition Reserve District
March 2, 1996, six hundred (600) feet shall be maintained at the minimum
front yard setback extending to the location of the principal structure.
5. Front Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. One hundred fifty (150)
feet measured from the centerline of a County road or one hundred (100)
feet from the County road right-of-way, whichever is greater. One
hundred (100) feet from the centerline of a local public street, or sixtyseven
(67) feet from the local public street right-of-way, whichever is
greater. On lots less than two (2) acres, thirty-five (35) feet from the road
right-of-way on a local street, one hundred (100) feet from the right-of-way
on other public roads.
6. Side Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. Thirty (30) feet. On lots
of record less than two (2) acres, fifteen (15) feet. On corner lots, the side
yard setback abutting the road shall be the same as the front yard
setback.
7. Rear Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. Sixty (60) feet. On lots
of record less than two (2) acres, thirty (30) feet.
8. Accessory Structure Setbacks.
a. On lots two (2) acres or greater in area, accessory structures shall
meet minimum principal structure setback standards.
b. For lots less than two (2) acres in area, accessory structures shall
maintain the following minimum setbacks:
(1) Front Yard. Same as principal structure.
(2) Side Yard. Five (5) feet.
(3) Rear Yard. Eight (8) feet.
9. No structure shall be located within an easement.
10. Impervious Surface Lot Coverage. No more than (30) percent of the lot.
11. Principal Structure Height Maximum: Thirty-five (35) feet.
12. Accessory Structure Area and Height.
a. Detached garages, buildings, and additional accessory structures,
individual and combined, shall be subject to the maximums listed in
the following table.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 33 UTR, Urban Transition Reserve District
Lot Size Maximum
Building Area
Maximum
Building Height
Less than 1 acre 1,000 square feet 15 feet
1 – 1.99 acres 1,600 square feet 18 feet
2 – 4.99 acres 2,000 square feet 18 feet
5 – 7.99 acres 2,600 square feet 20 feet
8 – 9.99 acres 3,200 square feet 20 feet
10 – 19.99 acres 4,000 square feet 24 feet
20 – 39.99 acres 5,000 square feet 24 feet
Exceptions.
(1) Existing or proposed agricultural buildings currently used for
agricultural purposes, as verified by the Planning
Department.
(2) Existing agricultural buildings previously used for agricultural
purposes shall not be included in area calculation
requirements of this table, unless they are suitable for use as
garages or residential accessory structures (such as a
machine shed), as determined by the Planning Department.
b. Outside wall dimensions will be used to determine maximum
building area, except where a roof projects out greater than two (2)
feet from the side wall, roof area will be used to determine
maximum building area.
c. The accessory structure size and height restriction shall not apply
to airplane hangars governed by an approved conditional use
permit. In no case shall an airplane hangar accessory to a single
family home exceed four thousand two hundred (4,200) square feet
in floor area.
13. A lot of record of less than ten (10) acres created by an instrument and
recorded in the Office of the County Recorder on or before October 29,
1971 that can meet all other minimum lot requirements and standards of
this Ordinance shall be considered buildable subject to normal building
permit requirements. Lots of record more than ten (10) acres and less
than forty (40) acres created by an instrument and recorded in the Office
of the County Recorder on or before January 4, 1977 that can meet all
other minimum lot requirements and standards of this Ordinance shall be
considered buildable subject to normal building permit requirements.
Scott County UTR-C, Urban Transition
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 34 Reserve Cluster District
CHAPTER 34: UTR-C, URBAN TRANSITION RESERVE CLUSTER
DISTRICT
34-1 PURPOSE
This district is intended to preserve land in those areas of Scott County identified in its
Comprehensive Plan for logical future extension of urban land uses served by public
utilities beyond the 2030 planning horizon. This zoning district is intended to preserve
these areas of the County in clustered residential developments that may be compatibly
integrated with interim agricultural practices and future urban development. This district
is also meant to perform the following functions:
1. To conserve land in a viable economic status until such time as public
utilities may be extended and urban development densities may be
supported.
2. To reduce the possibility of urban/rural land use conflicts in both the use of
the land and future extension of public utilities and other infrastructure
items.
34-2 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, INTERIM, ADMINISTRATIVE, AND ACCESSORY
USES
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this Ordinance, refer to
Table 20-4 for a list of permitted, conditional, interim, administrative, and accessory
uses in the UTR-C, Urban Transition Reserve Cluster District.
34-3 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
The following performance standards shall be observed in the UTR-C, Urban Transition
Reserve Cluster District for cluster subdivisions subject to the additional requirements,
exceptions, and modifications set forth in this Ordinance.
1. Platting Required for Institutional Uses. No building shall be constructed
on unplatted property, except for the addition of accessory structures or
additions to existing buildings.
2. Density Maximum.
a. One (1) dwelling unit per ten (10) acres.
Scott County UTR-C, Urban Transition
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 34 Reserve Cluster District
b. The density for a residential cluster Planned Unit Development
(PUD) subdivision shall be up to one (1) unit per eight (8) acres, or
up to one (1) unit per four (4) acres with publicly managed utilities,
based on the gross acreage of the subdivision as negotiated
through the Public Values Incentive Program as established in
Chapter 81 of this Ordinance, and shall meet all open space
performance standards in Section 34-4.
3. Street Access. Temporary lot access to County roads may only be
permitted provided all lots in residential clusters are designed to receive
permanent access from a future local public street.
4. Lot Size Minimum. One (1) acre of non-hydric land. Where independent
sewage treatment systems are proposed, each lot shall demonstrate
sufficient land area to accommodate two (2) independent sewage
treatment systems.
5. Lot Width Minimum. One hundred (100) feet shall be maintained at the
required front yard setback, and extending to the location of the principal
structure.
6. Front Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. One hundred fifty (150)
feet from the centerline of a County or State road or one hundred (100)
feet from the County or State road right-of-way, whichever is greater.
Thirty (30) feet measured from the local street right-of-way.
7. Side Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. Fifteen (15) feet.
Where a side yard adjoins a public road right-of-way, the front yard
setbacks shall apply.
8. Rear Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. Thirty (30) feet.
9. Accessory Structure Setbacks.
a. For lots two (2) acres or greater in area, accessory structures shall
meet minimum principal structure setback standards.
b. For lots less than two (2) acres in area, accessory structures shall
maintain the following minimum setbacks:
(1) Front Yard. Same as principal structure.
(2) Side Yard. Five (5) feet.
(3) Rear Yard. Eight (8) feet.
10. No structure shall be located within an easement.
Scott County UTR-C, Urban Transition
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 34 Reserve Cluster District
11. Impervious Surface Lot Coverage. No more than thirty (30) percent of the
lot.
12. Principal Structure Height Maximum. Thirty-five (35) feet.
13. Accessory Structure Area and Height.
a. Detached garages, buildings, and additional accessory structures,
individual and combined, shall be subject to the maximums listed in
the following table.
Lot Size Maximum
Building Area
Maximum
Building Height
Less than 1 acre 1,000 square feet 15 feet
1 – 1.99 acres 1,600 square feet 18 feet
2 – 4.99 acres 2,000 square feet 18 feet
5 – 7.99 acres 2,600 square feet 20 feet
8 – 9.99 acres 3,200 square feet 20 feet
10 – 19.99 acres 4,000 square feet 24 feet
20 – 39.99 acres 5,000 square feet 24 feet
Exceptions.
(1) Existing or proposed agricultural buildings currently used for
agricultural purposes, as verified by the Planning
Department.
(2) Existing agricultural buildings previously used for agricultural
purposes shall not be included in area calculation
requirements of this table, unless they are suitable for use as
garages or residential accessory structures (such as a
machine shed), as determined by the Planning Department.
b. Outside wall dimensions will be used to determine maximum
building area, except where a roof projects out greater than two (2)
feet from the side wall, roof area will be used to determine
maximum building area.
34-4 OPEN SPACE STANDARDS
The following performance standards are intended to promote the creation of open
space through residential clustering in the UTR-C, Urban Transition Reserve Cluster
District as a means for accomplishing one of the following objectives: a) reserving
Scott County UTR-C, Urban Transition
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 34 Reserve Cluster District
buildable land to accommodate future development in long-term urban growth areas, b)
preserving significant natural resources within Natural Area Corridors as defined in the
Comprehensive Plan, or c) creating open spaces for passive and/or active recreational
uses.
1. All designated open space in the UTR-C, Urban Transition Reserve
Cluster District shall be either platted as Future Development, Natural
Area or Recreation outlots or preserved through open space easements,
and shall conform to the type, use, location, performance, ownership,
management, and restrictions as specified in Chapter 16 of this
Ordinance.
2. In all residential cluster subdivisions in the UTR-C, Urban Transition
Reserve Cluster District, at least either seventy (70) percent of more of the
non-hydric land or eighty (80) percent of more of the non-wetland land in
the subdivision shall be preserved as a Future Development outlot(s).
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 40 RR-1, Rural Residential Reserve District
CHAPTERS 35-39: RESERVED
CHAPTER 40: RR-1, RURAL RESIDENTIAL RESERVE DISTRICT
40-1 PURPOSE
This district is intended to be reserved for future higher density rural residential
development when support services and infrastructure can be provided. Development
in this district shall maintain low rural residential densities until such time as the need for
additional rural residential development and rezoning to RR-2, Rural Residential Single
Family District is approved. An overlay zoning district may apply to this district.
40-2 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, INTERIM, ADMINISTRATIVE, AND ACCESSORY
USES
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this Ordinance, refer to
Table 20-4 for a list of permitted, conditional, interim, administrative, and accessory
uses in the RR-1, Rural Residential Reserve District.
40-3 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
The following performance standards shall be observed in a RR-1, Rural Residential
Reserve District subject to the additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications
set forth in this Ordinance:
1. Platting Required for Institutional Uses. No building shall be constructed
on unplatted property, except for the addition of accessory structures or
additions to existing buildings.
2. Density Maximum. One (1) dwelling unit per ten (10) acres of non-wetland
land.
3. Lot Size Minimum. Ten (10) acres with at least one (1) acre of non-hydric
soils. Lot must demonstrate sufficient area to accommodate two (2)
individual sewage treatment systems.
4. Lot Width Minimum. Three hundred (300) feet measured at the building
site for lots created prior to March 2, 1996. For lots after March 2, 1996,
three hundred (300) feet shall be maintained at the front setback line and
extending to the location of the principal structure.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 40 RR-1, Rural Residential Reserve District
5. Front Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. One hundred fifty (150)
feet measured from the centerline of a County or State road or one
hundred (100) feet from the County or State road right-of-way, whichever
is greater. One hundred (100) feet from centerline of public local road, or
sixty-seven (67) feet from the public local road right-of-way, whichever is
greater. On lots less than two (2) acres, thirty-five (35) feet from the road
right-of-way on a local street, one hundred (100) feet from the right-of-way
on other public roads.
6. Side Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. Thirty (30) feet. On lots
of record less than two (2) acres, fifteen (15) feet. Front yard setbacks
shall apply to side yards adjoining a street on corner lots.
7. Rear Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. Sixty (60) feet. On lots
of record less than two (2) acres, thirty (30) feet.
8. Accessory Structure Setbacks.
a. For lots two (2) acres or greater in area, accessory structures shall
meet minimum principal building setback standards.
b. For lots less than two (2) acres in area, accessory structures shall
maintain the following minimum setbacks.
(1) Front Yard. Same as principal structure.
(2) Side Yard. Five (5) feet.
(3) Rear Yard. Eight (8) feet.
9. No structure shall be located within an easement.
10. Impervious Surface Lot Coverage. No more than thirty (30) percent of the
lot.
11. Principal Building Height Maximum. Thirty-five (35) feet.
12. Accessory Structure Area and Height.
a. Detached garages, buildings, and additional accessory structures,
individual and combined, shall be subject to the maximums listed in
the following table.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 40 RR-1, Rural Residential Reserve District
Lot Size Maximum
Building Area
Maximum
Building Height
Less than 1 acre 1,000 square feet 15 feet
1 – 1.99 acres 1,600 square feet 18 feet
2 – 4.99 acres 2,000 square feet 18 feet
5 – 7.99 acres 2,600 square feet 20 feet
8 – 9.99 acres 3,200 square feet 20 feet
10 – 19.99 acres 4,000 square feet 24 feet
20 – 39.99 acres 5,000 square feet 24 feet
Exceptions.
(1) Existing or proposed agricultural buildings currently used for
agricultural purposes, as verified by the Planning
Department.
(2) Existing agricultural buildings previously used for agricultural
purposes shall not be included in area calculation
requirements of this table, unless they are suitable for use as
garages or residential accessory structures (such as a
machine shed), as determined by the Planning Department.
b. Outside wall dimensions will be used to determine maximum
building area, except where a roof projects out greater than two (2)
feet from the side wall, roof area will be used to determine
maximum building area.
13. A lot of record created by an instrument and recorded in the Office of the
County Recorder on or before October 29, 1971 that can meet all other
minimum lot requirements and standards of this Ordinance shall be
buildable subject to normal building permit requirements.
Scott County RR-1C, Rural Residential
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 41 Reserve Cluster District
CHAPTER 41: RR-1C, RURAL RESIDENTIAL RESERVE CLUSTER
DISTRICT
41-1 PURPOSE
This district is intended to be reserved for future higher density rural residential
development when support services and infrastructure can be provided. Development
in this district shall maintain low rural residential densities in a cluster subdivision design
until such time as the need for additional rural residential development and rezoning to
RR-2, Rural Residential Single Family District is approved. An overlay zoning district
may apply to this district.
41-2 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, INTERIM, ADMINISTRATIVE, AND ACCESSORY
USES
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this Ordinance, refer to
Table 20-4 for a list of permitted, conditional, interim, administrative, and accessory
uses in the RR-1C, Rural Residential Reserve Cluster District:
41-3 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
The following performance standards shall be observed in a RR-1C, Rural Residential
Reserve Cluster District subject to the additional requirements, exceptions, and
modifications set forth in this Ordinance for cluster subdivisions:
1. Platting Required for Institutional Uses. No building shall be constructed
on unplatted property, except for the addition of accessory structures or
additions to existing buildings.
2. Density Maximum.
a. The density for the residential cluster subdivisions shall be one (1)
dwelling per eight (8) acres based on the gross acreage of the
subdivision.
b. The density for a residential cluster Planned Unit Development
(PUD) subdivision shall be up to one (1) unit per five (5) acres, or
up to one (1) unit per two and one-half (2.5) acres with publicly
managed utilities, based on the gross acreage of the subdivision as
negotiated through the Public Values Incentive Program as
Scott County RR-1C, Rural Residential
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 41 Reserve Cluster District
established in Chapter 81 of this Ordinance, and shall meet all
open space performance standards in Section 41-4.
3. Street Access. Temporary lot access to County roads may only be
permitted provided all lots in residential clusters are designed to receive
permanent access from a future local public street.
4. Lot Size Minimum. Two and one-half (2.5) acres with at least one (1) acre
of non-hydric soils. Lot must demonstrate sufficient area to accommodate
two (2) independent sewage treatment systems.
5. Lot Width Minimum. One hundred fifty (150) feet measured at the building
site for lots created prior to March 2, 1996. For lots created after March 2,
1996, one hundred fifty (150) feet shall be maintained at the front setback
line and extending to the location of the principal structure.
6. Front Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. All buildings shall
maintain a setback of one hundred fifty (150) feet from the centerline of a
County or State road or one hundred (100) feet from a County or State
road right-of-way, whichever is greater. One hundred (100) feet from the
centerline of a local public street or sixty-seven (67) feet from a local
public street right-of-way, whichever is greater.
7. Side Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. Thirty (30) feet from any
side yard. Front yard setbacks shall apply to side yards adjoining a street
on corner lots.
8. Rear Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. Sixty (60) feet.
9. Accessory Structure Setbacks.
a. For lots two (2) acres or greater in area, accessory structures shall
meet minimum principal structure setback standards.
b. For lots less than two (2) acres in area, accessory structures shall
maintain the following minimum setbacks.
(1) Front Yard. Same as principal structure.
(2) Side Yard. Five (5) feet.
(3) Rear Yard. Eight (8) feet.
10. No structure shall be located within an easement.
11. Impervious Surface Lot Coverage. No more than thirty (30) percent of the
lot.
Scott County RR-1C, Rural Residential
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 41 Reserve Cluster District
12. Principal Structure Height Maximum. Thirty-five (35) feet.
13. Accessory Structure Area and Height.
a. Detached garages, buildings, and additional accessory structures,
individual and combined, shall be subject to the maximums listed in
the following table.
Lot Size Maximum
Building Area
Maximum
Building Height
Less than 1 acre 1,000 square feet 15 feet
1 – 1.99 acres 1,600 square feet 18 feet
2 – 4.99 acres 2,000 square feet 18 feet
5 – 7.99 acres 2,600 square feet 20 feet
8 – 9.99 acres 3,200 square feet 20 feet
10 – 19.99 acres 4,000 square feet 24 feet
20 – 39.99 acres 5,000 square feet 24 feet
Exceptions.
(1) Existing or proposed agricultural buildings currently used for
agricultural purposes, as verified by the Planning
Department.
(2) Existing agricultural buildings previously used for agricultural
purposes shall not be included in area calculation
requirements of this table, unless they are suitable for use as
garages or residential accessory structures (such as a
machine shed), as determined by the Planning Department.
b. Outside wall dimensions will be used to determine maximum
building area, except where a roof projects out greater than two (2)
feet from the side wall, roof area will be used to determine
maximum building area.
41-4 OPEN SPACE STANDARDS
The following performance standards are intended to promote the creation of open
space through residential clustering in the RR-1C, Rural Residential Reserve Cluster
District as a means for accomplishing one of the following objectives: a) reserving
buildable land to accommodate future rural development, b) preserving significant
natural resources within Natural Area Corridors as defined in the Comprehensive Plan,
Scott County RR-1C, Rural Residential
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 41 Reserve Cluster District
c) creating open spaces for passive and/or active recreational uses, or d) preserving
land for long-term agricultural uses.
1. All designated open space in the RR-1C, Rural Residential Reserve
Cluster District shall be either platted as Future Development, Natural
Area, Recreation, or Agricultural outlots or preserved through open space
easements, and shall conform to the type, use, location, performance,
ownership, management, and restrictions as specified in Chapter 16 of
this Ordinance.
2. In the RR-1C, Rural Residential Reserve Cluster District, at least fifty (50)
percent or more of the non-hydric soils shall be preserved as open space
outlots in the subdivision.
Scott County RR-2, Rural Residential
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 42 Single Family District
CHAPTER 42: RR-2, RURAL RESIDENTIAL SINGLE FAMILY DISTRICT
42-1 PURPOSE
This district is intended to promote reasonable rural residential growth in those areas
where supportive infrastructure and similar growth patterns exist and high-density rural
development is designated in the Comprehensive Plan. This district encourages
residential cluster developments to enhance the sense of rural community and preserve
quality natural resources. An overlay zoning district may apply to this district.
42-2 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, INTERIM, ADMINISTRATIVE, AND ACCESSORY
USES
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this Ordinance, refer to
Table 20-4 for a list of permitted, conditional, interim, administrative, and accessory
uses in the RR-2, Rural Residential Single Family District:
42-3 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
The following performance standards shall be observed in an RR-2, Rural Residential
Single Family District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications
set forth in this Ordinance:
1. Platting Required for Institutional Uses. No building shall be constructed
on unplatted property, except for the addition of accessory structures or
additions to existing buildings.
2. Density Maximum. One (1) dwelling unit per two and one-half (2.5) acres.
3. Lot Size Minimum. Two and one-half (2.5) acres with at least one (1) acre
of non-hydric soils. Lot must demonstrate sufficient area to accommodate
two independent sewage treatment systems.
4. Lot Width Minimum. One hundred fifty (150) feet at the building site for
parcels created prior to March 2, 1996. For lots created after March 2,
1996, one hundred fifty (150) feet shall be maintained at the front setback
line and extending to the location of the principal structure.
5. Front Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. One hundred fifty (150)
feet from the centerline of a County or State road or one hundred (100)
feet from the County or State road right-of-way, whichever is greater. One
Scott County RR-2, Rural Residential
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 42 Single Family District
hundred (100) feet from the centerline of a local public street, or sixtyseven
(67) feet from the local public street right-of-way, whichever is
greater. On lots of record less than two (2) acres, thirty-five (35) feet from
the road right-of-way on a local street, one hundred (100) feet from the
right-of-way on other public roads.
6. Side Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. Thirty (30) feet. Front
yard setbacks shall apply to side yards adjoining a public street on a
corner lot. On lots of record less than two (2) acres, fifteen (15) feet. On
a corner lot, see front yard setback.
7. Rear Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. Sixty (60) feet. On lots
of record less than two (2) acres, thirty (30) feet.
8. Accessory Structure Setbacks.
a. For lots two (2) acres or greater in area, accessory structures shall
meet minimum principal structure setback standards.
b. For lots less than two (2) acres in area, accessory structures shall
maintain the following minimum setbacks:
(1) Front Yard. Same as principal structure.
(2) Side Yard. Five (5) feet.
(3) Rear Yard. Eight (8) feet.
9. No structure shall be located within an easement.
10. Impervious Surface Lot Coverage. No more than thirty (30) percent of the
lot.
11. Principal Structure Height Maximum. Thirty-five (35) feet.
12. Accessory Structure Area and Height.
a. Detached garages, buildings, and additional accessory structures,
individual and combined, shall be subject to the maximums listed in
the following table.
Scott County RR-2, Rural Residential
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 42 Single Family District
Lot Size Maximum
Building Area
Maximum
Building Height
Less than 1 acre 1,000 square feet 15 feet
1 – 1.99 acres 1,600 square feet 18 feet
2 – 4.99 acres 2,000 square feet 18 feet
5 – 7.99 acres 2,600 square feet 20 feet
8 – 9.99 acres 3,200 square feet 20 feet
10 – 19.99 acres 4,000 square feet 24 feet
20 – 39.99 acres 5,000 square feet 24 feet
Exception.
(1) Existing or proposed agricultural buildings currently used for
agricultural purposes, as verified by the Planning
Department.
b. Outside wall dimensions will be used to determine maximum
building area, except where a roof projects out greater than two (2)
feet from the side wall, roof area will be used to determine
maximum building area.
42-4 OPEN SPACE STANDARDS
The following performance standards are intended to promote the creation of open
space through residential clustering in the RR-2, Rural Residential Single Family District
as a means for accomplishing one of the following objectives: a) preserving significant
natural resources within Natural Area Corridors as defined in the Comprehensive Plan,
b) preserving land for long-term agricultural uses, or c) creating open spaces for passive
and/or active recreational uses.
1. All designated open space in the RR-2, Rural Residential Single Family
District shall be either platted as Natural Area, Recreation, or Agricultural
outlots or preserved through open space easements, and shall conform to
the type, use, location, performance, ownership, management, and
restrictions as specified in Chapter 16 of this Ordinance.
Scott County RR-3, Residential Suburban
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 43 Single Family District
CHAPTER 43: RR-3, RESIDENTIAL SUBURBAN SINGLE FAMILY
DISTRICT
43-1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this district is to provide for single family dwelling units on existing lots of
record with connection to public sanitary sewer treatment systems at a relatively dense
urban scale to be established only when these services are available. An overlay
zoning district may apply to this district.
43-2 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, INTERIM, ADMINISTRATIVE, AND ACCESSORY
USES
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this Ordinance, refer to
Table 20-4 for a list of permitted, conditional, interim, administrative, and accessory
uses in the RR-3, Residential Suburban District:
43-3 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
The following performance standards shall be observed in a RR-3, Residential
Suburban District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set
forth in this Ordinance:
1. Platting Required for Institutional Uses. No building shall be constructed
on unplatted property, except for the addition of accessory structures or
additions to existing buildings.
2. Lot Size Minimum. Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or as allowed in
Chapter 70-8-1.
3. Lot Width Minimum. Seventy-five (75) feet measured at the front setback
line.
4. Front Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. Twenty-five (25) feet
from the road right-of-way.
5. Side Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. Ten (10) feet.
6. Rear Yard Setback Minimum, Principal Structure. Thirty (30) feet.
7. Accessory Structure Setbacks.
Scott County RR-3, Residential Suburban
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 43 Single Family District
a. No detached accessory structure shall be located forward of the
front building line of the principal structure except for on riparian
lots. On riparian lots, any accessory structure shall be setback a
minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the public street right-of-way.
b. Accessory structures shall be setback a minimum of five (5) feet
from a side yard lot line.
c. Accessory structures shall be setback a minimum of eight (8) feet
from a rear yard lot line.
8. No structure shall be located within an easement.
9. Impervious Surface Lot Coverage. No more than thirty (30) percent of the
lot.
10. Principal Structure Height Maximum. Thirty-five (35) feet.
11. Accessory Structure Area and Height.
a. Detached garages, buildings, and additional accessory structures,
individual and combined, shall be subject to the maximums listed in
the following table.
Lot Size Maximum
Building Area
Maximum
Building Height
Less than 1 acre 1,000 square feet 15 feet
1 – 1.99 acres 1,600 square feet 18 feet
2 – 4.99 acres 2,000 square feet 18 feet
5 – 7.99 acres 2,600 square feet 20 feet
8 – 9.99 acres 3,200 square feet 20 feet
10 – 19.99 acres 4,000 square feet 24 feet
20 – 39.99 acres 5,000 square feet 24 feet
Exception.
(1) Existing or proposed agricultural buildings currently used for
agricultural purposes, as verified by the Planning
Department.
b. Outside wall dimensions will be used to determine maximum
building area, except where a roof projects out greater than two (2)
feet from the side wall, roof area will be used to determine
maximum building area.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 50 C-1, General Commercial District
CHAPTERS 44-49: RESERVED
CHAPTER 50: C-1, GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
50-1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this district is to provide an area that will allow general retail service and
other commercial uses within available service capabilities and in a manner compatible
with the surrounding area in locations specifically guided by the Comprehensive Plan.
50-2 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, INTERIM, ADMINISTRATIVE, AND ACCESSORY
USES
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this Ordinance, refer to
Table 20-4 for a list of permitted, conditional, interim, administrative, and accessory
uses in the C-1, General Commercial District:
50-3 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
The following performance standards shall be observed in a C-1, General Commercial
District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this
Ordinance:
1. Platting Required. No building or structure shall be constructed on
unplatted property, except for the addition of accessory structures or
additions to existing buildings.
2. Lot Size Minimum. A minimum of two and one-half (2.5) acres.
3. Lot Width Minimum. A minimum of two hundred (200) feet at the minimum
front yard setback line and extending to the location of the principal
structure.
4. Front Yard Setback Minimum, All Structures. One hundred fifty (150) feet
from the centerline of a State or County road or one hundred (100) feet
from the State or County road right-of-way, whichever is greater. One
hundred (100) feet from the centerline of a local public street, or sixtyseven
(67) feet from the local public street right-of-way, whichever is
greater.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 50 C-1, General Commercial District
5. Side Yard Setback Minimum, All Structures. Twenty (20) feet, or on
corner lot, see Front Yard Setback. One hundred fifty (150) feet from an
existing rural residential, residential suburban, or urban expansion district.
6. Rear Yard Setback Minimum, All Structures. Thirty (30) feet. One
hundred fifty (150) feet from an existing rural residential, residential
suburban, or urban expansion district.
7. No structure shall be located within an easement.
8. Impervious Surface Lot Coverage. No more than seventy-five (75) percent
of the lot.
9. Structure Height Maximum. Forty-five (45) feet.
10. Service Streets. Uses fronting on a collector or arterial street shall have a
paved service street to provide access to the collector or arterial street at
specified intersections.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 60 I-1, Rural Industrial District
CHAPTERS 51-59: RESERVED
CHAPTER 60: I-1, RURAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
60-1 PURPOSE
This district is intended to allow industrial uses that are not water intensive and are
compatible without municipal services in those areas having access to arterial roadways
and/or rail transportation in locations specifically guided by the Comprehensive Plan.
60-2 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, INTERIM, ADMINISTRATIVE, AND ACCESSORY
USES
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this Ordinance, refer to
Table 20-4 for a list of permitted, conditional, interim, administrative, and accessory
uses in the I-1, Rural Industrial District:
60-3 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
The following performance standards shall be observed in an I-1, Rural Industrial
District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this
Ordinance:
1. Platting Required. No building or structure shall be constructed on
unplatted, I-1 zoned property, except for the addition of accessory
structures or additions to existing buildings.
2. Lot Size Minimum. A minimum of two and one-half (2.5) acres.
3. Lot Width Minimum. Two hundred (200) feet at the minimum front yard
setback line and extending to the location of the principal structure.
4. Front Yard Setback Minimum, All Structures. One hundred fifty (150) feet
from the centerline of a State or County road or one hundred (100) feet
from the State or County road right-of-way whichever is greater. One
hundred (100) feet from the centerline of a local public street, or sixtyseven
(67) feet from the local public street right-of-way, whichever is
greater.
5. Side Yard Setback Minimum, All Structures. Twenty (20) feet or the
height of the building, whichever is greater, or on corner lot, see front yard
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 60 I-1, Rural Industrial District
setback. One hundred fifty (150) feet from an existing rural residential,
residential suburban, or urban expansion district.
6. Rear Yard Setback Minimum, All Structures. Thirty (30) feet. One
hundred fifty (150) feet from an existing rural residential, residential
suburban, or urban expansion district.
7. No structure shall be located within an easement.
8. Impervious Surface Lot Coverage. No more than seventy-five (75) percent
of the lot.
9. Structure Height Maximum. Forty-five (45) feet.
10. Service Streets. Uses fronting on a collector or arterial street shall have a
paved service street to provide access to the collector or arterial street at
specified intersections.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 70 SL, Shoreland District
CHAPTERS 61-69: RESERVED
CHAPTER 70: SL, SHORELAND DISTRICT
70-1 PURPOSE
The uncontrolled use of shoreland within the unincorporated area of Scott County,
Minnesota affects the public health, safety and general welfare not only by contributing
to pollution of public waters, but also by impairing the local tax base. Therefore, it is in
the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare to provide for the wise
subdivision, use and development of shoreland of public waters. The Legislature of
Minnesota has delegated responsibility to local governments of the State to regulate the
subdivision, use and development of the shoreland of public waters and thus preserve
and enhance the quality of surface waters, conserve the economic and natural
environmental values of shoreland and provide for the wise use of waters and related
land resources. This responsibility is hereby recognized by Scott County.
70-2 JURISDICTION
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the shoreland of the public water bodies as
classified in Section 70-6 of this Chapter within the unincorporated area of Scott County.
No lake, pond or flowage less than twenty-five (25) acres in size need be regulated in
the shoreland regulations. A body of water created by a private user where there was
no previous shoreland may, at the discretion of Scott County, be exempted from this
Chapter.
70-3 COMPLIANCE
The use of any shoreland of public waters; the size and shape of lots; the use, size,
type and location of structures on lots; the installation and maintenance of water supply
and waste treatment systems; the grading and filling of any shoreland area; the cutting
of shoreland vegetation; and the subdivision of land shall be in full compliance with the
terms of this Chapter and other applicable regulations.
70-4 APPLICATION OF RULES
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter shall be held to be
minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the governing body
and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by State
Statutes.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 70 SL, Shoreland District
70-5 ADMINISTRATION
70-5-1 Permits Required
A permit is required for the construction of buildings or building additions (and including
such related activities as construction of decks and signs), the installation and/or
alteration of individual sewage treatment systems, and those grading and filling
activities not exempted by Section 70-8-7 of this Chapter. Application for a permit shall
be made to the Planning Department on the forms provided. The application shall
include the necessary information so that the Planning Department can determine the
site's suitability for the intended use and that a compliant individual sewage treatment
system will be provided.
A permit authorizing an addition to an existing structure shall stipulate that an identified
nonconforming sewage treatment system, as defined by Section 70-9-3 shall be
reconstructed or replaced in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
70-5-2 Variances
Variances may only be granted in accordance with Minnesota State Statutes Chapter
394, and Section 2-3 of this Ordinance, as applicable. A variance may not circumvent
the general purposes and intent of this Chapter. No variance may be granted that
would allow any use that is prohibited in the zoning district in which the subject property
is located. Conditions may be imposed in the granting of a variance to ensure
compliance and to protect adjacent properties and the public interest. In considering a
variance request, the Board of Adjustment must also consider whether the property
owner has reasonable use of the land without the variance, whether the property is
used seasonally or year-round, whether the variance is being requested solely on the
basis of economic considerations and the characteristics of development on adjacent
properties.
The Scott County Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide requests for variances in
accordance with the rules that it has adopted for the conduct of business. When a
variance is approved after the Department of Natural Resources has formally
recommended denial in the hearing record, the notification of the approved variance
required in Section 70-5-3 shall also include the Board of Adjustment's summary of the
public record/testimony, the findings of facts and conclusions which supported the
issuance of the variance.
For existing developments, the application for variance must clearly demonstrate
whether a conforming sewage treatment system is present for the intended use of the
property. The variance, if issued, must require reconstruction of a nonconforming
individual sewage treatment system.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 70 SL, Shoreland District
70-5-3 Notifications to the Department of Natural Resources
Copies of all notices of any public hearings to consider variances, amendments or
conditional uses under local shoreland management controls must be sent to the
Commissioner or the Commissioner's designated representative and postmarked at
least ten (10) days before the hearings. Notices of hearings to consider proposed
subdivisions/plats must include copies of the subdivision/plat.
A copy of approved amendments and subdivisions/plats and final decisions granting
variances or conditional uses under local shoreland management controls must be sent
to the Commissioner or the Commissioner's designated representative and postmarked
within ten (10) days of final action.
70-6 SHORELAND CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM AND LAND USE DISTRICTS
70-6-1 Shoreland Classification System
The public waters of the unincorporated areas of Scott County have been classified
below consistent with the criteria found in Minnesota State Rules, and the Protected
Waters Inventory Map for Scott County, Minnesota.
70-6-2 Lakes
Natural Environment Lakes
ID # NAME OHWL SECTION TOWNSHIP RANG
70-1 Rice Lake 996.2 12, 13 113 2E1
70-2 Goose 5 113 21
70-3 Duck 12 113 21
70-4 Unnamed 19 113 21
70-10 Murphy Lake 3, 4 114 21
70-11 Unnamed 10, 11 114 21
70-22 Cleary Lake 937.8 7 114 21
70-22 Cleary Lake 937.8 12 114 22
70-23 Unnamed 19 114 21
70-23 Unnamed 24 114 22
70-24 Kane Lake 19, 30 114 21
70-24 Kane Lake 24, 25 114 22
70-29 St. Catherine
Lake
2 113 22
70-31 Bradshaw Lake 927.9 9, 10, 15, 16 113 22
70-32 Unnamed 11 113 22
70-33 Unnamed 11 113 22
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 70 SL, Shoreland District
70-35 Lennon Lake 11, 12, 13, 14 113 22
70-37 Unnamed 13 113 22
70-39 St. Patrick’s
Marsh
17, 18, 19, 20 113 22
70-40 Mud Lake 19, 20 113 22
70-43 Nash Lake 22 113 22
70-44 Unnamed 26, 35 113 22
70-45 Unnamed 27 113 22
70-46 Unnamed 28, 33, 34 113 22
70-47 Unnamed 27, 34 113 22
70-50 McMahon/Carls
Lake
965.2 1 113 22
70-50 McMahon/Carls
Lake
965.2 35, 36 114 22
70-51 Unnamed 3 113 22
70-51 Unnamed 34 114 22
70-52 Cynthia Lake 4, 5 113 22
70-52 Cynthia Lake 32, 33 114 22
70-56 Campbell Lake 5, 6 114 22
70-59 Unnamed 9 114 22
70-60 Rice Lake 945.0 10, 11 114 22
70-61 Crystal Lake 943.3 10, 11 114 22
70-65 Buck 16 114 22
70-68 Unnamed 23 114 22
70-71 Unnamed 33, 34 114 22
70-73 Howard Lake 957.2 5 114 22
70-90 Hickey 7 113 22
70-90 Hickey 12 113 23
70-94 Sutton Lake 940.5 30, 31 114 22
70-94 Sutton Lake 940.5 23, 24, 25, 26,
36
114 23
70-96 Unnamed 4 113 23
70-98 Pleasant Lake 10, 11, 15 113 23
70-104 Unnamed 27 113 23
70-110 Geis Lake 11, 12, 13, 14 114 23
70-111 Swamp 13, 14, 23, 24 114 23
70-112 Unnamed 14 114 23
70-116 Strunks Lake 2, 3, 10, 11 115 23
70-118 Gifford Lake 9, 16, 17, 20,
21
115 23
70-119 Unnamed 24, 25 115 23
70-123 Unnamed 11, 12, 13, 14 113 24
70-128 Mitchell Lake 27, 28 113 24
70-132 Ahlswede 14 114 24
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 70 SL, Shoreland District
70-133 Browns Lake 28, 29, 32, 33 114 24
70-134 Horseshoe 32 114 24
70-139 Clarks Lake 21, 22, 27, 28 113 25
70-140 Mahoney’s Lake 25 113 25
70-327 Diddle De
Woodle
21, 28 114 23
Recreational Development Lakes
ID # NAME OHWL SECTION TOWNSHIP RANG
70-21 Markley Lake 893.2 6 114 2E1
70-69 Fish Lake 946.9 27, 28 114 22
70-91 Cedar Lake 943.4 7, 18, 19 113 22
70-91 Cedar Lake 943.4 12, 13, 24 113 23
70-95 O’Dowd Lake 945.2 25 115 23
70-120 Thole/Schneider 944.7 25, 36 115 23
General Development Lakes
ID # NAME OHWL SECTION TOWNSHIP RANG
70-54 Spring Lake 912.8 4, 5, 8, 9 114 2E2
70-6-3 Rivers and Streams
Agricultural Rivers
River From To
Minnesota Border of Scott and East Section line
LeSueur Counties Sec. 5,115,22
Transition Rivers
River From To
Vermillion County Road 29, west Border of Scott and
Section line, Sec. 22-113-21 Dakota Counties
Tributary Rivers
All protected watercourses in the unincorporated areas shown on the Protected
Waters Inventory Map for Scott County, a copy of which is hereby adopted by
reference, not given a classification in Section 70-6-3 above shall be considered
"Tributary".
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 70 SL, Shoreland District
70-7 LAND USE DISTRICT DESCRIPTIONS
The land use districts in Chapters 25 through 60 of this Ordinance are delineated on the
Official Zoning Map or in this Ordinance for the shoreland in the unincorporated areas of
Scott County. These land use districts are in conformance with the criteria specified in
Minnesota State Rules:
70-7-1 Purpose
The development of shoreland of public waters must be controlled by means of land use
zoning districts which are designated to be compatible with the classes of public waters
to which they apply. Land use zoning districts are established to provide for:
1. The management of areas unsuitable for development due to wet soils,
steep slopes, flooding, inadequate drainage, severe erosion potential,
presence of significant historic sites, or any other feature likely to be
harmful to the health, safety, or welfare of the residents of the County;
2. The preservation of areas suitable for residential development from
encroachment by commercial and industrial uses;
3. The centralization of service facilities for residential areas and
enhancement of economic growth for those areas suitable for limited
commercial development;
4. The management of areas for commercial or industrial uses which, by
their nature, require location in shoreland areas;
5. The protection of valuable agricultural lands from conversion to other
uses; and
6. The preservation and enhancement of the quality of water-based
recreational uses of public waters including provisions for public accesses;
and
7. The management of surface water, recognizing it as a valuable resource
in which its quality and quantity directly affects the economic and social
welfare of Scott County citizens.
70-7-2 Criteria for Designation
The land use districts in Chapters 25 through 60 of this Ordinance, and the delineation
of a land use district's boundaries on the Official Zoning Map, must be consistent with
the goals, policies, and objectives of the Scott County Comprehensive Land Use Plan
and the following criteria, considerations, and objectives:
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 70 SL, Shoreland District
General Considerations and Criteria for All Land Uses:
1. Preservation of natural areas;
2. Present ownership and development of shoreland areas;
3. Shoreland soil types and their engineering capabilities;
4. Topographic characteristics;
5. Vegetative cover;
6. In-water physical characteristics, values, and constraints;
7. Recreational use of the surface water;
8. Road and service center accessibility;
9. Socioeconomic development needs and plans as they involve water and
related land resources;
10. The land requirements of industry which, by its nature, requires location in
shoreland areas; and
11. The necessity to preserve and restore certain areas having significant
historical or ecological value.
70-8 ZONING AND WATER SUPPLY/SANITARY PROVISIONS
70-8-1 Lot Area and Width Standards
The lot area and lot width standards for single family homes created after the date of
enactment of this Chapter for the lake and river/stream classifications are the following:
1. For all lake and river/stream classifications, the minimum lot size shall
meet the requirements of the zoning district in which the Shoreland lot is
located.
2. Only land above the ordinary high water level of public waters shall be
used to meet lot area standards.
3. Minimum lot width at the building setback line and the ordinary high water
level on lots abutting classified public waters are as follows:
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 70 SL, Shoreland District
CLASSES OF
PUBLIC WATERS
UNSEWERED
RIPARIAN &
NON-RIPARIAN
SEWERED
RIPARIAN
SEWERED
NON-RIPARIAN
Area Width Area Width Area Width
Natural
Environment Lake
2.5 acres 200 feet 40,000 sq. ft. 125 feet 20,000 sq. ft. 125 feet
Recreational
Development Lake
2.5 acres 150 feet 20,000 sq. ft. 75 feet 15,000 sq. ft. 75 feet
General
Development Lake
2.5 acres 150 feet 15,000 sq. ft. 75 feet 12,000 sq. ft. 75 feet
Agricultural &
Tributary Rivers &
Streams
2.5 acres 150 feet 20,000 sq. ft. 75 feet 20,000 sq. ft. 75 feet
Transition Rivers 2.5 acres 250 feet 20,000 sq. ft. 75 feet 20,000 sq. ft. 75 feet
70-8-2 Access to Public Waters
Lots intended as controlled accesses to public waters or as recreation areas for use by
owners of non-riparian lots within subdivisions are permissible and must meet or exceed
the following standards:
1. They must meet the width and size requirements for residential lots, and
be suitable for the intended uses of controlled access lots.
2. For all subdivisions with proposed controlled access lots located within the
Prior Lake – Spring Lake Orderly Annexation Area the use will require a
Conditional Use Permit and shall meet all of the standards set forth in the
City of Prior Lake Zoning Code for Controlled Access Lots on General
Development Lakes, as may be amended.
2. If docking, mooring, or over-water storage of more than six (6) watercraft
is to be allowed at a controlled access lot, then the width of the lot
(keeping the same lot depth) must be increased twenty-five percent (25%)
for each watercraft beyond six (6).
3. They must be jointly owned by all purchasers of lots in the subdivision or
by all purchasers of non-riparian lots in the subdivision who are provided
riparian access rights on the access lot; and
4. Covenants or other equally effective legal instruments must be developed
that specify which lot owners have authority to use the access lot and
what activities are allowed. The activities may include watercraft
launching, loading, storage, beaching, mooring, or docking. They must
also include other outdoor recreational activities that do not significantly
conflict with general public use of the public water or the enjoyment of
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 70 SL, Shoreland District
normal property rights by adjacent property owners. Examples of the nonsignificant
conflict activities include swimming, sunbathing, or picnicking.
The covenants must limit the total number of vehicles allowed to be
parked and the total number of watercraft allowed to be continuously
moored, docked, or stored over water, and must require centralization of
all common facilities and activities in the most suitable locations on the lot
to minimize topographic and vegetation alterations. They must also
require all parking areas, storage buildings, and other facilities to be
screened by vegetation or topography as much as practical from view
from the public water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.
70-8-3 Placement, Design, and Height of Structures
Placement of Structures on Lots. All structures and facilities must be located to meet all
setbacks. Where structures exist on the adjoining lots on both sides of a proposed
building site, structure setbacks may be altered without a variance to conform to the
adjoining setbacks from the ordinary high water level. If there is one adjacent principal
structure, the OHWL minimum setback may be the average of the required setback and
the setback of the adjacent principal structure. The setback exceptions may be allowed
provided the proposed building site is not located in a shore impact zone or in a bluff
impact zone. Structures shall be located as follows.
1. Structure and Individual Sewage Treatment System Setbacks from
Ordinary High Water Level:
CLASSES OF
PUBLIC WATERS
UNSEWERED SEWERED
Structure ISTS Structure
Natural Environment
Lake
150 feet 150 feet 150 feet
Recreational
Development Lake
100 feet 75 feet 75 feet
General
Development Lake
75 feet 50 feet 75 feet
Agricultural &
Tributary Rivers &
Streams
100 feet 75 feet 100 feet
Transition Rivers 150 feet 100 feet 150 feet
2. Additional Structure Setbacks. The following additional structure setbacks
apply, regardless of the classification of the water body:
Setback from: Setback:
a. Top of bluff 30 feet
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 70 SL, Shoreland District
b. Unplatted cemetery 50 feet
3. Bluff Impact Zones. Structures and accessory facilities, except stairways
and landings, must not be placed within bluff impact zones.
4. Uses Without Water-oriented Needs. Uses without water-oriented needs
must be located on lots or parcels without public waters frontage, or, if
located on lots or parcels with public waters frontage, must either be set
back double the normal ordinary high water level setback or be
substantially screened from view from the water by vegetation or
topography, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.
70-8-4 Design Criteria for Structures
1. High Water Elevations. Structures must be placed in accordance with any
floodplain regulations applicable to the site. Where these controls do not
exist, the elevation to which the lowest floor, including basement, is placed
or flood-proofed must be determined as follows:
a. For lakes and protected wetlands, by placing the lowest floor at a
level at least three (3) feet above the highest known water level, or
three (3) feet above the ordinary high water level, whichever is
higher; where an outlet exists and has been defined; and
b. For rivers and streams, by placing the lowest floor at least three (3)
feet above the flood of record, if data is available. If data is not
available, by placing the lowest floor at least three (3) feet above
the ordinary high water level, or by conducting a technical
evaluation to determine effects of proposed construction upon flood
stages and flood flows and to establish a flood protection elevation.
Under all three approaches, technical evaluations must be done by
a licensed professional consistent with Minnesota State Rules,
governing the management of floodplain areas. If more than one
approach is used, the highest flood protection elevation determined
must be used for placing structures and other facilities.
2. Stairways, Lifts, and Landings. Stairways and lifts are the preferred
alternative to major topographic alterations for achieving access up and
down bluffs and steep slopes to shore areas. Stairways and lifts must
meet the following design requirements:
a. Stairways and lifts must not exceed four (4) feet in width on
residential lots. Wider stairways may be used for commercial
properties, public open-space recreational properties and planned
unit developments;
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 70 SL, Shoreland District
b. Landings for stairways and lifts on residential lots must not exceed
32 square feet in area. Landings larger than thirty-two (32) square
feet may be used for commercial properties, public open-space
recreational properties and planned unit developments;
c. Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways, lifts or landings;
d. Stairways, lifts, and landings may be either constructed above the
ground on posts or pilings, or placed into the ground, provided they
are designed and built in a manner that ensures control of soil
erosion;
e. Stairways, lifts, and landings must be located in the most visually
inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from the surface of the
public water assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, whenever
practical; and
f. Facilities such as ramps, lifts, or mobility paths for physically
handicapped persons are also allowed for achieving access to
shore areas, provided that the dimensional and performance
standards of sub items (a) to (e) are complied with in addition to the
requirements of Minnesota State Regulations.
3. Significant Historic Sites. No structure may be placed on a significant
historic site in a manner that affects the values of the site unless adequate
information about the site has been removed and documented in a public
repository.
4. Steep Slopes. The Planning Department must evaluate possible soil
erosion impacts and development visibility from public waters before
issuing a permit for construction of individual sewage treatment systems,
roads, driveways, structures or other improvements on steep slopes.
When determined necessary, conditions must be attached to issued
permits to prevent erosion and to preserve existing vegetation screening
of structures, vehicles, and other facilities as viewed from the surface of
public waters, assuming summer, leaf-on vegetation.
5. All buildings and structures must be in accordance with the State Building
Code.
70-8-5 Height of Structures
All structures in zoning districts, except churches and agricultural structures, must not
exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 70 SL, Shoreland District
70-8-6 Shoreland Alterations
Alterations of vegetation and topography will be regulated to prevent erosion into public
waters, fix nutrients, preserve shoreland aesthetics, preserve historic values, prevent
bank slumping and protect fish and wildlife habitat.
1. Vegetation alteration necessary for the construction of structures and
sewage treatment systems and the construction of roads and parking
areas regulated by Section 70-8-7 of this Chapter are exempt from the
vegetation alteration standards that follow.
2. Removal or alteration of vegetation, except for agricultural uses as
regulated in Section 70-8-11 is allowed subject to the following standards:
a. Intensive vegetation clearing within the shore and bluff impact
zones and on steep slopes is not allowed. Intensive vegetation
clearing for forest land conversion to another use outside of these
areas is allowable as a conditional use if an erosion control and
sedimentation plan is reviewed and approved by the Soil and Water
Conservation District.
b. In shore and bluff impact zones and on steep slopes, limited
clearing of trees and shrubs and cutting, pruning and trimming of
trees is allowed to provide a view to the water from the principal
dwelling site and to accommodate the placement of stairways and
landings, picnic areas, access paths, livestock watering areas,
beach and watercraft access areas, provided that:
(1) The screening of structures, vehicles, or other facilities as
viewed from the water, assuming summer, leaf-on
conditions, is not substantially reduced;
(2) Along rivers, existing shading of water surfaces is preserved;
and
(3) The above provisions are not applicable to the removal of
trees, limbs, or branches that are dead, diseased or pose
safety hazards.
70-8-7 Topographic Alterations/Grading and Filling
1. Grading and filling and excavations necessary for the construction of
structures, individual sewage treatment systems, and driveways under
validly issued construction permits for these facilities do not require the
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 70 SL, Shoreland District
issuance of a separate grading and filling permit. However, the grading
and filling standards in this Section must be incorporated into the issuance
of permits for construction of structures, individual sewage treatment
systems and driveways. Land disturbing activity regulations of Chapter 6
of this Ordinance shall apply, if applicable.
2. Public roads and parking areas are regulated by Section 70-8-8 of this
Chapter.
3. Notwithstanding Items 1 and 2 above, a grading and filling permit will be
required for:
a. The movement of more than ten (10) cubic yards of material on
steep slopes or within shore or bluff impact zones; and
b. The movement of more than fifty (50) cubic yards of material
outside of steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones.
4. The following considerations and conditions must be adhered to during the
issuance of construction permits, grading and filling permits, conditional
use permits, variances and subdivision approvals:
a. Grading or filling in any type 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, or 8 wetland must be
evaluated to determine how extensively the proposed activity would
affect the following functional qualities of the wetland*:
* This evaluation must also include a determination of whether the
wetland alteration being proposed requires permits, reviews, or
approvals by other local, state, or federal agencies such as a
Watershed District, the Minnesota Department of Natural
Resources or the United States Army Corps of Engineers. The
applicant will be so advised.
(1) Sediment and pollutant trapping and retention;
(2) Storage of surface runoff to prevent or reduce flood damage;
(3) Fish and wildlife habitat;
(4) Recreational use;
(5) Shoreline or bank stabilization; and
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 70 SL, Shoreland District
(6) Noteworthiness, including special qualities such as historic
significance, critical habitat for endangered plants and
animals, or others.
b. Alterations must be designed and conducted in a manner that
ensures only the smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for the
shortest time possible;
c. Mulches or similar materials must be used, where necessary, for
temporary bare soil coverage, and a permanent vegetation cover
must be established as soon as possible;
d. Methods to minimize soil erosion and to trap sediments before they
reach any surface water feature must be used;
e. Altered areas must be stabilized to acceptable erosion control
standards consistent with the field office technical guides of the Soil
and Water Conservation District and the Natural Resource
Conservation Service;
f. Fill or excavated material must not be placed in a manner that
creates an unstable slope;
g. Plans to place fill or excavated material on steep slopes must be
reviewed by licensed professionals for continued slope stability and
must not create finished slopes of thirty percent (30%) or greater;
h. Fill or excavated material must not be placed in bluff impact zones;
i. Any alterations below the ordinary high water level of public waters
must first be authorized by the Commissioner under Minnesota
State Statutes;
j. Alterations of topography must only be allowed if they are
accessory to permitted or conditional uses and do not adversely
affect adjacent or nearby properties; and
k. Placement of natural rock riprap, including associated grading of
the shoreline and placement of a filter blanket, is permitted if the
finished slope does not exceed three (3) feet horizontal to one (1)
foot vertical, the landward extent of the riprap is within ten (10) feet
of the ordinary high water level, and the height of the riprap above
the ordinary high water level does not exceed three (3) feet.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 70 SL, Shoreland District
5. Connections to public waters. Excavations where the intended purpose is
connection to a public water, such as boat slips, canals, channels,
lagoons, and harbors, must be controlled by local shoreland controls.
Permission for excavations may be given only after the Commissioner has
approved the proposed connection to public waters.
70-8-8 Placement and Design of Roads, Driveways, and Parking Areas
1. Public and private roads and parking areas must be designed to take
advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve maximum
screening from view from public waters. Documentation must be provided
by a licensed professional that all roads and parking areas are designed
and constructed to minimize and control erosion to public waters
consistent with the field office technical guides of the Soil and Water
Conservation District or other applicable technical materials.
2. Roads, driveways, and parking areas must meet structure setbacks and
must not be placed within bluff and shore impact zones, when other
reasonable and feasible placement alternatives exist. If no alternatives
exist, they may be placed within these areas and must be designed to
minimize adverse impacts.
3. Public and private watercraft access ramps, approach roads, and
access-related parking areas may be placed within shore impact zones
provided the vegetative screening and erosion control conditions of this
subpart are met. For private facilities, the grading and filling provisions of
Section 70-8-7 of this Chapter must be met.
70-8-9 Stormwater Management
The following general and specific standards shall apply, as well as those in Chapter 6
of this Ordinance.
1. General Standards
a. When possible, existing natural drainageways, wetlands, and
vegetated soil surfaces must be used to convey, store, filter, and
retain stormwater runoff before discharge to public waters.
b. Development must be planned and conducted in a manner that will
minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities, erosion
potential, and reduce and delay runoff volumes. Disturbed areas
must be stabilized and protected as soon as possible and facilities
or methods used to retain sediment on the site.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 70 SL, Shoreland District
c. When development density, topographic features, and soil and
vegetation conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle
stormwater runoff using natural features and vegetation, various
types of constructed facilities such as diversions, settling basins,
skimming devices, dikes, waterways, and ponds may be used.
Preference must be given to designs using surface drainage,
vegetation, and infiltration rather than buried pipes and man-made
materials and facilities.
2. Specific Standards
a. Impervious surface coverage of lots must not exceed twenty-five
percent (25%) of the lot area in Agricultural, Rural Residential,
Residential Suburban, and Urban Reserve Districts and seventyfive
percent (75%) in the Commercial and Industrial Districts.
b. When constructed facilities are used for stormwater management,
documentation must be provided by a licensed professional that
they are designed and installed consistent with the field office
technical guide of the Soil and Water Conservation District or other
applicable technical materials.
c. New constructed stormwater outfalls to public waters must provide
for filtering or settling of suspended solids and skimming of surface
debris before discharge.
70-8-10 Standards for Commercial, Industrial, Public, and Semipublic Uses
Surface water-oriented commercial uses and industrial, public, or semipublic uses with
similar needs to have access to and use of public waters may be located on parcels or
lots with frontage on public waters. Those uses with water-oriented needs must meet
the following standards:
1. In addition to meeting impervious coverage limits, setbacks, and other
zoning standards in this Chapter and Ordinance, the uses must be
designed to incorporate topographic and vegetative screening of parking
areas and structures;
2. Uses that require short-term watercraft mooring for patrons must
centralize these facilities and design them to avoid obstructions of
navigation and to be the minimum size necessary to meet the need; and
3. Uses that depend on patrons arriving by watercraft may use signs and
lighting to convey needed information to the public, subject to the following
general standards:
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 70 SL, Shoreland District
a. No advertising signs or supporting facilities for signs may be placed
in or upon public waters. Signs conveying information or safety
messages may be placed in or on public waters by a public
authority or under a permit issued by the County Sheriff;
b. Signs may be placed, when necessary, within the shore impact
zone if they are designed and sized to be the minimum necessary
to convey needed information. They must only convey the location
and name of the establishment and the general types of goods or
services available. The signs must not contain other detailed
information such as product brands and prices, must not be located
higher than ten (10) feet above the ground, and must not exceed
thirty two (32) square feet in size. If illuminated by artificial lights,
the lights must be shielded or directed to prevent illumination out
across public waters; and
c. Other outside lighting may be located within the shore impact zone
or over public waters if it is used primarily to illuminate potential
safety hazards and is shielded or otherwise directed to prevent
direct illumination out across public waters. This does not preclude
use of navigational lights.
70-8-11 Agriculture Use Standards
1. General cultivation farming, grazing, nurseries, horticulture, truck farming,
sod farming, and wild crop harvesting are permitted uses if steep slopes
and shore and bluff impact zones are maintained in permanent vegetation
or operated in accordance with a conservation plan that is approved by
Soil and Water Conservation District (SWCD) and achieves a comparable
level of water quality protection as would permanent vegetation cover
within the impact zones. Permanent vegetative cover within a shore
impact zone may be mowed and harvested, provided such activities are
performed in accordance with an operation and maintenance plan
approved by the SWCD and addresses water quality, soil erosion, and
wildlife habitat concerns.
The shore impact zone for parcels with permitted agricultural land uses is
equal to a line parallel to and fifty (50) feet from the ordinary high water
level.
2. Animal feedlots, as defined by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency,
must meet the following standards:
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 70 SL, Shoreland District
a. New feedlots must not be located within the bluff impact zone or
within three hundred (300) feet of the ordinary high water level of a
watercourse or lake.
b. Modifications or expansions to existing feedlots that are located
within three hundred (300) feet of the ordinary high water level or
within a bluff impact zone are allowed, with an approved Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency feedlot permit, if they do not further
encroach into the existing ordinary high water level setback or
encroach on bluff impact zones.
70-8-12 Mining Standards
1. Site Development and Reclamation Plan. A mining and reclamation plan
must be developed, approved, and followed over the course of operation
of the site. The plan must address dust, noise, possible pollutant
discharges, hours and duration of operation, and anticipated vegetation
and topographic alterations. It must also identify actions to be taken
during operation to mitigate adverse environmental impacts, particularly
erosion, and must clearly explain how the site will be rehabilitated after
mining activities end.
2. Setbacks for Processing Machinery. Processing machinery must be
located consistent with setback standards for structures from ordinary high
water levels of public waters and from bluffs.
70-8-13 Conditional Uses
Conditional uses allowable within shoreland areas shall be subject to the review and
approval procedures, and criteria and conditions for review of conditional uses
established in Section 2-6 of this Ordinance. The following additional evaluation criteria
and conditions apply within shoreland areas:
Evaluation criteria. A thorough evaluation of the waterbody and the topographic,
vegetation, and soils conditions on the site must be made to ensure:
1. The prevention of soil erosion or other possible pollution of public waters,
both during and after construction;
2. The visibility of structures and other facilities as viewed from public waters
is limited;
3. The site is adequate for water supply and individual sewage treatment
system; and
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 70 SL, Shoreland District
4. The types, uses, and numbers of watercraft that the project will generate
are compatible in relation to the suitability of public waters to safely
accommodate these watercraft.
Conditions attached to conditional use permits. The County Board, upon consideration
of the criteria listed above and the purposes of this Ordinance, shall attach such
conditions to the issuance of the conditional use permits as it deems necessary to fulfill
the purposes of this Chapter. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the
following:
1. Increased setbacks from the ordinary high water level;
2. Limitations on the natural vegetation to be removed or the requirement
that additional vegetation be planted; and
3. Special provisions for the location, design, and use of structures,
individual sewage treatment systems, watercraft launching and docking
areas and vehicle parking areas.
70-8-14 Water Supply and Sewage Treatment
Any public or private supply of water for domestic purposes must meet or exceed
standards for water quality of the Minnesota Department of Health and the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency.
Any premises used for human occupancy must be provided with an adequate method of
sewage treatment, as follows:
1. All Individual Sewage Treatment Systems shall meet the requirements of
the Scott County Individual Sewage Treatment System Ordinance No. 4.
2. Individual Sewage Treatment Systems must be set back from the ordinary
high water level in accordance with the setbacks contained in Section 70-
8-3 of this Chapter.
3. Nonconforming sewage treatment systems shall be regulated and
upgraded in accordance with Section 70-9-3 of this Chapter.
70-9 NONCONFORMITIES
All legally established non-conformities as of August 4, 1992, (the original effective date
of this Chapter) may continue, but they will be managed in accordance with Chapter 3
of this Ordinance for the subjects of alterations and additions, repair after damage,
discontinuance of use, and intensification of use; except that the following standards will
also apply in shoreland areas:
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 70 SL, Shoreland District
70-9-1 Construction on Nonconforming Lots of Record
1. Lots of record in the Office of the County Recorder/Registrar of Titles on
the date of enactment of shoreland controls that do not meet the
requirements of Section 70-8-1 of this Chapter may be allowed as building
sites without variances from lot size requirements provided the use is
permitted in the zoning district; the lot has been in separate ownership
from abutting lands at all times since it became substandard; was created
compliant with official controls in effect at the time; and sewage treatment
and setback requirements of this Chapter are met.
2. A variance from setback requirements must be obtained before any use,
sewage treatment system, or building permit is issued for a lot. In
evaluating the variance, the Board of Adjustment shall consider sewage
treatment and water supply capabilities or constraints of the lot and shall
deny the variance if adequate facilities cannot be provided.
3. If, in a group of two or more contiguous lots under the same ownership,
any individual lot does not meet 70% of the requirements of Section 70-8-
1 of this Chapter the lot must not be considered as a separate parcel of
land for the purposes of sale or development. The lot must be combined
with the one or more contiguous lots so they equal one or more parcels of
land, each meeting 70% of the requirements of Section 70-8-1 of this
Chapter as much as possible.
70-9-2 Additions/Expansions to Nonconforming Structures
1. All additions or expansions to the outside dimensions of an existing
nonconforming structure must meet the setback, height, and other
requirements of Section 70-8-3 of this Chapter. Any deviation from these
requirements must be authorized by a variance pursuant to Section 70-5-
2.
2. Deck additions may be allowed without a variance to a structure not
meeting the required setback from the ordinary high water level if all of the
following criteria and standards are met:
a. The structure existed on the date the structure setbacks were
established;
b. A thorough evaluation of the property and structure reveals no
reasonable location for a deck meeting or exceeding the existing
ordinary high water level setback of the structure;
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 70 SL, Shoreland District
c. The deck encroachment toward the ordinary high water level does
not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the existing setback of the
structure from the ordinary high water level or does not encroach
closer than thirty (30) feet, whichever is more restrictive; and
d. The deck is constructed primarily of wood, and is not roofed or
screened.
70-9-3 Nonconforming Sewage Treatment Systems
1. A sewage treatment system not meeting the requirements of Section 70-8-
14 of this Chapter must be upgraded, at a minimum, at any time a permit
or variance of any type is required for any expansion on, or use of, the
property. For the purposes of this provision, a sewage treatment system
shall not be considered nonconforming if the only deficiency is the sewage
treatment system's improper setback from the ordinary high water level.
2. Scott County has by Resolution #92029 of the Scott County Board of
Commissioners notified the Commissioner of its program to identify
nonconforming sewage treatment systems. Scott County will require
upgrading or replacement of any nonconforming system identified by this
program within a reasonable period of time. Sewage systems installed
according to all applicable local shoreland management standards in
effect at the time of installation may be considered as conforming unless
they are determined to be failing, except that systems using cesspools,
leaching pits, seepage pits, or other deep disposal methods, or systems
with less soil treatment area separation above groundwater than required
by the Scott County Individual Sewage Treatment System Ordinance No.
4 for design of on-site sewage treatment systems, shall be considered
nonconforming.
70-10 SUBDIVISION/PLATTING PROVISIONS
70-10-1 Land Suitability
Each lot created through subdivision must be suitable in its natural state for the
proposed use with minimal alteration. Suitability analysis by Scott County shall consider
susceptibility to flooding, existence of wetlands, soil and rock formations with severe
limitations for development, severe erosion potential, steep topography, inadequate
water supply or sewage treatment capabilities, near-shore aquatic conditions unsuitable
for water-based recreation, important fish and wildlife habitat, presence of significant
historic sites, or any other feature of the natural land likely to be harmful to the health,
safety or welfare of future residents of the proposed subdivision or of Scott County.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 70 SL, Shoreland District
70-10-2 Consistency with Other Controls
Subdivisions must conform to the Scott County Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7. A
subdivision will not be approved where a later variance from one or more standards in
official controls would be needed to use the lots for their intended purpose. A
subdivision will not be approved unless a domestic water supply is available and a
sewage treatment system consistent with Section 70-8-14 can be provided for every lot.
Each lot shall meet the minimum lot size and dimensional requirements of Section 70-8-
1, including at least a minimum contiguous lawn area that is free of limiting factors
sufficient for the construction of two standard soil treatment systems, in compliance with
Scott County Individual Sewage Treatment System Ordinance No. 4. Lots that would
require use of holding tanks shall not be approved.
70-10-3 Information Requirements
Sufficient information shall be submitted by the applicant for Scott County to make a
determination of land suitability. The information shall include at least the following:
1. Topographic contours at two-foot intervals or less from United States
Geological Survey maps or more accurate sources, showing limiting site
characteristics;
2. The surface water features required in Minnesota State Statutes, to be
shown on plats, obtained from United States Geological Survey
quadrangle topographic maps or more accurate sources;
3. Adequate soils information to determine suitability for building and on-site
sewage treatment capabilities for every lot from soil borings and
percolation tests performed in accordance with the Scott County Individual
Sewage Treatment System Ordinance No. 4;
4. Information regarding adequacy of domestic water supply; extent of
anticipated vegetation and topographic alterations; near-shore aquatic
conditions, including depths, types of bottom sediments, and aquatic
vegetation; and proposed methods for controlling stormwater runoff and
erosion, both during and after construction activities;
5. Location of 100-year floodplain areas and floodway districts from existing
adopted maps or data; and
6. A line or contour representing the ordinary high water level, the "toe" and
the "top" of bluffs, and the minimum building setback distances from the
top of the bluff and the lake or stream.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 70 SL, Shoreland District
70-10-4 Dedications
When a land or easement dedication is a condition of subdivision approval, the approval
must provide easements over natural drainage or ponding areas for management of
stormwater and significant wetlands.
70-10-5 Platting
All subdivisions that create lots or parcels for building permit purposes that are less than
forth (40) acres in size shall be processed as a plat in accordance with Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 71 FP, Floodplain District
CHAPTER 71: FP, FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT
71-1 PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this Chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare and to minimize those losses described in Section 71-3 by provisions contained
herein. All terms, conditions and requirements of the following Sections shall pertain
only to Chapter 71, Floodplain District. Where the terms, conditions and requirements
of the following Sections conflict with any terms, conditions and requirements of the
Ordinance, the former shall control. Otherwise, all terms, conditions and requirements
of the Ordinance shall be deemed to be supplementary to those of this Chapter.
71-2 JURISDICTION
This Chapter shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the un-incorporated area of
Scott County shown on the Official Zoning Map and/or the attachments thereto as being
located within the boundaries of the Floodway, Flood Fringe, or General Floodplain
Districts.
71-3 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION
The legislature of the State of Minnesota has, in Minnesota Statutes Chapter 104 and
Chapter 394, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the Board of Commissioners
of Scott County, Minnesota does ordain as follows:
71-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS
71-4-1 Findings of Fact
The flood hazard areas of Scott County, Minnesota, are subject to periodic inundation
which results in potential loss of life, loss of property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures
or flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely
affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
71-4-2 Establishment of Official Zoning Map
The Official Zoning Map together with all materials attached thereto is hereby adopted
by reference and declared to be a part of this Chapter. The attached material shall
include the Flood Insurance Study for the County of Scott prepared by the Federal
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 71 FP, Floodplain District
Insurance Administration dated February 19, 1987, and the Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map and Flood Insurance Rate Map dated February 19, 1987 therein, as may
be revised or amended by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The
Official Zoning Map shall be on file in the Planning Department.
71-4-3 Methods Used to Analyze Flood Hazards
This Chapter is based upon a reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards which is
consistent with the standards established by the Minnesota Department of Natural
Resources.
71-4-4 Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation
The Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation shall be an elevation no lower than one (1)
foot above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation
caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from designation of a floodway.
71-4-5 Interpretation
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter shall be held to be
minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the County of Scott
and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by State
Statutes.
The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be determined by scaling distances on the
Official Zoning Map. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the district as shown on the Official Zoning Map, as for example where
there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions
and there is a formal appeal of the decision of the Planning Department, the Board of
Adjustment shall make the necessary interpretation. All decisions will be based on
elevations on the regional (100-year) flood profile and other available technical data.
Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to present their case to the Board of Adjustment and to submit technical
evidence.
71-4-6 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
This Chapter does not imply that areas outside the floodplain districts or land uses
permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Chapter
shall not create liability on the part of Scott County or any officer or employee thereof for
any flood damages that result from reliance on this Chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 71 FP, Floodplain District
71-5 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
71-5-1 Districts
1. Floodway District. The Floodway District shall include those areas
designated as floodway on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map
adopted in Section 71-4-2.
2. Flood Fringe District. The Flood Fringe District shall include those areas
designated as floodway fringe on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map
adopted in Section 71-4-2.
3. General Floodplain District. The General Floodplain District shall include
those areas designated as unnumbered A Zones on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map adopted in Section 71-4-2.
71-5-2 Compliance
No new structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be located,
extended, converted, or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this
Chapter and other applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of
this Chapter. Within the Floodway, Flood Fringe and General Floodplain Districts, all
uses not listed as permitted uses or conditional uses in Sections 71-6, 71-7 and 71-8
that follow, respectively, shall be prohibited. In addition, a caution is provided here that:
Modifications, additions, structural alterations or repair after damage to existing
nonconforming structures and nonconforming uses of structures or land are regulated
by the general provisions of this Chapter and specifically Section 71-12; and As-built
elevations for elevated or flood proofed structures must be certified by ground surveys
and flood proofing techniques must be designed and certified by a qualified
professional as specified in the general provisions of this Chapter and specifically as
stated in Section 71-11 of this Chapter.
71-6 FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW)
71-6-1 Permitted Uses
1. General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture,
truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.
2. Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas, and airport landing
strips.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 71 FP, Floodplain District
3. Private and public golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery
ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks,
wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting
preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing
areas, and single or multiple purpose recreational trails.
4. Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas.
71-6-2 Standards for Floodway Permitted Uses
1. The use shall have a low flood damage potential.
2. The use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning district. The
underlying Zoning District of all floodplain areas are to be as indicated by
the Scott County Zoning Map.
3. The use shall not obstruct flood flows or increase flood elevations and
shall not involve structures, fill, obstructions, excavations or storage of
materials or equipment.
71-6-3 Conditional Uses
1. Structures accessory to the uses listed in Section 71-6-1 above and the
uses listed below as #2 through #7.
2. Extraction and storage of sand, gravel, and other materials.
3. Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves, and water control structures.
4. Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines, and pipelines.
5. Storage yards for equipment, machinery, or materials.
6. Placement of fill.
7. Structural works for flood control such as levees, dikes and floodwalls
constructed to any height where the intent is to protect individual
structures and levees or dikes where the intent is to protect agricultural
crops for a frequency flood event equal to or less than the ten-year
frequency flood event.
71-6-4 Standards for Floodway Conditional Uses
1. All Uses. No structure (temporary or permanent), fill (including fill for
roads and levees), deposit, obstruction, storage of materials or equipment,
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 71 FP, Floodplain District
or other uses may be allowed as a conditional use that will cause any
increase in the stage of the 100-year or regional flood or cause an
increase in flood damages in the reach or reaches affected.
2. All floodway conditional uses shall be subject to the procedures and
standards contained in Section 71-11-4 of this Chapter.
3. The conditional use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning district.
The underlying Zoning District of all floodplain areas are to be as indicated
by the Scott County Zoning Map.
4. Fill.
a. Fill, dredge spoils and all other similar materials deposited or stored
in the floodplain shall be protected from erosion by vegetative
cover, mulching, riprap or other acceptable method.
b. Dredge spoil sites and sand and gravel operations shall not be
allowed in the floodway unless a long-term site development plan is
submitted which includes an erosion/sedimentation prevention
element to the plan.
c. As an alternative, and consistent with subsection (b) immediately
above, dredge spoil disposal and sand and gravel operations may
allow temporary, on-site storage of fill or other materials which
would have caused an increase to the stage of the 100-year or
regional flood but only after the Planning Advisory Commission and
the County Board has received an appropriate plan which assures
the removal of the materials from the floodway based upon the
flood warning time available. The conditional use permit must be
title registered with the property in the Office of the County
Recorder of Registrar of Titles.
5. Accessory Structures.
a. Accessory structures shall not be designed for human habitation.
b. Accessory structures, if permitted, shall be constructed and placed
on the building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the
flow of flood waters. Whenever possible, structures shall be
constructed with the longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of
flood flow. So far as practicable, structures shall be placed
approximately on the same flood flow lines as those of adjoining
structures.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 71 FP, Floodplain District
c. Accessory structures shall be elevated on fill or structurally dry
flood proofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 flood proofing
classifications in the State Building Code. As an alternative, an
accessory structure may be flood proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 flood
proofing classification in the State Building Code provided the
accessory structure constitutes a minimal investment, does not
exceed five hundred (500) square feet in size, and for a detached
garage, the detached garage must be used solely for parking of
vehicles and limited storage. All flood proofed accessory structures
must meet the following additional standards, as appropriate:
(1) The structure must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure and
shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls; and
(2) Any mechanical and utility equipment in a structure must be
elevated to or above the Regulatory Flood Protection
Elevation or properly flood proofed.
6. Storage of Materials and Equipment.
a. The storage or processing of materials that are in time of flooding
flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or
plant life is prohibited.
b. Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily
removable from the area within the time available after a flood
warning and in accordance with a plan approved by the Planning
Advisory Commission and the County Board.
7. Structural works for flood control that will change the course, current or
cross Section of protected wetlands or public waters shall be subject to
the provisions of Minnesota Statute. Community-wide structural works for
flood control intended to remove areas from the regulatory floodplain shall
not be allowed in the floodway.
8. A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the floodway shall not cause an
increase to the 100-year or regional flood and the technical analysis must
assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides of a stream.
71-7 FLOOD FRINGE DISTRICT (FF)
71-7-1 Permitted Uses
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 71 FP, Floodplain District
Permitted Uses shall be those uses of land or structures listed as Permitted Uses in the
underlying zoning use districts. The underlying Zoning District of all floodplain areas are
to be as indicated by the Scott County Zoning Map. All Permitted Uses shall comply
with the standards for Flood Fringe "Permitted Uses" listed in Section 71-7-2 and the
standards for all Flood Fringe "Permitted and Conditional Uses" listed in Section 71-7-5.
71-7-2 Standards for Flood Fringe Permitted Uses
1. All structures, including accessory structures, must be elevated on fill so
that the lowest floor including basement floor is at or above the Regulatory
Flood Protection Elevation. The finished fill elevation for structures shall
be no lower than one (1) foot below the Regulatory Flood Protection
Elevation and the fill shall extend at such elevation at least fifteen (15) feet
beyond the outside limits of the structure erected thereon.
2. As an alternative to elevation on fill, accessory structures that constitute a
minimal investment and that do not exceed five hundred (500) square feet
for the outside dimension at ground level may be internally flood proofed
in accordance with Section 71-6-4, Accessory Structures (c).
3. The cumulative placement of fill where at any one time in excess of
one-thousand (1,000) cubic yards of fill is located on the parcel shall be
allowable only as a conditional use, unless said fill is specifically intended
to elevate a structure in accordance with Section 71-7-2 (1) above.
4. The storage of any materials or equipment shall be elevated on fill to the
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation.
5. The provisions of Section 71-7-5 of this Chapter shall apply.
71-7-3 Conditional Uses
1. Any structure that is not elevated on fill or flood proofed in accordance
with Section 71-7-2 (1 and 2) or any use of land that does not comply with
the standards in Section 71-7-2 (3 and 4) shall only be allowable as a
conditional use. An application for a conditional use shall be subject to the
standards and criteria and evaluation procedures specified in Sections 71-
7-4 through 71-7-5 and 71-11-4 of this Chapter.
71-7-4 Standards for Flood Fringe Conditional Uses
1. Alternative elevation methods other than the use of fill may be utilized to
elevate a structure's lowest floor above the Regulatory Flood Protection
Elevation. These alternative methods may include the use of stilts, pilings,
parallel walls, etc., or above-grade, enclosed areas such as crawl spaces
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 71 FP, Floodplain District
or tuck under garages. The base or floor of an enclosed area shall be
considered above-grade and not a structure's basement or lowest floor if:
1) the enclosed area is above-grade on at least one side of the structure;
2) is designed to internally flood and is constructed with flood resistant
materials; and 3) is used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage. The above-noted alternative elevation methods are subject to the
following additional standards:
a. Design and Certification - The structure's design and as-built
condition must be certified by a licensed professional as being in
compliance with the general design standards of the State Building
Code and, specifically, that all electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities
must be at or above the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation or
be designed to prevent flood water from entering or accumulating
within these components during times of flooding.
b. Specific Standards for Above-grade, Enclosed
Areas - Above-grade, fully enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or
tuck under garages must be designed to internally flood and the
design plans must stipulate:
(1) The minimum area of openings in the walls where internal
flooding is to be used as a flood proofing technique. When
openings are placed in a structure's walls to provide for entry
of flood waters to equalize pressures, the bottom of all
openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade.
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of flood waters.
(2) That the enclosed area will be designed of flood resistant
materials in accordance with the FP-3 or FP-4 classifications
in the State Building Code and shall be used solely for
building access, parking of vehicles or storage.
2. Basements, as defined by Section 1.7 of this Ordinance, shall be subject
to the following:
a. Residential basement construction shall not be allowed below the
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation.
b. Non-residential basements may be allowed below the Regulatory
Flood Protection Elevation provided the basement is structurally dry
flood proofed in accordance with Section 71-7-4 (3) below.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 71 FP, Floodplain District
3. All areas of non-residential structures including basements to be placed
below the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation shall be flood proofed in
accordance with the structurally dry flood proofing classifications in the
State Building Code. Structurally dry flood proofing must meet the FP-1 or
FP-2 flood proofing classification in the State Building Code and this shall
require making the structure watertight with the walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components
having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
the effects of buoyancy. Structures flood proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4
classification shall not be permitted.
4. When at any one time more than one thousand (1,000) cubic yards of fill
or other similar material is located on a parcel for such activities as on-site
storage, landscaping, sand and gravel operations, landfills, roads, dredge
spoil disposal or construction of flood control works, an
erosion/sedimentation control plan must be submitted. The plan must
clearly specify methods to be used to stabilize the fill on site for a flood
event at a minimum of the 100-year or regional flood event. The plan
must be prepared and certified by a licensed professional. The plan may
incorporate alternative procedures for removal of the material from the
floodplain if adequate flood warning time exists.
5. Storage of Materials and Equipment.
a. The storage or processing of materials that are in time of flooding
flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or
plant life is prohibited.
b. Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily
removable from the area within the time available after a flood
warning and in accordance with a plan approved by the Planning
Advisory Commission and the County Board.
6. The provisions of Section 71-7-5 of this Chapter shall also apply.
71-7-5 Standards for All Flood Fringe Uses
1. All new principal structures must have vehicular access at or above an
elevation not more than two (2) feet below the Regulatory Flood Protection
Elevation. If a variance to this requirement is granted, the Board of
Adjustment must specify limitations on the period of use or occupancy of
the structure for times of flooding and only after determining that adequate
flood warning time and local flood emergency response procedures exist.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 71 FP, Floodplain District
2. Commercial Uses - accessory land uses, such as yards, railroad tracks,
and parking lots may be at elevations lower than the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation. However, a permit for such facilities to be used by
the employees or the general public shall not be granted in the absence of
a flood warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the
area would be inundated to a depth greater than two (2) feet or be subject
to flood velocities greater than four (4) feet per second upon occurrence of
the regional flood.
3. Manufacturing and Industrial Uses - measures shall be taken to minimize
interference with normal plant operations especially along streams having
protracted flood durations. Certain accessory land uses such as yards
and parking lots may be at lower elevations subject to requirements set
out in Section 71-7-5 (2) above. In considering permit applications, due
consideration shall be given to needs of an industry whose business
requires that it be located in floodplain areas.
4. Fill shall be properly compacted and the slopes shall be properly protected
by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable methods. The
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria
for removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain
structures properly elevated on fill above the one-hundred (100) year flood
elevation. FEMA's requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and
side slope protection standards for multi-structure or multi-lot
developments. These standards should be investigated prior to the
initiation of site preparation if a change of special flood hazard area
designation will be requested.
5. Floodplain developments shall not adversely affect the hydraulic capacity
of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any tributary watercourse or
drainage system where a floodway or other encroachment limit has not
been specified on the Official Zoning Map.
71-8 GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT
71-8-1 Permitted Uses
1. The uses listed in Section 71-6-1 of this Chapter shall be permitted uses.
2. All other uses shall be subject to the floodway/flood fringe evaluation
criteria pursuant to Section 71-8-2 below. Section 71-6 shall apply if the
proposed use is in the Floodway District and Section 71-7 shall apply if the
proposed use is in the Flood Fringe District.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 71 FP, Floodplain District
71-8-2 Procedures for Floodway and Flood Fringe Determinations within the
General Floodplain District
1. Upon receipt of an application for a conditional use permit for a use within
the General Floodplain District, the applicant shall be required to furnish
such of the following information as is deemed necessary by the Planning
Department for the determination of the Regulatory Flood Protection
Elevation and whether the proposed use is within the Floodway or Flood
Fringe District.
a. A typical valley cross-Section showing the channel of the stream,
elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the channel,
cross-Sectional areas to be occupied by the proposed
development, and high water information.
b. Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground;
pertinent structure, fill, or storage elevations; size, location, and
spatial arrangement of all proposed and existing structures on the
site; location and elevations of streets; photographs showing
existing land uses and vegetation upstream and downstream; and
soil type.
c. Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line of
the stream for at least five hundred (500) feet in either direction
from the proposed development.
2. The applicant shall be responsible to submit one copy of the above
information to a licensed professional person or agency for technical
assistance in determining whether the proposed use is in the Floodway or
Flood Fringe District and to determine the Regulatory Flood Protection
Elevation. Procedures consistent with Minnesota Regulations 1983, Parts
6120.5000 - 6120.6200 shall be followed in this expert evaluation. The
licensed professional is strongly encouraged to discuss the proposed
technical evaluation methodology with the respective Department of
Natural Resources Area Hydrologist prior to commencing the analysis.
The qualified professional shall:
a. Estimate the peak discharge of the regional flood.
b. Calculate the water surface profile of the regional flood based upon
a hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and overbank areas.
c. Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the regional
flood without increasing flood stages more than 0.5 foot. A lesser
stage increase than 0.5 foot shall be required if, as a result of the
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 71 FP, Floodplain District
additional stage increase, increased flood damages would result.
An equal degree of encroachment on both sides of the stream
within the reach shall be assumed in computing floodway
boundaries.
3. The Planning Department shall present the technical evaluation and
findings of the licensed professional to the County Board. The County
Board must formally accept the technical evaluation and the
recommended Floodway and/or Flood Fringe District boundary or deny
the permit application. The County Board, prior to official action, may
submit the application and all supporting data and analyses to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, the Department of Natural Resources
or the Planning Advisory Commission for review and comment. Once the
Floodway and Flood Fringe Boundaries have been determined, the
County Board shall refer the matter back to the Planning Department who
shall process the permit application consistent with the applicable
provisions of Section 71-6 and 71-7 of this Chapter.
71-9 SUBDIVISIONS
71-9-1 Review Criteria
No land shall be subdivided which is unsuitable for the reason of flooding, inadequate
drainage, water supply or sewage treatment facilities. All lots within the floodplain
districts shall contain a building site at or above the Regulatory Flood Protection
Elevation. All subdivisions shall have water and sewage treatment facilities that comply
with the provisions of this Chapter and have road access both to the subdivision and to
the individual building sites no lower than two (2) feet below the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation. For all subdivisions in the floodplain, the Floodway and Flood
Fringe boundaries, the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation and the required elevation
of all access roads shall be clearly labeled on all required subdivision drawings and
platting documents.
71-9-2 Floodway/Flood Fringe Determinations in the General Floodplain District
In the General Floodplain District, applicants shall provide the information required in
Section 71-8-2 of this Chapter to determine the 100-year flood elevation, the Floodway
and Flood Fringe District boundaries and the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation for
the subdivision site.
71-9-3 Removal of Special Flood Hazard Area Designation
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for
removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 71 FP, Floodplain District
elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA's requirements incorporate
specific fill compaction and side slope protection standards for multi-structure or
multi-lot developments. These standards should be investigated prior to the initiation of
site preparation if a change of special flood hazard area designation will be requested.
71-10 PUBLIC UTILITIES, RAILROADS, ROADS, AND BRIDGES
71-10-1 Public Utilities
All public utilities and facilities such as gas, electrical, sewer, and water supply systems
to be located in the floodplain shall be flood-proofed in accordance with the State
Building Code or elevated to above the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation.
71-10-2 Public Transportation Facilities
Railroad tracks, roads, and bridges to be located within the floodplain shall comply with
Sections 71-6 and 71-7 of this Chapter. Elevation to the Regulatory Flood Protection
Elevation shall be provided where failure or interruption of these transportation facilities
would result in danger to the public health or safety or where such facilities are essential
to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or auxiliary roads or railroads may be
constructed at a lower elevation where failure or interruption of transportation services
would not endanger the public health or safety.
71-10-3 Individual Sewage Treatment Systems and Water Supply Systems
Where public utilities are not provided: 1) on-site water supply systems must be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and 2)
new or replacement Individual Sewage Treatment Systems must be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from
the systems into flood waters and they shall not be subject to impairment or
contamination during times of flooding. Any Individual Sewage Treatment System
designed in accordance with Scott County Individual Sewage Treatment Ordinance #4,
as amended, shall be determined to be in compliance with this Section.
71-11 ADMINISTRATION
71-11-1 Planning Department
The Planning Department designated by the County Board shall administer and enforce
this Chapter. If the Planning Department finds a violation of the provisions of this
Chapter the Planning Department shall notify the person responsible for such violation
in accordance with the procedures stated in Section 71-13 of the Chapter.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 71 FP, Floodplain District
71-11-2 Permit Requirements
1. Permit Required. A permit issued by the Planning Department in
conformity with the provisions of this Chapter shall be secured prior to the
erection, addition, or alteration of any building, structure, or portion
thereof; prior to the use or change of use of a building, structure, or land;
prior to the change or extension of a nonconforming use; and prior to the
placement of fill, excavation of materials, or the storage of materials or
equipment within the floodplain.
2. Application for Permit. Application for a permit shall be made to the
Planning Department on forms furnished by said Department and shall
include the following where applicable: plans in duplicate drawn to scale,
showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the lot;
existing or proposed structures, fill, or storage of materials; and the
location of the foregoing in relation to the stream channel.
3. State and Federal Permits. Prior to granting a permit or processing an
application for a conditional use permit or variance, the Planning
Department shall determine that the applicant has obtained all necessary
State and Federal Permits.
4. Certificate of Compliance for a New, Altered, or Nonconforming Use. It
shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or permit the use or occupancy of any
building or premises or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed,
converted, altered, or enlarged in its use or structure until a Certificate of
Compliance has issued by the Planning Department stating that the use of
the building or land conforms to the requirements of this Chapter.
5. Construction and Use to be as Provided on Applications, Plans, Permits,
Variances and Certificates of Compliance. Permits, conditional use
permits, or certificates of compliance issued on the basis of approved
plans and applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and
construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no
other use, arrangement, or construction. Any use, arrangement, or
construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation
of this Chapter, and punishable as provided by Section 71-13 of this
Chapter.
6. Certification. The applicant shall be required to submit certification by a
licensed professional that the finished fill and building elevations were
accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.
Flood-proofing measures shall be certified by a licensed professional.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 71 FP, Floodplain District
7. Record of First Floor Elevation. The Planning Department shall maintain a
record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new
structures and alterations or additions to existing structures in the
floodplain. The Planning Department shall also maintain a record of the
elevation to which structures or and alterations and/or additions to
structures are flood-proofed.
71-11-3 Board of Adjustment
1. Rules. The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules for the conduct of
business and may exercise all of the powers conferred on such Boards by
State law.
2. Administrative Review. The Board shall hear and decide appeals where it
is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement or
administration of this Chapter.
3. Variances. The Board may authorize upon appeal in specific cases such
relief or variance from the terms of this Chapter as will not be contrary to
the public interest and only for those circumstances such as hardship,
practical difficulties or circumstances unique to the property under
consideration, as provided for in Minnesota State Statute, Chapter 394. In
the granting of such variance, the Board of Adjustment shall clearly
identify in writing the specific conditions that existed consistent with
Minnesota State Statutes, Chapter 394 which justified the granting of the
variance. No variance shall have the effect of allowing in any district uses
prohibited in that district, permit a lower degree of flood protection than the
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation for the particular area, or permit
standards lower than those required by State law.
4. Hearings. Upon filing with the Board of Adjustment of an appeal from a
decision of the Planning Department, or an application for a variance, a
reasonable time for a hearing shall be scheduled and due notice given to
the parties in interest as specified by law. The Planning Department shall
submit, by mail, to the Commissioner of Natural Resources, a copy of the
application for proposed variances sufficiently in advance so that the
Commissioner will receive at least ten (10) days notice of the hearing.
5. Decisions. The Board shall arrive at a decision on such appeal or
variance within the time permitted by State Law. In passing upon an
appeal, the Board may, so long as such action is in conformity with the
provisions of this Chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify
the order, requirement, decision or determination of the Planning
Department or other public official. It shall make its decision in writing
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 71 FP, Floodplain District
setting forth the findings of fact and the reasons for its decisions. In
granting a variance the Board may prescribe appropriate conditions and
safeguards such as those specified in Section 71-11-4 (6) which are in
conformity with the purposes of this Chapter. Violations of such conditions
and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance
is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Chapter under Section 71-
13. A copy of all decisions granting variances shall be forwarded by mail
to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten (10) days of such
action.
6. Appeals. All decisions by the Board of Adjustment in granting variances
or hearing appeals from any administrative order, requirement, decision,
or determination shall be final, except that any aggrieved person or
persons shall have the right to appeal within thirty (30) days, after receipt
of notice of the decision, to the District Court in Scott County on questions
of law and fact.
7. Flood Insurance Notice and Record Keeping. The Planning Department
shall notify the applicant for a variance that: 1) the issuance of a variance
to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100
of insurance coverage and 2) such construction below the 100-year or
regional flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification
shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions. The Planning
Department shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including
justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its
annual or biennial report submitted to the Administrator of the National
Flood Insurance Program.
71-11-4 Conditional Uses
In addition to the criteria as outlined in Section 2-6 of this Ordinance for the granting of a
conditional use permit, the Planning Advisory Commission shall hear and make
recommendations to the County Board on applications for conditional uses permissible
under this Chapter as outlined below. Applications shall be submitted to the Planning
Department who shall forward the application to the Planning Advisory Commission for
consideration.
1. Hearings. Upon filing an application for a conditional use permit, the
Planning Department shall submit by mail to the Commissioner of Natural
Resources a copy of the application sufficiently in advance so that the
Commissioner will receive at least ten (10) days notice of the hearing.
2. Decisions. The Planning Advisory Commission shall arrive at a
recommendation on a conditional use and shall forward said
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 71 FP, Floodplain District
recommendation to the County Board for consideration. In granting a
conditional use permit the Planning Advisory Commission shall prescribe
appropriate conditions and safeguards, in addition to those specified in
Section 71-11-4 (6) which are in conformity with the purposes of this
Chapter. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part
of the terms under which the conditional use permit is granted, shall be
deemed a violation of this Chapter punishable under Section 71-13. A
copy of all decisions granting conditional use permits shall be forwarded
by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten (10) days of
such action.
3. Procedures to be followed by the Planning Advisory Commission in
Recommending Conditional Use Permit Applications Within all Floodplain
Districts.
a. Require the applicant to furnish the following information and
additional information as deemed necessary by the Planning
Department for determining the suitability of the particular site for
the proposed use:
(1) Plans in triplicate drawn to scale showing the nature,
location, dimensions, and elevation of the lot, existing or
proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, flood-proofing
measures, and the relationship of the above to the location
of the stream channel.
(2) Specifications for building construction and materials,
flood-proofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel
improvement, storage of materials, water supply and
sanitary facilities.
b. Transmit one (1) copy of the information described in subsection (a)
to a licensed professional for technical assistance, where
necessary, in evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood
heights and velocities, the seriousness of flood damage to the use,
the adequacy of the plans for protection, and other technical
matters.
c. Based upon the technical evaluation of the licensed professional,
the Planning Advisory Commission shall determine the specific
flood hazard at the site and evaluate the suitability of the proposed
use in relation to the flood hazard.
4. Factors Upon Which the Recommendation of the Planning Advisory
Commission Shall Be Based. In recommending conditional use
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 71 FP, Floodplain District
applications, the Planning Advisory Commission shall consider all relevant
factors specified in other Sections of this Chapter, and:
a. The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments.
b. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream which may cause injury to others or may block
bridges, culverts or other hydraulic structures.
c. The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability
of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary
conditions.
d. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
e. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community.
f. The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.
g. The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the
proposed use.
h. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development
and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
i. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for the area.
j. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
k. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the flood waters expected at the site.
l. Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this
Chapter.
5. Time for Acting on Application. The County Board shall act on an
application in the manner described above within the time permitted by
state law, except that where additional information is required pursuant to
71-11-4 (4) of this Chapter. The County Board shall render a written
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 71 FP, Floodplain District
decision within the time permitted by state law from the receipt of such
additional information.
6. Conditions Attached to Conditional Use Permits. Upon consideration of
the factors listed above and the purpose of this Chapter, the County Board
shall attach such conditions to the granting of conditional use permits as it
deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this Chapter. Such conditions
may include, but are not limited to, the following:
a. Modification of waste treatment and water supply facilities.
b. Limitations on period of use, occupancy, and operation.
c. Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
d. Requirements for construction of channel modifications,
compensatory storage, dikes, levees, and other protective
measures.
e. Flood-proofing measures in accordance with the State Building
Code and this Chapter. The applicant shall submit a plan or
document certified by a qualified professional that the
flood-proofing measures are consistent with the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation and associated flood factors for the particular
area.
71-12 NONCONFORMING USES
A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the adoption of
this Chapter but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter may be
continued subject to the following conditions:
1. No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged, or altered in a way
which increases its nonconformity.
2. Any alteration or addition to a nonconforming structure or nonconforming
use which would result in increasing the flood damage potential of that
structure or use shall be protected to the Regulatory Flood Protection
Elevation in accordance with any of the elevation on fill or flood proofing
techniques (FP-1 through FP-4 floodproofing classifications) allowable in
the State Building Code, except as further restricted in (3) below.
3. The cost of any structural alterations or additions to any nonconforming
structure over the life of the structure shall not exceed fifty percent (50%)
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 71 FP, Floodplain District
of the market value, as determined by the County Assessor, of the
structure unless the conditions of this Section are satisfied. The cost of all
structural alterations and additions constructed since the adoption of Scott
County's initial floodplain controls must be calculated into today's current
cost which will include all costs such as construction materials and a
reasonable cost placed on all manpower or labor. If the current cost of all
previous and proposed alterations and additions exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the current market value, as determined by the County Assessor,
of the structure, then the structure must meet the standards of Section 71-
6 or 71-7 of this Chapter for new structures depending upon whether the
structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe, respectively.
4. If any nonconforming use is discontinued for twelve (12) consecutive
months, any future use of the building premises shall conform to this
Chapter. The assessor shall notify the Planning Department in writing of
instances of nonconforming uses which have been discontinued for a
period of twelve (l2) months.
5. If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means,
including floods, to an extent of fifty percent (50%) or more if its market
value, as determined by the County Assessor, at the time of destruction, it
shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this
Chapter. The applicable provisions for establishing new uses or new
structures in Sections 71-6, 71-7 or 71-8 will apply depending upon
whether the use or structure is in the Floodway, Flood Fringe or General
Floodplain District, respectively.
71-13 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION
1. Violation of the provisions of this Chapter or failure to comply with any of
its requirements, including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with granting of variances or conditional uses,
shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof, the responsible party shall be subject to a fine or
imprisonment, as set forth in Minnesota Statutes, plus in either case, the
cost of prosecution.
2. Nothing herein contained shall prevent Scott County from taking such
other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
Such actions may include but are not limited to:
a. In responding to a suspected violation of this Chapter, the Planning
Department and Scott County may utilize enforcement actions
available to it including but not limited to prosecution and fines,
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 71 FP, Floodplain District
injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders for corrective measures or
a request to the National Flood Insurance Program for denial of
flood insurance availability to the responsible party. The County
must act in good faith to enforce these official controls and to
correct violations of this Chapter to the extent possible so as not to
jeopardize its eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program.
b. When a violation of this Chapter is either discovered, the Planning
Department shall investigate the situation and document the nature
and extent of the violation of the official control. This information
will be submitted to the appropriate Department of Natural
Resources and Federal Emergency Management Agency Regional
Office along with the County's plan of action to correct the violation
to the degree possible.
c. The Planning Department shall notify the responsible party of the
requirements of this Chapter and all other official controls and the
nature and extent of the suspected violation of these controls. If
the structure and/or use is under construction or development, the
Planning Department may order the construction or development
immediately halted until a proper permit or approval is granted by
the County. If the construction or development is already
completed, the Planning Department may either issue an order
identifying the corrective actions that must be made within a
specified time period to bring the use or structure into compliance
with the official controls, or notify the responsible party to apply for
an after-the-fact permit/development approval within a specified
period of time, not to exceed thirty (30) days.
d. If the responsible party does not appropriately respond within the
specified period of time, each additional day that lapses shall
constitute an additional violation of this Chapter and shall be
prosecuted accordingly. The Planning Department shall notify the
landowner to restore the land to the condition which existed prior to
the violation of this Chapter.
71-14 AMENDMENTS
1. The floodplain designation on the Official Zoning Map shall not be
removed from floodplain areas unless it can be shown that the designation
is in error or that the area has been filled to or above the elevation of the
regional flood and is contiguous to lands outside the floodplain. Special
exceptions to this rule may be permitted by the Commissioner of Natural
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 71 FP, Floodplain District
Resources if determined that, through other measures, lands are
adequately protected for the intended use.
2. All amendments to this Chapter, including amendments to the Official
Zoning Map, must be submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of
Natural Resources prior to adoption. Changes in the Official Zoning Map
must meet the Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA)
Technical Conditions and Criteria and must receive prior FEMA approval
before adoption. The Commissioner of Natural Resources must be given
ten (10) days written notice of all hearings to consider an amendment to
this Chapter and said notice shall include a draft of the amendment or
technical study under consideration.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance 80.348 OSD, Open Space Design Development
CHAPTERS 72-79: RESERVED
CHAPTER 80: OSD, OPEN SPACE DESIGN DEVELOPMENT
80-1 PURPOSE
1. The fundamental purpose of this Chapter is to encourage rural residential
development to be clustered in a pattern which satisfies the following
planning objectives:
a. Reserve contiguous open spaces for agricultural production, scenic
enjoyment, recreational use, rural identity, and/or to retain land
resources for future development in the Rural Residential Reserve
Cluster District and Urban Expansion Reserve Cluster District when
appropriate infrastructure is available to support additional growth.
b. Creation of cohesive high amenity neighborhoods in order to
establish local identity and community interaction.
c. Physical integration of neighborhoods, open spaces, and places of
destination in order to create attractive living environments and
avoid future urban/rural land use conflicts.
d. To provide either public or privately owned open spaces for passive
or active recreational use by the residents of the neighborhood or
the larger community.
e. To provide for a diversity of lot sizes, housing choices and
development densities to accommodate a variety of ages and
income groups.
f. To implement the Scott County Comprehensive Plan objectives and
policies with regard to rural area residential development, natural
resource preservation, and public service delivery.
g. Allow for housing to be concentrated on sites having low
agricultural production value.
2. The diagrams included in this Section are provided to demonstrate
graphically the purpose of the Open Space Design Development, its
performance standards, and strategies by which the intended
development pattern described by this ordinance may be achieved.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance 80.349 OSD, Open Space Design Development
3. Creative application of this Ordinance is encouraged. However, its
purpose and intent must be preserved. The County will encourage and
support new development planned in compliance with the performance
standards found in this Ordinance.
80-2 APPLICABILITY
The requirements in this Chapter shall only apply to the following seven existing Open
Space Design Developments that were approved between 2001 and 2009: Territory
OSD, Silver Maple Bay Estates OSD, South Passage OSD, Monterey Heights, Grand
View Arbour OSD, Stonebridge OSD, and St Catherine’s on the Bay OSD. No new
applications or requests for Open Space Design Developments shall be accepted.
80-3 APPLICATION
1. A conditional use permit shall be required for an Open Space Design
Development in the Rural Residential Reserve Cluster, Rural Residential
Single Family, and Urban Expansion Reserve Cluster Zoning Districts
pursuant to Section 2-6 of this Ordinance.
2. A conditional use permit application shall be filed with the County Planning
Department in accordance with Section 2-6 of this Ordinance.
3. In addition to the informational requirements of Section 2-6-3.2 of this
Ordinance, the following items shall be submitted as part of the conditional
use permit application for the Open Space Design Development.
a. General Location Map and Site Description.
(1) General location map illustrating the development site in
relationship to County and local roads and adjoining
property.
(2) Legal description of the entire site to be included in the
residential cluster.
(3) Identification of the property ownership adjoining the site.
(4) Within the Urban Expansion Reserve Cluster District, the
proximity to the nearest City boundary, public utilities, or
orderly annexation area.
b. Resource Inventory. The Open Space Design Development
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance 80.350 OSD, Open Space Design Development
conditional use permit application shall include a resource inventory
as illustrated in Figure 80-A. The following mapped at a scale of no
less than one (1) inch to one hundred (100) feet.
(1) Topographic contours at two (2) foot intervals showing rock
outcrops and slopes of more than fifteen (15) percent.
(2) Soil type locations and identification of soil type
characteristics such as hydric soils, agricultural capability,
depth to bedrock, and suitability for wastewater disposal
systems.
(3) Hydrologic characteristics, including surface water bodies,
floodplains, wetlands, natural swales and drainageways.
(4) Vegetation of the site, according to general cover type
(pasture, woodland, etc.), defining boundaries of woodland
areas and individual stand-alone trees with a caliper of more
than eighteen (18) inches. Vegetative types shall be
classified as generally deciduous, coniferous or mixed and
described by plant community, relative age and condition.
(5) Current land use and land cover (cultivated areas, paved
areas, etc.), all buildings and structures on the land, and all
encumbrances, such as easements or covenants.
(6) Transportation systems and streets that adjoin or serve the
site, functional classification, current and projected traffic
volumes, and general condition.
(7) Visual resources, showing views onto the tract from
surrounding roads and public areas, as well as views within
the tract.
(8) Cultural resources. Brief description of historic character of
buildings and structures, historically important landscapes,
and archeological features.
(9) Neighborhood Context. General outlines of existing
buildings, land use, and natural features such as water
bodies or wooded areas, roads, driveways and property
boundaries within five hundred (500) feet of the tract. This
information may be presented on an aerial photograph at a
scale of no less than one (1) inch to two hundred (200) feet.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance 80.351 OSD, Open Space Design Development
c. Yield Plan.
(1) The applicant shall submit a yield plan as illustrated in Figure
80-B, showing the maximum number of dwelling units that
would be permitted given the minimum lot size and lot widths
for conventional subdivisions and other requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision Regulations. The yield
plan need not be engineered; however, it shall be drawn to
scale and it shall identify all the major physical features on
the parcel. The minimum lot areas and width for each
zoning district are as follows:
Base District Lot Requirements
Zoning
District
Density
Unit/Acre
Minimum Lot
Size (Acres)*
Minimum Lot
Width (Feet)
UER-C 1 / 10 1 100
RR-1C 1 / 8 2.5 150
RR-2** 1 / 2.5 2.5 150
* Minimum lot size must include at least one (1) acre of buildable soil
(non-hydric).
** RR-2 Density is based on buildable (non-hydric soils) land.
d. Concept Subdivision Plan as illustrated in Figure 80-C.
(1) One or more Open Space Design Development plans
meeting the intent of this Chapter and including at least the
following information:
(a) Open space areas indicating which areas are to be
protected and defined by the purpose of the open
space.
(b) Boundaries of areas to be developed and proposed
general street and lot layout.
(c) Number and type of housing units proposed.
(d) Areas proposed for stormwater management and on
or off-site sewage treatment.
(e) Said plans shall be drawn at a scale of no less than
one (1) inch to one hundred (100) feet.
(2) Within the Urban Expansion Reserve Cluster and Rural
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance 80.352 OSD, Open Space Design Development
Residential Reserve Cluster Zoning Districts, a “build out
plan” or “ghost plat” showing the ultimate development of the
entire parcel at densities in conformance with the Scott
County Comprehensive Plan, as amended, must be
submitted as part of the concept subdivision plan.
e. Phasing Plan. Open Space Design Development may be phased
in accordance with a unified development plan for the entire tract
meeting the following requirements:
(1) A phasing plan identifying the sequence of development
showing approximate areas, serially numbered with a
description of each phase. Information shall be provided
regarding the number of dwelling units, proposed
improvements, and common facilities for each.
(2) The phasing plan shall be made a part of the subdivision
approval and is effective for three (3) years from the date of
preliminary plat approval unless extended by the County
Board. If final plat approval is not received within three (3)
years, the preliminary plat shall become null and void.
(3) Any common facilities within the approved phase of the
Open Space Design Development, including golf courses,
trails, play areas, shall be constructed prior to the sale of any
lots and shall be clearly marked on a site map which shall be
an attachment to all sales agreements for individual lots.
(4) As part of the development agreement, a financial guarantee
to ensure completion of common facilities, trails and
landscaping shall be provided.
f. Subdivision Application. Following or simultaneously with the Open
Space Design Development conditional use permit application, a
subdivision application may be processed in accordance with the
Scott County Subdivision Ordinance No. 7. The preliminary plat
shall illustrate compliance with the approved concept plan and the
performance standards of this Chapter.
80-4 USES
Within an Open Space Design Development, the range of land uses shall be more
limited than the base zoning district. The following uses are permitted within the Open
Space Design Development, provided they comply with the performance standards of
this Ordinance.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance 80.353 OSD, Open Space Design Development
1. Permitted Uses.
a. Residential.
(1) Single family detached dwelling.
(2) Residential care facility serving six (6) or fewer persons in a
single family detached dwelling.
b. Open Space. The following uses are allowed in designated open
spaces based upon the open space designation.
(1) Future development open space.
(a) Agricultural uses.
(b) Trails (off road).
(c) Domestic sewage disposal systems.
(d) Informal turf play areas.
(e) Community gardens.
(f) Storm water management areas.
(2) Natural Habitat.
(a) Conservation (i.e., woodlands, meadows, wetlands).
(b) Storm water management facilities.
(c) Trails (off road).
(d) Nature observation structures.
(3) Recreational/Pedestrian Corridors.
(a) Trails (off road).
(b) Picnic areas.
(c) Community gardens.
(d) Turf play areas.
(e) Ball fields.
(f) Playgrounds.
(g) Courts (tennis, basketball, etc.).
(h) Swimming pools.
(i) Common open air buildings/structures.
2. Accessory Uses.
a. Residential.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance 80.354 OSD, Open Space Design Development
(1) Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily
incidental and directly related to the uses allowed as
permitted, conditional, interim, and administrative permit in
this Chapter, subject to application regulation of this
Ordinance.
(2) Boarding or renting of rooms to not more than four (4)
individuals per principal dwelling.
(3) Day care facilities serving twelve (12) or fewer persons in a
single family detached dwelling.
(4) Fences as regulated by Section 4-3-10 of this Ordinance.
(5) Play and recreational facilities, only accessory to an existing
principal permitted use on the same lot and which are
operated for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents
of the principal use and their occasional guests, except as
otherwise permitted.
(6) On-site parking and loading as regulated by Chapter 5 of this
Ordinance.
(7) Recreational vehicles and equipment parking and storage.
(8) Accessory use antennas and satellite dishes for private use.
(9) Signs as regulated by Chapter 11 of this Ordinance.
b. Open Space.
(1) Accessory uses, buildings, structures customarily incidental
and directly related to the uses allowed as permitted,
conditional, interim, and administrative permit in this
Chapter, subject to applicable regulations of this Ordinance.
3. Conditional Uses. The following uses shall be allowed in a designated
open space with a separately applied for and approved conditional use
permit.
a. Golf course.
4. Administrative Permitted Uses. The following are uses allowed by
administrative approval of an administrative permit based upon the
procedures and criteria set forth in Chapter 2 of this Ordinance.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance 80.355 OSD, Open Space Design Development
a. Personal wireless service antennas and related antenna accessory
buildings located upon a public or quasi-public structure or existing
tower as regulated by Chapter 13 of this Ordinance.
b. Fences taller than maximum height standards.
c. Grading permits.
d. Home occupations as regulated by Chapter 8 of this Ordinance.
80-5 DENSITY BONUS
The individual zoning districts shall establish the base residential density for the Open
Space Design Development. The base density may be increased according to the
following table, if all of the performance standards of Sections 80-8 and 80-9 of this
Ordinance are complied with.
Zoning
District
Base Density
Unit / Acre
ISTS
Bonus
Community Sewage
Treatment
System & Well Bonus
RR-1C 1 / 8 50% 100%
RR-2** 1 / 2.5 20% 45%
UER-C 1 / 10 50% 100%
** RR-2 Density is based on buildable (non-hydric soils) land.
80-6 OPEN SPACE STANDARDS
1. Purpose. The intention of this Ordinance is to promote the creation of
open space through cluster residential subdivision design as a means for
accomplishing the following objectives:
a. Preserving buildable land supply to accommodate future County
growth in the Rural Residential Reserve Cluster and Urban
Expansion Reserve Cluster Districts.
b. Preservation of land for continued agricultural production.
c. Preservation of natural habitat areas and unique County land
forms.
d. Creation of open spaces for passive and active recreational uses.
e. Establishment of a unified landscape amenity for the enjoyment of
the neighborhood.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance 80.356 OSD, Open Space Design Development
2. Open Space Classification Designations. Each open space area shall be
classified in one of the following categories: future development, natural
habitat, neighborhood recreation, or pedestrian corridor open space, and
shall conform to the type of use, location criteria, and deed restrictions of
that classification.
a. Future Development. The future development area should be
characterized by buildable non-hydric soils in areas that do not
contain environmentally sensitive features that may be damaged by
future development. The future development areas should be
located in relation to the residential cluster subdivision in a manner
that represents a logical expansion of the development pattern,
extension of streets, utilities and other support infrastructure. A
development build-out plan (ghost plat) shall be required consistent
with Section 80-6-5 of this Ordinance for all future development
outlots. A golf course may be included and considered a
permanent land use within a future development open space.
b. Natural Habitat. The development shall preserve the maximum
quantity of natural habitat open spaces in a contiguous, connected
configuration. Natural habitat open spaces may include, but are not
limited to greenways, fields, wetlands, slopes, bluffs, dense woods,
lakes, ponds, streams, shoreland, and other environmentally
sensitive areas or desirable view sheds. Natural habitat open
spaces may be preserved as easements or outlots with shared
ownership among the property owners.
c. Neighborhood Recreation. The development shall locate
neighborhood recreation open spaces such that they are an integral
part of the neighborhood of surrounding home sites, at an elevation
appropriate to their intended recreational use, defined by coherent
boundaries, and accessible to all neighborhood residents.
Neighborhood recreation open spaces may include, but are not
limited to, greens, commons, playgrounds, ball fields, gardens, or
other permitted, conditional or accessory uses allowed within an
Open Space Design Development.
d. Pedestrian Corridors. Pedestrian corridor open spaces may
include, but are not limited to, established regional trails, local
pathways, paved walkways, and shorelines. Pedestrian corridor
outlots shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width. Pedestrian
corridor open space shall be used for pedestrian, bicycle, and/or
equestrian travel. Motorized vehicles shall be prohibited.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance 80.357 OSD, Open Space Design Development
e. Habitable structures shall not be permitted in any open space
outlot.
3. Ownership and Management. Each designated open space outlot shall
be owned and managed according to the following means, subject to
Township and County approval.
a. Future development open spaces may be retained under single
ownership by persons who will use the open space for the
purposes as provided by this Ordinance and/or any deed
restrictions or permanent conservation restrictions.
b. Open space may be owned in common by the property owners
created through subdivision of the original tract. Management shall
be the responsibility of that subdivision’s homeowner association.
In the case where at least one (1) outlot of open space is held in
common ownership, a homeowner association shall be established
for that subdivision. Membership in the association by all property
owners in the subdivision shall be mandatory.
c. Natural Environment. Open space may be deeded to an
established land trust or non-profit organization. Management shall
be the responsibility of the land trust or non-profit organization.
Maintenance may be performed by the neighborhood homeowner
association, through written agreement between the association
and the land trust or non-profit organization.
d. Recreational and Pedestrian Corridor. Recreational open space or
pedestrian corridors intended as public parks or public trails shall
be deeded to the Township. Management and maintenance of the
public recreational areas shall be the responsibility of the Township.
4. Deed Restrictions. Each open space outlot shall conform to the deed
restrictions associated with its open space classification.
a. Future development open space shall have a deed restriction on
the outlot that maintains the property for agriculture use, or other
open space permitted uses. A deed restriction shall be provided
stating that development may occur upon the advent of one of the
following events:
(1) Change in the County Comprehensive Plan and zoning that
would permit a greater development density.
(2) The provision of public utilities and support infrastructure to
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance 80.358 OSD, Open Space Design Development
the specific site that supports additional development
density.
(3) Annexation of a site by a municipality having its own
comprehensive plan and zoning authority.
b. A deed restriction shall be provided to potential homeowners of the
residential lots within the Open Space Design Development
identifying the intent for development of the future development
open space.
c. Open Space may be protected by establishing conservation
easements in perpetuity in favor of an established land trust or nonprofit
organization as provided in Minnesota statutes 84.64-84.65.
Unless the document establishing the restrictions specifically
provides to the contrary, the County shall have no responsibility for
the maintenance or management of the area subject to the
restrictions. The form and content or the deed or other instrument
establishing the restrictions must be approved by the County prior
to the execution and delivery thereof. Notwithstanding any
provision of this Ordinance to the contrary, the County may, in
cases where conservation restrictions are utilized to meet open
space dedication requirements of this ordinance, waive the
requirement that the area subject to the restrictions be platted as a
separate outlot.
d. Stormwater drainage systems located within open spaces or the
residential lots shall be covered by utility and drainage easements
dedicated on the final plat to the Township.
80-7 HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION
A homeowners association shall be established if the open space is owned by a
homeowners association. Membership in the association is mandatory for all
purchasers of homes in the development and their successors. A homeowners
association agreement, guaranteeing continuing maintenance shall be submitted to the
County as part of the data required for the conditional use permit. The homeowners
association documents or the declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions shall
contain the following information:
1. The legal description of the common lands or facilities.
2. The restrictions placed upon the use and enjoyment of the lands or
facilities including the persons or entities entitled to enforce the
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance 80.359 OSD, Open Space Design Development
restrictions.
3. A mechanism for resolving disputes among the owners or association
members.
4. A mechanism to assess and enforce the common expenses for the land or
facilities including upkeep and maintenance expenses, real estate taxes
and insurance premiums.
5. The conditions and timing of the transfer of ownership and control of land
or facilities to the association or to common ownership.
6. Any other matter the developer deems appropriate.
80-8 OPEN SPACE DESIGN DEVELOPMENT
To qualify for an Open Space Design Development conditional use permit and related
density increases, the following minimum requirements for open space must be met:
Base District Percentage of Required
Open Space (Gross Acreage)
UER-C 70%
RR-1C 60%
RR-2 30%
1. At least sixty (60) percent of buildable land (non-hydric soils) preserved for
future development in the Rural Residential Reserve Cluster and Urban
Expansion Cluster Districts.
2. Road rights-of-way may be located within the required open space area,
but shall not be counted towards the required minimum open space.
3. At least twenty-five (25) percent of the open space shall be accessible to
the residents of the development and shall be owned in common by all
residents of the development.
a. At least ten (10) percent of the “accessible” open space shall be
suitable for recreational uses such as trails, playfields, or
community gardens.
b. A pathway system connecting open space area neighborhoods and
to planned or developed trails on adjacent parcels shall be
identified in the plan.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance 80.360 OSD, Open Space Design Development
c. That portion of the open space designated for the location of
sewage treatment facilities shall not be included as part of this
accessible open space.
80-9 RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
1. It is the intention of this Ordinance to promote residential cluster
development which offers a variety of lot size, configuration, topography,
and affordability. Evaluation and subdivision approval by the County shall
be subject to demonstration by the applicant that the proposed
development plan provides a cohesive residential cluster in a site design
appropriate to the location of common open spaces.
2. Residential Cluster Siting Standards.
a. Residential clusters should be sited to achieve the following goals,
to the extent practicable. In cases where impact on one or more of
the following resource areas is unavoidable, the impact should be
minimized through use of landscaping, topography, or other
features.
(1) Avoid prime farmland soils and large tracts of land in
agricultural use, and avoid interference with normal
agricultural practices.
(2) Minimize disturbance to woodlands, hedgerows, mature
trees or other significant vegetation.
(3) Protect scenic views of open land from adjacent roads.
(4) Protect existing historic buildings or incorporate them
through adaptive reuse.
(5) Preserve tracts of buildable (non-hydric soils) land in a size
and configuration that can support future development in the
UER-C and RR-1C Districts.
b. Whenever possible, open space shall connect with existing or
potential open space lands on adjoining parcels.
3. Residential Cluster Subdivision.
a. An Open Space Design Development conditional use permit shall
only be granted to land parcels capable of supporting at least
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance 80.361 OSD, Open Space Design Development
fifteen (15) residential lots including the density bonus identified in
Section 80-5 of this Ordinance.
b. The intent of the Open Space Design Development is to create
cohesive neighborhoods. In this respect, the Open Space Design
Development may be subdivided into neighborhoods having no less
than five (5) lots.
c. A neighborhood cluster shall be oriented toward an identifiable
feature which all residential units share in common. Examples are
as illustrated in Figures 80-D and 80-E. Neighborhood identity may
be established by one (1) or more of the following features:
(1) View Shed. The lots of a neighborhood may be arranged
such that a majority of the principle structure will take visual
advantage of an identifiable feature, building, structure,
greenway, wetland, woods, lake, stream, or other open
space which could be described as a view shed.
(2) Streetscape. The lots may be arranged such that the
principle structures face a local street enhanced with
landscaping, street trees, boulevards, medians, or other
landscaping techniques appropriate to the
Township’s/County’s street design standards.
(3) Future Development. Subdivision design must demonstrate
logical extensions of street and development patterns into
future development outlots or adjoining properties in the
UER-C and RR-1 Districts.
(4) Streets. Lots in a cluster subdivision shall receive direct
access via local streets. Direct lot access from a County or
State road will be prohibited.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance 80.362 OSD, Open Space Design Development
4. Minimum Lot Size, Lot Width, and Setbacks.
UER-C
(ISTS)
UER-C
(Community)
RR-1C
(ISTS)
RR-1C
(Community)
RR-2
(ISTS)
RR-2
(Community)
Lot Area
1 acre
non-hydric
20, 000 sq. ft. #
1 acre nonhydric
20,000 sq. ft.
1 acre
nonhydric
24,000 sq. ft.
Lot Width 100’ * 100’ # * 150’ * 100’ * 150’ * 120’ *
Front Yard Setback 30’ local ** 25’ local # ** 67’ local ** 25’ local **
67’
local **
50’ local **
Rear Yard Setback 30’ 30’ # 60’ 30’ 60’ 50’
Side Yard Setback 15’ 15’ # 30’ 15’ 30’ 30’
*
The minimum lot width shall be maintained at the required front yard setback line
extending to the location of the principal building.
** One hundred fifty (150) feet from the centerline of a County or State road or one
hundred (100) feet from the County or State road right-of-way, whichever is greater.
# The minimum lot area, width and setbacks can be reduced provided the engineering
and cost of converting the rural utilities, water, sewer, street, and storm water
systems to the future urban municipal system, are fully addressed to the satisfaction
of the adjacent municipality.
5. Landscaping. A landscape plan illustrating the following components shall
be required with all Open Space Design Development applications:
a. Residential clusters shall be sited in a manner that preserves
existing tree cover consistent with the Scott County Subdivision
Ordinance No. 7, as amended.
b. A twenty (20) foot wide landscaped buffer yard shall be established
where residential clusters abut a County or State road. The
landscape buffer shall provide a green belt planting strip consistent
with Section 4-4-1.a of this Ordinance.
c. The residential cluster shall provide a boulevard landscape plan
that establishes a streetscape design. Said plan shall include a
landscaped subdivision entrance and landscape accents that may
include paver block pedestrian crossings or similar features
throughout the Open Space Design Development subdivision.
d. The Open Space Design Development landscaping shall include a
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance 80.363 OSD, Open Space Design Development
landscape maintenance plan that outlines measures to insure the
replacement of dead plantings and long term maintenance
landscaping in common open space or public areas.
6. Streets.
a. All residential clusters shall be accessed via local streets that meet
the design standards of the County and Township. Direct lot
access from a County or State road is prohibited.
b. All local streets leading to and within a residential cluster shall be
paved and have curbing.
c. Local streets shall be planned to provide street connections to
adjoining parcels, neighborhoods, future development, and open
space areas to discourage reliance on County roads for local trips.
d. Dead-end streets are prohibited, and cul-de-sacs shall be permitted
only where topography or other physical conditions justify their use.
e. The subdivision shall be responsible for the costs of County road
improvements as determined by the County Engineer to
accommodate the residential cluster.
f. Developer shall be responsible for the cost and installation of street
signs within the subdivision.
g. Developer shall be responsible for the cost and installation of street
lighting. Street lighting plan shall be required for the Open Space
Design Development subdivision illustrating the type and location of
street lights.
h. Flexibility from local street design guidelines including narrow street
width, landscape medians, etc. may be approved by the Township
Board.
7. Utilities.
a. All new subdivisions may be platted to accommodate homesite lots
with either individual or community managed sewage treatment
systems.
b. All sewage treatment systems shall conform to the performance
standards of Minnesota Pollution Control Agency’s Standards for
Sewage Treatment Systems WPC-7080 and its appendices, and
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance 80.364 OSD, Open Space Design Development
the Scott County’s Individual Sewage Treatment System Ordinance
No. 4.
c. All subdivision proposals shall be reviewed by a certified inspector
designated by the County for suitability of platted lots to
accommodate individual and/or communal sewage treatment
systems.
d. A community sewage treatment system shall include an operating,
financial, and management plan that is controlled by a public entity
with taxing authority to insure proper maintenance, management
and financing that is approved by the Township and County.
e. Communal drainfields shall be designed with sufficient land area for
a replacement system shall be required.
f. Communal septic systems may have all or a portion of their
required drainfields in open spaces provided:
(1) The ground cover is restored to its natural condition after
installation.
(2) Recreational uses are prohibited above or within fifty (50)
feet of their installation.
g. All homesite lots shall accommodate an on-site or an approved
communal water supply system with reasonable backup.
h. All existing and proposed utility, power, and cable service lines
shall be installed underground within easement locations approved
by the County and/or Townships.
8. Grading and Drainage. The Open Space Design Development shall
comply with grading and stormwater management performance standards
of Chapter 6 of this Ordinance. Stormwater management plans shall
encourage infiltration of stormwater.
80-10 BUILD OUT PLAN (GHOST PLAT)
A build out plan (ghost plat) shall be required for all Open Space Design Developments
within the Rural Residential Reserve Cluster and Urban Expansion Reserve Cluster
Districts illustrating how the current subdivision will be integrated with the future
development area. The build out plan shall illustrate:
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance 80.365 OSD, Open Space Design Development
1. How the land within the subdivision will be subdivided into urban or rural
residential lots in the future.
2. The layout of future streets or extensions.
3. Easements for the extension of utilities and stormwater drainage.
4. Within the Urban Expansion Reserve Cluster Zoning District, the
subdivision may be required to provide information on how public utilities
may be extended to the subdivision to accommodate future urban
development.
Figure 80-A Resource Inventory – Inventory of the physical conditions of a proposed
subdivision site.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance 80.366 OSD, Open Space Design Development
Figure 80-B Yield Plan – Illustrates a proposed subdivision design and lot count based
on the base zoning district. The example below reflects a subdivision in a Rural
Residential Reserve Cluster Zoning District. The maximum permitted density for the
district is one (1) unit per eight (8) acres. On a forty (40) acre tract, a maximum of five
(5) lots are possible. A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the non-hydric land being
subdivided for development must be dedicated to open space for future development.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance 80.367 OSD, Open Space Design Development
Figure 80-C Concept Plan – Illustrates lot layout and open spaces. Future
development, natural habitat, pedestrian corridor, and neighborhood recreation open
spaces are located on the development site according to their type of use.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance 80.368 OSD, Open Space Design Development
Figure 80-D – An example of a neighborhood cluster orientated toward a viewshed or a
physical amenity.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance 80.369 OSD, Open Space Design Development
Figure 80-E – An example of a neighborhood cluster orientated toward a park, or green
space at an intersection, with streetscape accents.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 81 PUD, Planned Unit Development
CHAPTER 81: PUD, PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
81-1 PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose of the Planned Unit Development (PUD) overlay zoning district is to
provide a comprehensive procedure intended to allow greater flexibility and creativity in
cluster residential and non-residential development than would be possible under a
conventional zoning district. The PUD may be used to encourage residential,
commercial, and industrial development which satisfies the following objectives:
1. Variety. Within a comprehensive site design concept, a PUD can provide
for a diversity of lot sizes, mix of land uses, housing choices and
residential development densities to accommodate a variety of ages and
income groups.
2. Efficiency. In areas guided by the Comprehensive Plan, a PUD can
preserve contiguous natural resource areas and open space to protect
environmentally sensitive areas and provide scenic enjoyment,
recreational use, agricultural production, rural identity, and/or to retain land
for efficient future development when appropriate infrastructure is
available to support additional growth.
3. Sensitivity. By departing from the strict application of required setbacks,
yard areas, lot sizes, street widths, minimum requirements and other
performance standards associated with conventional zoning, a PUD can
maximize the development potential of land while remaining sensitive to
its unique and valuable natural and cultural characteristics.
4. Integration. Through physical integration of neighborhoods, open spaces,
and places of destination, a PUD can create attractive livable
neighborhoods and avoid future urban/rural land use conflicts.
5. Value. Providing a more flexible approach, a PUD can be used to
encourage the private sector into a collaborative development track that
includes density bonuses in exchange for public values that promote
varied housing options, improve public infrastructure systems, and
encourage natural resource protection.
6. Vision. With regards to rural development, natural resource protection,
and public service delivery, a PUD can implement the Comprehensive
Plan objectives and policies and help realize the County’s Vision.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 81 PUD, Planned Unit Development
The intent of the PUD overlay zoning district is to promote residential cluster,
commercial, and industrial development that may offer a variety of lot sizes,
configuration, topography, and affordability. Evaluation and subdivision approval shall
be subject to demonstration by the applicant that the proposed development plan
provides a cohesive site design appropriate to the location.
81-2 GENERAL STANDARDS
1. The PUD is allowed as a zoning overlay district in the A-3 Agricultural
Preservation Density, RR-1C Rural Residential Reserve Cluster, RR-2
Rural Residential Single Family, RR-3 Rural Residential Suburban Single
Family, UER-C Urban Expansion Reserve Cluster Zoning, UTR-C Urban
Transition Reserve Cluster, C-1 General Commercial, and I-1 Rural
Industrial Districts.
2. Lot Size Minimum. Residential, commercial or industrial lot sizes may
deviate from the minimum requirements set in the underlying zoning
district. However, residential lots may not be reduced below one (1) acre
of non-hydric soil if served by an individual sewage treatment system
(ISTS). The minimum size for residential lots served by a community
sewage treatment system (CSTS) shall be established in the overall
development plan as part of the PUD General Plan.
3. Open Space Minimum. Under a residential PUD, the required open space
area set aside for preservation or future development may deviate from
the minimum requirements set in the underlying zoning district, but the
deviation shall not exceed ten (10) percent. The Applicant shall
demonstrate why deviation from the standards is in the public interest.
4. Integrated Design. A PUD shall consist of a compatible arrangement and
selection of land uses in groupings of buildings that are planned and
designed as an integrated unit. The integrated design shall include
elements such as building orientation and materials, utilities, parking
areas, traffic and pedestrian circulation, signage, landscaping, and open
spaces.
81-3 COORDINATION WITH OTHER REGULATIONS
81-3-1 Subdivision Reviews
1. Subdivision review under the Scott County Subdivision Ordinance No. 7
shall be carried out simultaneously with the review of a PUD under this
article.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 81 PUD, Planned Unit Development
2. The plans required under this article must be submitted in a form, which
will satisfy the requirements of Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 for the
preliminary and final plats.
3. Flexibility of design standards and criteria of Subdivision Ordinance No. 7
may be allowed as part of a PUD; however, approval from the Township
Board is required for flexibility from all Township standards, such as
stormwater maintenance and local street design guidelines including
narrow street width, landscape medians, etc.
81-3-2 ISTS/CSTS Reviews
1. ISTS or CSTS review under the Scott County Individual/Community
Sewage Treatment System Ordinance No. 4 shall be carried out
simultaneously with the review of a PUD under this article.
2. The plans required under this article must be submitted in a form, which
will satisfy the requirements of Individual/Community Sewage Treatment
System Ordinance No. 4 for creating new lots.
81-4 PROCEDURE FOR PROCESSING A PUD
The processing steps for a PUD provide clear direction to the Applicant as to the
acceptability of the various segments of a PUD proposal and how it affects the public
interest prior to a major expenditure of developmental funds. The necessary steps and
applications, outlined in detail in the following sections, are:
1. Development Review Team (DRT). Pre-application meeting(s) with
County staff and Township.
2. PUD Concept Plan. Initial consideration of overall proposal and plans by
the Planning Commission and Township Board. No formal action is taken.
(PUD Concept Plan may not be required for all proposals.)
3. PUD General Plan. Review of detailed PUD proposal and overall
development plan approval.
4. PUD Final Plan. Final plan approval for all or a portion of the PUD
proposal; review of individual phases for consistency with PUD General
Plan.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 81 PUD, Planned Unit Development
81-5 DEVELOPMENT REVIEW TEAM
The Applicant for the proposed PUD shall attend a Development Review Team (DRT)
meeting with County staff and Township officials. The primary purpose of the DRT
meeting is to provide the Applicant with an opportunity to gather information and obtain
guidance as to the general suitability of the proposal for the area for which it is proposed
and its conformity to the provisions of this Chapter before incurring substantial expense
in the preparations of plans, surveys, and other data. At the DRT meeting, the applicant
shall be prepared to generally describe the PUD proposal and discuss County identified
public values and any potential density bonus.
81-5-1 Application
1. A Development Review Team (DRT) application and fee shall be filed with
the County Planning Department in accordance with Chapter 3, Sketch
Plan, of the Subdivision Ordinance.
2. In addition to the informational requirements of Chapter 3, Sketch Plan, of
the Subdivision Ordinance, the Applicant shall submit a written project
description as to how the PUD proposal relates to Public Values Incentive
Program, as defined in Section 81-10.
81-5-2 Procedure
1. The DRT application will be processed and reviewed in accordance with
the procedures outlined in Chapter 3, Sketch Plan, of the Subdivision
Ordinance.
2. PUD proposals will be reviewed to determine potential public values as
outlined in Section 81-10. County identified public values will be
presented to the Applicant at a DRT 1 meeting. The County will also
present the potential density bonus available should the PUD proposal
provide all of the Public Values identified on the subject site.
3. Should outstanding issues exist, additional DRT meetings may be
required prior to submittal of the PUD Concept Plan.
81-6 PUD CONCEPT PLAN
Applicants shall prepare, at the discretion of the Planning Department, a PUD Concept
Plan. The PUD Concept Plan provides an opportunity for the Applicant to submit an
application and plan to the County showing the basic intent and the general nature of
the entire development before incurring substantial cost. This PUD Concept Plan
serves as the basis for initial review and comment by the Planning Commission and the
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 81 PUD, Planned Unit Development
Town Board. Consistency with the Public Values Incentive Program, if applicable, will
also be reviewed at this time. PUD Concept Plan review does not convey any legal
development rights to the applicant.
81-6-1 Application
A PUD Concept Plan application, fee and escrow, and eight (8) paper copies of all
required application materials shall be filed with the County Planning Department. The
following elements shall be included in the PUD Concept Plan application:
1. Location map showing the property in relation to the surrounding area and
important elements, including major roadways, public facilities, and parks.
2. Narrative description of the proposed planned unit development.
3. Map showing existing conditions and current community plans for the
property and 500 feet beyond including at a minimum the following:
a. Existing Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Designations.
b. Natural area corridors, greenways and trail corridors identified on
any approved long range community plans.
c. Present use and existing buildings and structures.
d. Property boundaries, ownership and approximate dimensions.
e. Hydrologic characteristics including surface water, floodplains,
wetlands, natural swales and drainageways based on readily
available mapping information. A wetland delineation is not required
for concept review.
f. Natural resource information including wooded areas, wetlands,
steep slopes, and prime habitat areas based on readily available
mapping information.
g. Location of public utilities, if applicable.
4. Map or maps showing the proposed development, including, as
appropriate:
a. Proposed land use patterns with a listing of uses, including
descriptions of the anticipated housing types and densities. General
“bubble” land use diagrams would be considered sufficient for
concept review.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 81 PUD, Planned Unit Development
b. Public values as identified by the County. General areas identified
as public values showing how they are incorporated into the design
of the proposed development.
c. Existing and proposed roads and trail systems.
d. Park and open space systems.
e. Landscaping plan.
f. Staging and timing of development.
81-6-2 Procedure
1. Staff and any affected agencies shall provide a project evaluation and
submit to the Planning Commission and Town Board for review.
2. The Planning Commission shall review and comment on the PUD Concept
Plan at a regular meeting of the Planning Commission.
81-7 PUD GENERAL PLAN
The purpose of the PUD General Plan is to provide one or more specific plans upon
which the Planning Commission will base its recommendation to the Board of
Commissioners and with which substantial compliance is necessary for the preparation
of the PUD Final Plan.
81-7-1 Application
General application materials required of a PUD General Plan shall be the same as for
the approval of a preliminary plat, as outlined in Chapter 4, Preliminary Plat, of the
Subdivision Ordinance. In addition to the informational requirements of the Subdivision
Ordinance, the following items shall be submitted as part of the PUD General Plan
application:
1. General Location Map and Site Description.
a. General location map illustrating the development site in
relationship to County and local roads and adjoining property.
b. Legal description of the entire site to be included in the
development.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 81 PUD, Planned Unit Development
c. Identification of the property ownership adjoining the site.
d. Within the Urban Expansion Reserve Cluster District, the proximity
to the nearest City boundary, public utilities, or orderly annexation
area.
2. Narrative description of the following:
a. Explanation on how the County identified public values are
incorporated into the design of the overall development plan (if
applicable).
b. Descriptive list of all deviations from the standard zoning
regulations as proposed in the PUD General Plan and an
explanation as to why these deviations provide a public benefit.
c. Explanation on how the Planning Commission’s comments from the
PUD Concept Plan review are incorporated into the design of the
overall development plan (if applicable).
3. Resource Inventory. The PUD General Plan application shall include a
resource inventory as illustrated in the following mapped at a scale of no
less than one (1) inch to one hundred (100) feet.
a. Topographic contours at two (2) foot intervals showing rock
outcrops and slopes of more than fifteen (15) percent.
b. Soil type locations and identification of soil type characteristics such
as hydric soils, agricultural capability, depth to bedrock, and
suitability for wastewater disposal systems.
c. Hydrologic characteristics, including surface water bodies,
floodplains, wetlands, natural swales and drainageways.
d. Vegetation of the site, according to general cover type (pasture,
woodland, etc.), defining boundaries of woodland areas and
individual stand-alone trees with a caliper of more than eighteen
(18) inches. Vegetative types shall be classified as generally
deciduous, coniferous or mixed and described by plant community,
relative age and condition.
e. Current land use and land cover (cultivated areas, paved areas,
etc.), all buildings and structures on the land, and all
encumbrances, such as easements or covenants.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 81 PUD, Planned Unit Development
f. Transportation systems and streets that adjoin or serve the site,
functional classification, current and projected traffic volumes, and
general condition.
g. Visual resources, showing views onto the tract from surrounding
roads and public areas, as well as views within the tract.
h. Cultural resources. Brief description of historic character of
buildings and structures, historically important landscapes, and
archeological features.
i. Neighborhood Context. General outlines of existing buildings, land
use, and natural features such as water bodies or wooded areas,
roads, driveways and property boundaries within five hundred (500)
feet of the tract. This information may be presented on an aerial
photograph at a scale of no less than one (1) inch to two hundred
(200) feet.
4. Project Design. For commercial and industrial projects, preliminary
architectural plans indicating use, floor plan, elevations and exterior wall
finishes of proposed buildings and architectural guidelines for future
development phases. For residential clusters that incorporate a common
design theme, preliminary elevations and/or plans graphically depicting
the proposed architectural guidelines to be applied to residential lots and
common amenities.
5. Natural Area Conservation Easement. Any required conservation
easement document shall meet the requirements outlined in Chapter 16 of
this Ordinance.
6. Residential Development Yield Plan. For residential cluster PUDs, the
applicant shall submit a yield plan which shall show the maximum number
of dwelling units that would be permitted given the minimum lot size and
lot widths for the underlying zoning district and other requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision Regulations. The yield plan need not
be engineered; however, it shall be drawn to scale and it shall identify all
the major physical features on the parcel.
7. Overall Development Plan. One or more development plans meeting the
intent of this Chapter and including at least the following information:
a. Boundaries of areas to be protected for open space. Open space
outlots should be labeled by open space type, as defined in Section
16-3.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 81 PUD, Planned Unit Development
b. Boundaries of areas to be developed and proposed general street
and lot layout.
c. Number and type of housing units proposed.
d. Unified landscaping plan for entire development.
e. Boundaries of identified public values and detailed calculations of
land area. Also, graphic representations showing how public values
are incorporated into the design of the proposed development.
f. Areas proposed for stormwater management and on- or off-site
sewage treatment.
g. Said plans shall be drawn at a scale of no less than one (1) inch to
one hundred (100) feet.
h. A phasing plan identifying the sequence of development showing
approximate areas, serially numbered with a description of each
phase. Information shall be provided regarding the number of
dwelling units or lots, proposed improvements, and common
facilities for each.
81-7-2 Procedure
1. In addition to the following guidelines, the PUD General Plan application
will be processed and reviewed in accordance with the procedures
outlined in Chapter 4, Preliminary Plat, of the Subdivision Ordinance.
2. In its final approval of a PUD General Plan, the Planning Commission and
Board of Commissioners may include conditions which must be met
before approval of a PUD Final Plan, and also conditions which are
permanent.
3. A rezoning of a parcel of land to the PUD Overlay District shall not
become effective until such time as the Board of Commissioners approves
the PUD General Plan.
4. Agreement/Financial Guarantee. Following the approval of the PUD
General Plan but prior to PUD Final Plan approval, the applicant shall
enter into a three-way developer agreement with the County and Town
Board relating to the terms of the PUD, and shall also provide such
financial guarantees as the County and Town Board requires or deems
necessary. The developer agreement shall be consistent with the
standards listed in Chapter 10 of the Subdivision Ordinance.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 81 PUD, Planned Unit Development
81-8 PUD FINAL PLAN
The PUD Final Plan is to serve as a complete, and permanent public record of the PUD
and the manner in which it is to be developed. It shall incorporate all prior approved
plans and all approved modifications thereof resulting from the PUD process. It shall
serve in conjunction with other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance as the land use
regulation applicable to the PUD.
81-8-1 Application
General application materials required of a PUD Final Plan shall be the same as for the
approval of a final plat, as outlined in Chapter 5 of the Subdivision Ordinance. In
addition to the informational requirements of the Subdivision Ordinance, the following
items shall be submitted as part of the PUD Final Plan application:
1. Phasing Plan. A PUD may be phased in accordance with an overall
development plan for the entire tract meeting the following requirements:
a. A phasing plan identifying the sequence of development showing
approximate areas, serially numbered with a description of each
phase. Information shall be provided regarding the number of
dwelling units or lots, proposed improvements, and common
facilities for each.
b. The phasing plan shall be made a part of the subdivision approval
and is effective for five (5) years from the date of PUD General Plan
approval unless extended by the Board of Commissioners. If final
plat approval is not received within five (5) years, the PUD General
Plan shall become null and void.
2. Proof of recording any easements and restrictive covenants prior to sale of
any land or dwelling unit within the PUD and of the establishment and
activation of any entity that is to be responsible for the management and
maintenance of any public or common open space or service facility.
3. All certificates, seals and signatures required for the dedication of land
and recording of documents.
81-8-2 Procedure
1. In addition to the following guidelines, the PUD Final Plan application will
be processed and reviewed in accordance with the procedures outlined in
Chapter 5, Final Plat, of the Subdivision Ordinance.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 81 PUD, Planned Unit Development
2. If no PUD Final Plan is submitted within six months of approval of the PUD
General Plan, the Board of Commissioners may revoke approval of the
PUD General Plan.
3. The PUD Final Plan shall comply in all respects with the approved PUD
General Plan. Changes in the approved PUD General Plan shall follow
the guidelines as stated in Section 81-11.
4. Roads and other improvements, including improvements to common open
spaces, must be completed prior to recording the PUD Final Plan, unless
adequate financial guarantees are provided to the County.
5. Except as otherwise expressly provided herein, upon receiving notice from
the Planning Manager that the approved Final Plan has been recorded, all
appropriate officials of the County may issue building and other permits to
the applicant for development, construction and other work in the area
encompassed by the approved PUD Final Plan provided, however, that no
such permit shall be issued unless the appropriate official is first satisfied
that all requirements of this Chapter which are applicable to the permit
sought, have been satisfied.
6. Within one (1) year after the approval of a PUD Final Plan, construction
shall commence in accordance with such approved plan. Failure to
commence construction within such period shall, unless an extension shall
have been granted and hereinafter provided, automatically render void all
approvals of the PUD plan and the area encompassed within the PUD
shall thereafter be subject to those provisions of the Zoning Chapter, and
other Chapter provisions, applicable in the district in which it is located. In
such case, the Board of Commissioners shall adopt a resolution repealing
the PUD approvals and re-establishing the zoning and other provisions
that would otherwise be applicable.
81-9 USES
Uses within the PUD may include only those uses generally associated with the
underlying zoning district. Specific allowed uses and performance standards for each
PUD shall be delineated in an ordinance and development plan as part of approval of
the PUD General Plan. The development plan shall identify all the proposed land uses
and those uses shall become permitted uses with the acceptance of the development
plan. Any change in the uses presented in the development plan will be considered an
amendment to the PUD and will follow the procedures specified in Section 81-11 of this
Ordinance.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 81 PUD, Planned Unit Development
81-10 PUBLIC VALUE INCENTIVE PROGRAM
1. The underlying zoning district shall establish the base residential density
for a PUD.
2. Providing one or more of the County-identified public values may result in
an increase in density. Density bonuses may be approved up to the
maximum density allowed for each residential land use category, as
identified in the Comprehensive Plan.
3. County-identified public values eligible for a potential density bonus are
defined in the Comprehensive Plan.
4. The awarding of a density bonus for each proposed public value shall be
guided by the following schedule. The potential density bonus will be
presented to the applicant at the DRT 1 meeting with the final bonus
amount negotiated through the PUD General Plan review process. Based
on this evaluation, the Planning Commission may deviate from the
following schedule at its discretion.
Public Values Incentive Program
Public Value Qualifies a High Public Value Qualifies a Low Public Value
Publicly Managed
Utilities
CSTS system within a subordinate
sewer district with a community water
supply system
ISTS systems within a subordinate
sewer district with a community water
supply system
Community water supply system
Public
Roadway/Transitway
Significant ROW for arterial or collector
roadway expansions or extensions
Significant ROW for roads ALONG
WITH land or easements for trails and/or
natural resource protection
ROW that provides a critical LINK or fills
critical GAP in transportation system or
that addresses critical SAFETY issue in
transportation system
ROW for arterial or collector roadway
expansions or extensions
ROW that provides a LINK or fills GAP in
transportation system
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 81 PUD, Planned Unit Development
Public Values Incentive Program
Public Value Qualifies a High Public Value Qualifies a Low Public Value
Public Parkland
Significant ACREAGE for regional or
town parkland
Significant QUALITY NATURAL
RESOURCES protected through
parkland dedication
Parkland dedication that provides a
critical LINK or fills critical GAP in
regional park system
Dedicated parkland that is in IMMINENT
threat of development
ACREAGE for regional town parkland
Important QUALITY NATURAL
RESOURCES protection through
parkland dedication
Parkland dedication that provides a LINK
or fills GAP in regional park system
Public Trailway
Significant ROW, GRADING and
CONSTRUCTION for regional, county,
or town trailway
Trailway dedication that provides a
critical LINK or fills critical GAP in
regional, county, or town trail system
Dedicated trailway that is in IMMINENT
threat of development
ROW and GRADING for regional,
county, or trailway
Trailway dedication that provides a LINK
or fills GAP in regional, county, or town
trail system
Natural Resource
Conservation
Significant ACREAGE of permanently
protected Natural Area
Permanent protection of HIGHEST
QUALITY Natural Area
Permanent protection of a Natural Area
that provides a critical LINK or fills
critical GAP in corridor system
Permanent protection of a Natural Area
that is in IMMINENT threat of
development.
ACREAGE of permanently protected
Natural Area
Protection of MEDIUM QUALITY
Natural Areas
Protection of Natural Area that provides
a LINK or fills GAP in corridor system
Regional Stormwater
Management
Significant ACREAGE of dedicated land
for a Regional Stormwater facility
Dedication of land that provides a critical
LINK or fills critical GAP for completion
of Regional Stormwater system
Permanent protection of an identified
Regional Stormwater facility that is in
IMMINENT threat of development.
ACREAGE of dedicated land for a
Regional Stormwater facility
Dedication of land that provides a LINK
or fills GAP for completion of Regional
Stormwater system
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 81 PUD, Planned Unit Development
Public Values Incentive Program
Public Value Qualifies a High Public Value Qualifies a Low Public Value
Wetland Restoration
Significant ACREAGE of restored and
long-term managed Wetland
Restoration and long-term management
of HIGHEST QUALITY Wetland
ACREAGE of restored and long-term
managed Wetland
Restoration and long-term management
of MEDIUM QUALITY Wetland
Livable and Sustainable
Neighborhoods
Master planned community (25 lots or
more) including amenities or
infrastructure that promotes LIFECYCLE
or SENIOR HOUSING,
SUSTAINABILITY principles, and/or
ACTIVE LIVING PRACTICES
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT that
reduces runoff by 25 percent or more
WATER CONSERVATION
techniques/technology that reduces
water usage by 25 percent or more
Provides on-site ALTERNATIVE
ENERGY SOURCE that provides 25
percent or more of expected energy use
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT that
reduces runoff by 15-24 percent
WATER CONSERVATION
techniques/technology that reduces
water usage by 15-24 percent
Provides on-site ALTERNATIVE
ENERGY SOURCE that provides 15-24
percent or more of expected energy use
ENVIRONMENTALLY FRIENDLY
BUILDING materials and practices
81-11 AMENDMENTS/REVIEW
1. Minor changes in the location, placement, and heights of structures may
be approved through an administrative permit, as set forth in Section 2-8,
and authorized by the Zoning Administrator if required by engineering or
other circumstances not foreseen at the time the final plan was approved.
2. Approval of the Planning Commission and Board of Commissioners is
required when significant changes are proposed, such as changes in
uses, significant changes in the location, size, or height of structures, any
rearrangement of lots, blocks and building tracts, changes in the provision
of common open space, and any other changes which result in significant
deviations from the approved PUD General Plan. These changes shall be
consistent with the purpose and intent of the approved PUD General Plan.
3. Any amendment that proposes significant changes to an approved PUD
General Plan shall follow the same procedures as outlined in section 81-7
of this Chapter.
4. The Board of Commissioners may require periodic review of a PUD as a
condition to approval of a PUD General Plan in order to ensure
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 81 PUD, Planned Unit Development
compliance with the conditions of the PUD. At such time the Board of
Commissioners may, at its discretion, choose to take additional testimony
on the PUD.
Scott County
Zoning Ordinance Chapter 90 Effective Date
CHAPTERS 82-89: RESERVED
CHAPTER 90: EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after January 20, 2010.
SIGNED:
By: ____________________________________________
Chairman of County Board
ATTEST:
By: _____________________________________________
County Administrator
By: _____________________________________________
County Attorney
1-4-1 Resolution 2010-015, Adopted January 26, 2010/Effective February 3, 2010
CHAPTER 1
TITLE 4
SUBSURFACE
SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM ORDINANCE NO. 4
(Cite as e.g.)
(Scott County Subsurface Sewage Treatment System
Ordinance No. 4 Section )
1-4-2 Resolution 2010-015, Adopted January 26, 2010/Effective February 3, 2010
SCOTT COUNTY SUBSURFACE SEWAGE TREATMENT
SYSTEM ORDINANCE NO. 4
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1.00 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY. 3
2.00 DEFINITIONS. 3
3.00 GENERAL PROVISIONS. 4
4.00 STANDARDS ADOPTED. 6
5.00 SITE EVALUATION AND PRESERVATION. 7
6.00 PERMITS AND LICENSES. 12
7.00 INSPECTIONS. 15
8.00 SSTS MAINTENANCE PROGRAM. 20
9.00 LAND APPLICATION OF DOMESTIC SEPTAGE. 22
10.00 ABANDONMENT OF AN SSTS. 25
11.00 VARIANCES. 25
12.00 LIABILITY. 25
13.00 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. 25
14.00 EFFECTIVE DATE. 26
15.00 SEVERABILITY. 26
16.00 AMENDMENTS. 26
1-4-3 Resolution 2010-015, Adopted January 26, 2010/Effective February 3, 2010
1.00 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.
1.01 PURPOSE. An ordinance establishing the minimum standards and criteria for the
design, location, installation, use, and maintenance of Subsurface Sewage Treatment
Systems (SSTS), also referred to as Individual Sewage Treatment Systems (ISTS) and
Community Sewage Treatment Systems (CSTS); penalties for failure to comply with
provisions of this Ordinance; issuing, denying, modifying, imposing conditions upon,
suspending or revoking licenses and permits; the proper removal, transport, treatment and
disposal of domestic septage; and other matters as determined to be necessary, and thus
protect the surface and ground waters of the County of Scott and the State of Minnesota,
and promote the public health and general welfare.
1.02 AUTHORITY. This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Sections
145A.05, 115.55 and 115.56.
2.00 DEFINITIONS.
2.01 CERTAIN TERMS. For the purposes of these standards, certain terms or words used
herein shall be interpreted as follows: the words "shall" and "must" are mandatory, the
words "should" and "may" are permissive. All distances, unless otherwise specified,
shall be measured horizontally.
2.02 ALTERNATE SITE. “Alternate Site” means that portion of real property that is
designated by a licensed ISTS professional and approved by the Department to be
protected from all vehicular traffic, construction and other disturbances and which will
allow for the construction of a future standard SSTS.
2.03 COUNTY. “County” means Scott County, Minnesota.
2.04 COUNTY BOARD. "County Board" means the Scott County Board of Commissioners.
2.05 COMMUNITY SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM. “Community Sewage Treatment
System” or “CSTS” means a collector-type sewage treatment system serving two or more
dwellings on separate lots and managed by a public entity such as a Subordinate Service
District or Sanitary District.
2.06 DEPARTMENT. "Department" means the Scott County Environmental Health
Department or its successor.
2.07 INCORPORATED. “Incorporated” means the mixing of domestic septage with the
topsoil by means of discing or plowing.
2.08 INJECTED. “Injected” means the direct flow of domestic septage from the injector tank
or injector vehicle into the soil.
1-4-4 Resolution 2010-015, Adopted January 26, 2010/Effective February 3, 2010
2.09 INSPECTOR. "Inspector" means the person or persons registered by the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency with specialty area endorsements applicable to the work being
conducted and assigned the responsibility for the administration of this Ordinance by the
Manager of the Department.
2.10 ONE HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD. "One hundred-year flood" means that flood which
can be expected to occur, on an average, of once in one hundred years; or the level to
which flood waters have a one percent chance of rising in any given year.
2.11 TYPE I SYSTEM. “Type I System” is an SSTS that follows a standard trench, bed, atgrade,
mound, or graywater system design in accordance with Minn. Rules parts
7080.2200 through 7080.2240.
2.12 TYPE II SYSTEM. “Type II System” is an SSTS with acceptable modifications or
sewage containment system that may be permitted for use on a site not meeting the
conditions acceptable for a standard Type I system. These include holding tanks, privies
and systems located in floodplains or on lots with rapidly permeable soils.
2.13 TYPE III SYSTEM. “Type III System” is an SSTS that uses soil to treat sewage but
does not meet the tank, size or distribution requirements for a Type I system. Type III
systems are designed for use on a lot that cannot accommodate a standard Type I soil
treatment and dispersal system.
2.14 TYPE IV SYSTEM. “Type IV System” is an SSTS having an approved pretreatment
device and incorporating pressure distribution and dosing.
2.15 TYPE V SYSTEM. “Type V System” is an SSTS designed by a professional engineer
that does not meet the prescriptive designs for Type I-IV systems. Type V systems must
meet the public health and safety standards of Minn. Rules part 7080.1500.
3.00 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
3.01 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES. Except to the extent superseded by this
Ordinance, all of the provisions of the Scott County Administrative Procedures
Ordinance No. 13 relating to definitions; license and permit provisions; administration of
the Ordinance; license and permit application and processing; suspensions and
revocations; variances; severability; provisions cumulative; and no consent, shall apply
as if fully set forth herein.
3.02 ADMINISTRATION OF ORDINANCE. This Ordinance shall be administered by the
Inspector. The Inspector’s responsibilities shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
1-4-5 Resolution 2010-015, Adopted January 26, 2010/Effective February 3, 2010
A. Review and consider all permit applications submitted to the Department for the
site evaluation, installation and maintenance of an SSTS within the County.
B. Conduct routine inspections of SSTS installations and site evaluations in such
frequency as to insure consistent compliance with the provisions of this
Ordinance. The permittee or licensed SSTS professional shall be provided with
written and documented notice of any deficiencies, recommendations for their
correction and the date when the corrections shall be accomplished. The
permittee or licensed professional shall be required to allow free access to the
Department, County Board or to the proper representative of any other
governmental agency at any time for the purpose of making such inspections as
may be necessary to determine compliance with the requirements of this
Ordinance, or any other applicable statute, ordinance or regulation, or for the
purpose of making written and documented notice of any deficiencies, or
recommendations for their correction and the date by which corrections shall be
accomplished.
C. Investigate complaints of violations of this Ordinance and recommend, when
necessary, to the County Attorney's Office that legal proceedings be initiated to
achieve compliance with this Ordinance and protect public health and the
environment.
D. Advise, consult and cooperate with other governmental agencies and the various
offices of Scott County.
E. Resolve conflicts and other technical disputes between SSTS certified individuals.
3.03 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED. All sewage, septage and sewage tank effluent generated
within Scott County shall be treated either in a Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
(MPCA) permitted facility or a system that meets the requirements of this Ordinance.
Any person who conducts site evaluations or designs, installs, alters, repairs, replaces,
maintains, pumps, or inspects all or part of an SSTS in Scott County shall comply with
the requirements of this Ordinance and the appropriate portions of Minn. Rules chapters
7080 or 7081. Any SSTS, irrespective of the date of original installation, which is found
to be in violation of Minn. Rules part 7080.1500, 7080.2150, subp. 2, or 7081.0080, shall
be relocated, reconstructed or reinstalled so as to be in compliance with this Ordinance.
A surface discharge is strictly prohibited unless a national pollution discharge elimination
system permit has been issued by the MPCA. Any septic tank that is exposed for
inspection or repairs shall be repaired or replaced in accordance with this Ordinance to
meet the requirements of Minn. Rules part 7080.1900 or 7081.0240.
3.04 CONDITIONS. Violation of any conditions imposed by the County on a license, permit
or variance shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance and subject to the penalty
provisions set forth in this Ordinance.
1-4-6 Resolution 2010-015, Adopted January 26, 2010/Effective February 3, 2010
4.00 STANDARDS ADOPTED.
4.01 TECHNICAL STANDARDS. The technical standards of the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency are hereby adopted by reference. Those standards encompass Minn.
Rules chapters 7080 and 7081.
4.02 TYPE II, III, IV AND V SYSTEMS. Type II, III, IV and V systems shall only be
allowed/permitted for existing lots of record (as defined in Section 5.01 A.) where a Type
I system cannot be reasonably installed as determined by the Inspector. This applies
regardless of whether or not a Permit is required from the County except as otherwise
specified in Section 4.03 C. The SSTS shall meet all provisions contained in Minn.
Rules parts 7080.2250 through 7080.2400, shall only be used to manage sewage from
existing dwellings and Other Establishments, and shall not be used to accommodate the
construction or expansion of a dwelling or Other Establishment or to accommodate an
unacceptable increase in wastewater to the SSTS as determined by the Inspector. In
addition to these standards, the following shall apply:
A. All Type II, III, IV and V systems shall include a water meter. In addition, if the
SSTS contains a pump chamber and dosing device, an electrical event counter
shall be placed on the dosing device.
B. An application to install or modify a Type IV or V system must include a
Monitoring and Mitigation Plan. The Monitoring Plan shall identify the name of
a licensed designer, inspector or installer along with a five-year contract with that
SSTS professional to perform inspections and take whatever measurements or
samples are agreed to by the Department in the Approved Monitoring Plan. The
Mitigation Plan shall identify what measures will be taken within a specific
Department-approved time frame to replace the SSTS or bring it into compliance
with the standards approved in the Monitoring Plan. Alternate sites designated to
accommodate replacement of the SSTS shall be protected and maintained.
C. Type IV and V systems must be licensed as provided in section 6.04.
4.03 PRETREATMENT OF EFFLUENT. Providing that all standard components of an
SSTS are designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions established herein,
additional devices to screen, filter or pretreat septic tank effluent as approved by the
Inspector:
A. May be added to an SSTS providing adequate maintenance is clearly established.
B. Shall be added for pretreatment of any wastewater which, after standard treatment
in a septic tank designed in accordance with Minn. Rules part 7080.1900, fails to
achieve any of the following standards:
1. Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) in excess of 220mg/l.
2. Total Suspended Solids (TSS) in excess of 65mg/l.
1-4-7 Resolution 2010-015, Adopted January 26, 2010/Effective February 3, 2010
3. Fats, Oils and Grease (FOG) in excess of 30mg/l.
C. Shall be added to a CSTS for the purpose of enhancing the longevity of the
drainfield component of the SSTS subject to approval by the Subordinate Service
District (SSD).
All such pretreatment devices shall be subject to review and approval by the Inspector
and are subject to the provisions in Section 6.04.
4.04 USE OF HOLDING TANKS. The operation and maintenance of a holding tank shall
comply with all requirements as specified on forms provided by the Inspector. At a
minimum, a monitoring and disposal contract signed by the owner and a licensed
maintenance business is required unless the owner is a farmer exempt from licensing
under Minnesota Statues, section 115.56, subdivision 2 paragraph (b), clause (3). The
owner is responsible for ensuring that the contract guarantees the proper removal of the
tank contents before overflow or any discharge. Holding tanks shall only be used in the
following circumstances:
A. For replacement of an SSTS where it is impossible as determined by the Inspector
to construct a Type I system;
B. For seasonal buildings or facilities where the SSTS would be used less than four
days per week during the winter months of November through March;
C. To capture wastewater that cannot be treated in an SSTS as determined by the
Inspector;
D. For new construction or expansion as defined in 7.03 D, if the lot is scheduled to
receive municipal sewer service within one year;
E. For temporary uses as controlled by a development contract; or
F. For temporary occupancy before a drainfield can be installed due to adverse soil
conditions.
5.00 SITE EVALUATION AND PRESERVATION.
5.01 SITE EVALUATION FOR SSTS PERMIT APPLICATION.
A. Site evaluations must be conducted in accordance with Minn. Rules parts
7080.1700 and 7081.0100 through 7081.0230, this section, or as otherwise
provided in Minn. Rules chapters 7080 and 7081. Each SSTS permit application
shall include a primary and an alternate site. Both sites shall meet the
requirements of Minn. Rules parts 7080.2050 through 7080.2240. Soil boring and
1-4-8 Resolution 2010-015, Adopted January 26, 2010/Effective February 3, 2010
percolation test locations and the one hundred-year flood elevation must be
clearly marked on the design plans submitted.
On existing vacant lots recorded with the Scott County Land Records Office prior
to May 12, 1992, where it is not possible to locate two Type I system sites, at
least one Type I system site must be identified unless otherwise allowed by this
Ordinance for the purposes of obtaining a building permit. The site shall meet the
requirements of Minn. Rules parts 7080.2050 through 7080.2240. The building
pad cannot be larger than 5,000 square feet if a larger pad would preclude the use
of an alternate site on the lot.
B. The following must be field staked before the Department will conduct a site
inspection:
1. The septic and pump tanks.
2. Soil boring and percolation test locations.
3. The four corners of the sand and rockbed of a mound, drop boxes and both
ends of each trench of a trench SSTS or as necessary to easily identify the
location of other system types.
4. The boundaries of the alternate site.
5. Property lines, easements and other features requiring a setback as
specified by the Inspector within 20 feet of any part of the SSTS. A
survey may be required if the exact location of the property line, easement
or feature cannot be determined.
C. All new septic tanks shall be designed and constructed to meet the standards
listed in Minn. Rules part 7080.1930 subp. 2 for a garbage disposal, and the top
lid of any septic or pumping tank shall not be located more than four feet below
the final grade as outlined in Minn. Rules part 7080.2000. These tank size and
depth requirements may be waived by the Inspector for an existing ISTS.
D. To determine the Hydraulic Loading Rate there must be a minimum of three
percolation tests done within the primary site in accordance with Minn. Rules
chapter 7080.2150 subp. 3, E. Table IXa. Additional percolation tests may be
required in either or both sites if the Inspector determines that they are needed to
accurately define the soil conditions. There must be a minimum of four soil
borings done within the primary site, preferably one in each corner of the
proposed SSTS. At least two soil borings shall also be done within the alternate
site. Additional borings may be required in either or both sites if the Inspector
determines that the borings have not accurately defined the soil conditions.
Alternatively, two or more soil pits, a minimum of three feet deep, may be
substituted per site to assess soil conditions in accordance with Minn. Rules
chapter 7080.2150 subp. 3, E. Table IX. The pits must be left open or reopened to
1-4-9 Resolution 2010-015, Adopted January 26, 2010/Effective February 3, 2010
accommodate site inspection and be fenced, roped off or refilled as needed to
prevent accidents.
The soil treatment area shall be sized using the slowest tested percolation rate or
be based upon the detailed soil description, whichever results in a larger
absorption area if both sizing methods are used. If the absorption area is based on
the percolation rate and five or more percolation tests are done, an average of all
the percolation rates may be used to size the soil treatment area.
E. Applications for ISTS permits which lack sufficient soils information for approval
(due to weather/seasonal soil conditions), but which the Inspector believes
contain sufficient information for conditional issuance of a building permit, shall
be allowed to proceed through the permit process with the condition that final
ISTS permit approval will not be granted until complete soil information is
submitted and approved. An additional permit fee shall be paid as established by
resolution of the County Board.
F. An SSTS shall not be constructed within the boundaries of an easement nor shall
any part of the SSTS cross an easement without written permission from the
individual(s) or entity(ies) possessing the rights to the easement.
G. Below ground pools shall meet the setback requirements established for buildings
as described in this Ordinance.
H. Fencing and Staking. Where the Inspector deems necessary, both the primary and
alternate drainfield sites shall be fenced prior to applying for a permit to construct
an SSTS. The fence shall consist of four-foot high orange construction fence,
wooden snow fence, or two strands of weatherproof high-visibility roping
attached to posts placed no more than 20 feet apart with either high visibility
ribbon at least one-half inch wide tied to the rope no more than 6 feet apart or
signs no smaller than 16 inches by 20 inches no more than 20 feet apart, that
clearly identify the drainfield area and prohibit trespass. The fencing or roping
and signs shall be clearly visible at least two feet above surrounding vegetation.
The choice between fencing and roping with signs shall be at the discretion of the
designer and property owner and should take into consideration any risk such
barrier may present.
The stakes shall be clearly visible at least two feet above surrounding vegetation
and the stake labeling shall be legible.
I. The proposed alternate site shall be 5,000 square feet or of a size, location and
configuration deemed suitable by the Inspector for the intended use.
J. A management plan shall be developed by the designer and must be reviewed and
approved before issuance of a construction permit for all new or replacement
ISTS as described in Minn. Rule 7082.0600 Subpart 1.
1-4-10 Resolution 2010-015, Adopted January 26, 2010/Effective February 3, 2010
5.02 SITE EVALUATION FOR CREATING NEW LOTS.
A. All proposed development that requires rezoning or platting shall be submitted to
the Inspector for review. No new lots shall be approved by Scott County unless
the Inspector renders a favorable recommendation that a primary and alternate
site can be located on each lot or be served by a CSTS. Each site shall meet the
requirements of Minn. Rules parts 7080.2050 through 7080.2230 and shall be
sized to accommodate a Type I system for a five bedroom dwelling. Appeal from
an unfavorable recommendation hereunder, shall be in accordance with the
provisions adopted in the Scott County Administrative Procedures Ordinance No.
13. The review and recommendation provided pursuant to this section shall not
eliminate the need for compliance with section 5.01.
B. There shall be a minimum of two percolation tests conducted on each lot of the
proposed development except for those served by a CSTS. Additional percolation
tests may be required in the primary or alternate sites if soil conditions,
topography, land-use, etc., indicate a change of soil characteristics that would
influence the percolation test results. Both percolation tests shall be conducted
within the boundaries of the primary site.
C. At least two soil borings shall be done within the boundary of each primary and
alternate ISTS site. Additional soil borings may be required upon review of the
information submitted. Alternatively, two or more soil pits a minimum of three
feet deep may be substituted per site to assess soil conditions in accordance with
Minn. Rules chapter 7080.2150 Subp. 3 (E). Care should be taken to prevent
damage to a future drainfield site because the County may not approve a permit
for a drainfield where significant soil disturbance has occurred.
D. The following shall be located on each lot of a proposed preliminary plat layout
where lots will be served by an ISTS on forms and to a level of detail acceptable
to the Inspector:
1. Contours, as required by the Scott County Land Subdivision Ordinance
No. 7.
2. A proposed building pad of 5,000 square feet and driveway.
3. Two ISTS sites.
4. All percolation tests and soil borings.
5. Any drainage and utility easements, required buffer strips, bluff setbacks,
trails, driveways and private drainage systems including tile, ditches,
culverts and other similar restricted areas for construction of an ISTS as
outlined in Minn. Rule part 7080.1720 subp. 3, C. & D.
6. One hundred-year flood elevation, wetlands and the ordinary high water
level of public waters.
1-4-11 Resolution 2010-015, Adopted January 26, 2010/Effective February 3, 2010
7. Existing wells within 100 feet from any proposed ISTS site, 300 feet for
public supply wells or as otherwise established by the Minnesota
Department of Health.
E. The drainfield locations for new residential lots shall be located on non-hydric
soils and sized at a minimum of 5,000 square feet with sufficient information
provided to the Inspector to demonstrate that the proposed sites are likely to be
able to accommodate an ISTS of a standard design consistent with site soils and
topography.
F. Any drainfield site within fifty feet of proposed construction activities (i.e., road
construction, house construction, or other construction or improvement activities
associated with the plat) shall be fenced and staked by the developer in
accordance with section 5.01 H.
G. Design plans of a detail acceptable to the Inspector shall be submitted for
consideration of a proposed preliminary plat for new lots to be served by a CSTS
and:
1. The Subordinate Service District (SSD) or Sanitary District (SD) shall be
fully established as required by state statutes.
2. The SSD/SD shall review and approve the design of the CSTS in
coordination with the Inspector.
3. Preliminary plat layouts must include the information required in section
5.02 D. 1, 2, 5, 6 and 7. Sufficient information shall also be provided as
deemed necessary by the Inspector to identify two acceptable drainfield
infiltration locations per CSTS. These locations must be fenced and
staked as outlined in section 5.02 F.
4. The number of soil pits and percolation tests shall be sufficient to
accurately depict soil conditions as determined by the Inspector in
consideration of topography and soils.
5. The infiltration area shall be based on the anticipated wastewater
generated from all sources that could use the CSTS. All assumptions and
estimates made for wastewater generation must be acceptable to the
Inspector. Unless otherwise known, the estimated number of bedrooms to
use per dwelling for wastewater generation determination shall be five.
6. All plans for a CSTS shall be prepared by a licensed designer and
qualified Minnesota Registered Engineer.
7. Soils information shall also include hydraulic conductivity testing as
specified in Minn. Rule part 7081.0170 and applicable ground water
testing as specified in Minn. Rule part 7081.0210. The dispersal system
1-4-12 Resolution 2010-015, Adopted January 26, 2010/Effective February 3, 2010
shall be configured to comply with all applicable requirements of Minn.
Rule parts 7081.0080 through 7081.0300 which includes nutrient nitrogen
and phosphorus and ground water mounding. Methods for determining
the potential for ground water mounding shall be acceptable to the
Inspector. Consideration should be given for the use of GMound and
GPond and the findings and recommendations developed in the Scott
County GMound Proofing Study.
5.03 PRESERVATION OF SITES.
A. An area which has been identified for future use as an SSTS site shall be
maintained in its original, natural soil condition so a future SSTS or device may
be constructed that meets all Ordinance requirements unless a substitute alternate
site acceptable to the Inspector can be identified and maintained. Each site shall
be protected during lot development, road and building construction and during
any other improvement, disturbance or activity to prevent any impairment of the
treatment ability or hydraulic performance of the site.
B. No permit shall be issued for grading, building, building expansion or remodel or
for any other use that could, in the opinion of the Inspector:
1. Damage or encroach upon an identified site unless a substitute alternate
site acceptable to the Inspector can be identified and maintained. In
situations where an alternate site is not available, a permit shall not be
issued which will result in damage to or encroach upon a possible partial
site.
2. Destroy or eliminate a potential or partial alternate site regardless of when
the lot was created unless an alternate or potential alternate site acceptable
to the Inspector is identified.
3. Increase sewage flow to an existing SSTS unless the additional sewage
flow can be accommodated in conformance with this Ordinance.
C. It is a violation of this Ordinance and may be cause for denial of a building permit
if a site or potential site is damaged, regardless of when the lot was created.
6.00 PERMITS AND LICENSES.
6.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
A. Unless a site-specific permit to construct and operate an SSTS has been issued by
the MPCA, no person shall install, alter, repair, replace or extend any SSTS in
Scott County without first obtaining a permit from the Inspector for each specific
installation, alteration, repair or extension; and, at the time of applying for said
1-4-13 Resolution 2010-015, Adopted January 26, 2010/Effective February 3, 2010
permit, shall pay a fee as established by resolution of the County Board. Such
permits shall be valid for a period of 12 months from the date of issuance unless
the applicant pays a permit renewal fee as established by resolution of the County
Board.
All SSTS design work, installation, alteration, repair, maintenance, operation,
pumping, or inspection activities must be completed by a state licensed business
or an acceptably certified qualified employee, or a person exempted under Minn.
Rules part 7083.0700.
B. No building permit shall be issued until all associated SSTS permits are approved
and issued.
C. No dwelling or Other Establishment shall be redesigned or enlarged if such
redesign or enlargement results in exceeding the designed capacity of the SSTS
unless a permit has been granted by the Inspector to enlarge or redesign the SSTS
to accommodate the expected increase in sewage and the permittee agrees in
writing, on forms provided by the County, to replace the SSTS within one year.
D. No more than one dwelling or Other Establishment shall be connected to the same
ISTS unless such connection was specified in the application submitted and in the
permit issued for the SSTS and it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
Inspector that the existing SSTS can accommodate the additional effluent.
E. The County will not issue an ISTS permit when a municipality has required the
owner to connect to the municipal sewer system.
6.02 PERMIT NOT REQUIRED. An SSTS permit is not required to repair or replace the
following: a crushed pipe, a pump, floats or other electrical devices of the pump, baffles
in the septic tank or the septic tank cover. Permits may be required by other
governmental agencies for activities related to or in conjunction with such activities.
6.03 PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
A. An application for an SSTS permit shall be made in writing on forms acceptable
to the Inspector and shall be signed by the applicant. If the Inspector finds that
the applicant has failed to submit all of the items required in this section or as
otherwise required by the Inspector, the application will be considered
incomplete. This may result in a delay in the issuance or denial of the permit
application. Each application shall include the site evaluation information listed
in section 5.01 and shall also contain the following:
1. Estimated water usage and water use calculations.
2. Pump selection procedure and pressure distribution worksheets.
1-4-14 Resolution 2010-015, Adopted January 26, 2010/Effective February 3, 2010
3. One copy of an SSTS design, drawn to a scale no smaller than 1 inch
equals 30 feet, which includes the items required in section 5.01, as
appropriate, and the following:
a. All existing and anticipated future buildings and improvements on
the lot, including additions, decks, three-season porches, roads and
driveways.
b. Location and elevations of percolation tests, soil borings and soil
pits.
c. Location, size and elevation of existing and proposed septic and
pump tanks, distribution devices, and soil absorption area.
d. Cross-section of the SSTS.
e. Proposed well location. Also indicate all existing well locations
and depths on or within 100 feet of the SSTS site.
f. Location of all existing and proposed utilities, setback areas and
other restricted areas as outlined in 5.02 D. 5.
g. Water bodies.
h. Two-foot before and after contours when excavation, grading or
fill will impact or be impacted by the soil absorption area.
i. Roof drains, sump pump discharge, water treatment devices,
swimming pools and other potential sources of surface water run
on point source discharge locations.
4. A management plan acceptable to the Inspector.
5. Any additional information that may be required by the Inspector to assure
compliance with this Ordinance and ground water protection.
B. All Other Establishments shall have a device installed suitable for measuring
waste water flow.
C. In the event of a change in the application information that served as the basis for
issuing a permit, the permittee must file an amended application with acceptable
supporting documentation and receive approval for the amended permit prior to
initiating construction. An additional permit fee shall be paid as established by
resolution of the County Board.
1-4-15 Resolution 2010-015, Adopted January 26, 2010/Effective February 3, 2010
D. Final approval of the SSTS shall be evidenced by a certificate of compliance
issued by the Inspector.
E. Setback conflicts between septic system locations and structures may be resolved
through acceptable written documentation from an MPCA licensed SSTS
professional who is also a qualified civil engineer demonstrating that the
proposed activity will not adversely impact the structure or SSTS.
6.04 OPERATIONAL LICENSE REQUIRED.
A. A CSTS not managed under an operational permit by the MPCA and Type IV and
V systems shall be licensed and shall comply with the licensing provisions of this
section. In addition, such SSTS shall comply with Minn. Rules parts 7080.2290,
7080.2350, and 7080.2400, and chapter 7081, as applicable. An annual license
fee shall be paid as established by resolution of the County Board.
B. Licenses shall be valid for a period of up to 12 months from the date of issuance
and shall be renewed annually. The license period for a new SSTS shall
commence on March 1 following the year of installation. The annual license
period shall be from March 1 to February 28/29. Annual reports required as a
license condition shall be due by January 31.
C. A building permit shall not be issued on any lot that has an SSTS in use as
identified in item A. where the SSTS is not licensed as required in this section.
D. Prior to issuing an SSTS license, the licensee must demonstrate that the SSTS is
designed and installed to accommodate the current daily flow of wastewater and
provide for adequate treatment. A current certificate of compliance may also be
required. The compliance inspection must include a flow diagram for all sewage
and commercial and industrial wastewaters.
E. Licensees shall demonstrate at the time of license renewal that the SSTS has been
monitored, properly maintained and is functioning in accordance with the
approved design.
F. Type I systems with only septic tank effluent screens are exempt from the
operational license requirements.
7.00 INSPECTIONS.
7.01 INSPECTION REQUIRED. Inspections are required by the Department for all County
regulated SSTS prior to design approval, during construction and before being placed
into service, in part or in whole. No SSTS shall be covered, in part or in whole, prior to
an inspection by this Department unless prior verbal approval has been given by the
Inspector.
1-4-16 Resolution 2010-015, Adopted January 26, 2010/Effective February 3, 2010
A. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to notify the Inspector that the job is
ready for inspection. The Department shall be notified before 9:00 A.M. on the
requested day of the inspection. Failure to request an inspection before 9:00 A.M.
on the requested day of the inspection may result in a scheduled inspection at a
time other than requested and/or a delay or denial in the issuance of a Certificate
of Compliance from the Inspector. The Department shall also be notified prior to
commencement of any part of the installation if a weather event (such as freezing
temperatures, rain or snow) that could adversely impact the SSTS during any part
of the installation including final grading that is likely or predicted to occur.
B. Failure of the Inspector to inspect the SSTS does not relieve or lessen the
responsibility or liability of any person owning, controlling or installing any
SSTS.
C. The Inspector shall make every effort to inspect an SSTS within one hour of the
scheduled inspection.
D. The Inspector shall cause such inspections to be made as are necessary to
determine compliance with this Ordinance. If upon inspection the Inspector
discovers that any part of the SSTS is not constructed in accordance with the
minimum standards provided in this Ordinance and the approved design, the
Inspector shall give the licensed installer and/or the permittee written notification
describing the defects.
E. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to provide the Inspector with free
access to the property at reasonable times for the purpose of making inspections.
F. The permittee shall pay applicable fees as established by resolution of the County
Board.
G. The permittee or installer, as determined by the Inspector, shall be responsible for
the correction or elimination of all defects. No SSTS shall be placed or replaced
in service until all defects have been corrected or eliminated. A Certificate of
Compliance from the Inspector may be delayed or denied if the permittee or
installer fails to correct or eliminate all defects as required by the Inspector.
H. The permittee or SSTS professional representing the permittee shall be present
during the installation inspection.
7.02 INSPECTION ALTERNATIVE.
A. If the Inspector is unable to inspect within twenty-four hours, the SSTS
professional responsible for the installation must:
1. Have verbal approval from the Inspector before commencing the
installation of the SSTS.
1-4-17 Resolution 2010-015, Adopted January 26, 2010/Effective February 3, 2010
2. Complete and sign an as-built drawing of the SSTS as installed (a copy of
the original design will not be accepted). The as-built shall include a
cross-section of the drainfield and tanks showing the depth the tank(s) was
installed, the location of all maintenance holes, the number and height of
maintenance hole risers, and the size and height of all inspection pipes. In
addition, the as-built shall include trench depth, trench length, the type of
rock or pipe used, the amount of backfill, the dimensions of the rockbed
and sand base, the depth of sand below the rock, the size and separation of
the pipe, the size and separation of perforations, the size and length of the
pump line, the model, size and horsepower of the pump, the type and
location of the alarm, the well location and any other pertinent information
that the Inspector deems necessary to approve the SSTS.
3. Leave the SSTS open for inspection as required by the Inspector,
including the ends of each trench and the distribution device, or the four
corners of the sand and rockbed of a mound.
4. Sign, date and submit for approval an as-built drawing that includes a
certified statement that the SSTS was built in accordance with Minn.
Rules chapters 7080, 7081 and this Ordinance.
B. Failure to receive verbal approval from the Inspector to cover an SSTS prior to
completion of an inspection shall be cause to order the SSTS to be exposed for
inspection. The amount of the SSTS to be exposed for inspection shall be
determined by the Inspector at the time of inspection.
7.03 COMPLIANCE INSPECTIONS REQUIRED. A compliance inspection is required:
A. When an inspection is done for any new or replacement SSTS;
B. If a permit or variance is applied for to alter an existing SSTS;
C. Any other time an SSTS is reviewed to determine if the SSTS is in compliance;
D. When a permit is applied for a bedroom, to build a horizontal addition onto an
existing structure, or to build an accessory structure on a lot having an ISTS;
E. Any time the Scott County Zoning Ordinance No. 3 requires an inspection of an
SSTS;
F. Where a permit or an amendment to an existing permit is required for a change in
use of a property (i.e. residential to commercial, commercial to industrial, etc., or
the addition of a business, or a change of a business type or use) including
additional parking or outside storage area; or
G. When any parcel of land is developed, subdivided, rezoned or split and there is an
existing SSTS on any of the parcels.
1-4-18 Resolution 2010-015, Adopted January 26, 2010/Effective February 3, 2010
H. Exemptions: The compliance inspection requirement may be waived when
Department records indicate that the existing SSTS is not a cesspool, drywell,
seepage pit, leaching pit, or other pit in an area highly susceptible to ground water
contamination, is not an imminent threat to public health; and
1. There are acceptable design, construction, maintenance and location
records of the SSTS; or
2. There are limited options to locate a replacement SSTS and the permit
activity will not result in an increase in water usage.
Prior to approving the permit, the Inspector may require the identification of an
alternate site and that the tank(s) be pumped if records show that it has been more
than six years since the tank(s) was last pumped. The action proposed in the
building permit application shall not encroach upon the alternate site or the
existing SSTS.
7.04 REQUIREMENTS FOR A COMPLIANCE INSPECTION.
A. A compliance inspection shall be submitted to the Department on forms approved
by the Department. At a minimum, a compliance inspection must determine
whether or not the existing SSTS is a failing system or poses an imminent threat
to public health or safety.
B. The Compliance Inspector may allow for up to a 15 percent reduction in the
vertical separation distance as described in Minn. Rules part 7080.1500 subp. 4 D.
C. After a compliance inspection is done, the licensed professional who conducted
the compliance inspection must submit a Certificate of Compliance or a Notice of
Noncompliance to the Department within 15 days of the date of the inspection or
at the time of permit application, whichever is first.
7.05 SCHEDULE TO REPAIR OR REPLACE SSTS.
A. Any SSTS for which a Notice of Noncompliance has been issued shall be
replaced or repaired in accordance with Table 1, except as provided in item E.
below. Table 1 does not supersede compliance with Federal Class V
requirements. Table 1 is based on information supplied to the County by the
Minnesota Geological Survey.
B. All owners of new or replacement Class V injection wells, as defined in Code of
Federal Regulations, title 40, part 144, must submit inventory information to the
U. S. Environmental Protection Agency and Scott County. All Class V wells
must be identified as such in property transfer disclosures.
C. Those SSTS that pose an imminent threat to public health and safety must
immediately have the threat to public health abated by pumping, restricted use, or
other means approved or ordered by the Inspector. This abatement must continue,
1-4-19 Resolution 2010-015, Adopted January 26, 2010/Effective February 3, 2010
as needed, until the SSTS is upgraded, repaired, replaced or the use of the SSTS is
discontinued.
D. Compliance with Table 1 may be waived when the Inspector determines that the
existing SSTS is not an imminent threat to public health and:
1. Municipal sewer service to the lot is likely within five years;
2. There are acceptable design, construction, maintenance and location
records of the SSTS; or
3. Constraints due to small lot size, topography or hydric or wet soils
severely limit the options for replacement.
The Inspector may revoke the waiver and require the SSTS to be replaced within
a specified timeframe if there is a change to one or more of the conditions that
originally allowed the waiver. The Inspector may also allow the timeline for
replacement outlined in Table 1 to be postponed to a later date for good cause or
extenuating circumstances when doing so will not jeopardize public health.
TABLE 1
Imminent Health
Threat
Cesspool, Drywell,
Leaching Pit,
Seepage Pit or other
Pit.
Less than the Required
Vertical Separation
per Minn. Rules part
7080.1500 subp. 4 D.
& 4 E.
Areas highly susceptible to
ground water contamination 10 months 10 months 3 years
Areas moderately susceptible
to ground water contamination
10 months 3 years 5 years
Areas with low susceptibility
to ground water contamination
10 months 5 years 10 years
E. An applicant for a building permit for the addition of a bedroom to an existing
residence shall obtain an SSTS permit, if necessary, to upgrade, repair, replace or
discontinue use of the SSTS in accordance with the most restrictive applicable
timeline below:
1. Table 1 if the SSTS is failing, or
2. Within one year of the approved SSTS permit date if the existing SSTS is
inadequate in size to accommodate the increased use.
7.06 STOP WORK ORDER. Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions
of this Ordinance, the Inspector may order all work stopped by the installer or owner of
1-4-20 Resolution 2010-015, Adopted January 26, 2010/Effective February 3, 2010
the land. All installation and construction shall cease and desist until subsequent
authorization to proceed is given by the Inspector.
7.07 SSTS PROFESSIONAL LISTS.
A. The Inspector may provide lists of SSTS professionals to the public. The lists
will be for compliance inspectors, installers, maintainers and designers. The lists
should be updated annually and include those SSTS professionals for which there
are records of having performed satisfactory SSTS services in Scott County as
determined by the Inspector within the previous three calendar years.
B. Exception: SSTS professionals who have acted out of compliance with this
Ordinance, as determined by the Inspector, will not be listed. Reasons for not
being listing include, but are not limited to: failure to submit information to the
Inspector resulting in a delay for issuing a notice of compliance; failure to submit
pumping permits or compliance inspections as required; failure to submit
adequate site evaluation information which prevents the issuance of an SSTS
permit; outstanding SSTS fees owed to Scott County; or unresolved violations of
this Ordinance.
8.00 SSTS MAINTENANCE PROGRAM.
The SSTS and all its components must be maintained in compliance with this Ordinance,
Minn. Rules chapters 7080, 7081 and 7083 and any manufacturer requirements which do
not conflict with the requirements of this Ordinance or the Rules adopted herein.
This maintenance program shall apply throughout Scott County in accordance with
section 1.02.
8.01 MANAGEMENT OF SEPTAGE.
A. The owner of any septic tank or the owner's agent shall regularly, but in no case
less frequently than every three years (unless otherwise approved by the
Department due to limited use), inspect and measure the accumulations of sludge,
including the settled materials at the bottom of the tank, and the accumulations of
scum, which includes grease and other floating materials at the top of the tank.
The owner of any septic tank or the owner's agent shall arrange for the removal
and sanitary disposal of septage from the tank whenever the top of the sludge
layer is less than 12 inches below the bottom of the outlet baffle or whenever the
bottom of the scum layer is less than 3 inches above the bottom of the outlet
baffle. Removal of septage shall include complete removal of scum and sludge.
B. All septage removed from any portion of an SSTS shall be removed from the site
in sealed tanks or containers and be managed in a manner approved by the
Inspector and in accordance with all applicable rules and regulations.
1-4-21 Resolution 2010-015, Adopted January 26, 2010/Effective February 3, 2010
C. Recipients of septage used for the purpose of land application on their property
shall obtain a license in accordance with the requirements of section 9.00 of this
Ordinance.
D. Any tank or related apparatus used for removing or transporting domestic septage
shall be maintained and operated in such a manner as to avoid emission of
offensive odors, spilling or loss of any septage.
E. Septage removed from an SSTS shall be managed to prevent a nuisance or a
menace to public health.
F. Septage shall be land applied only at rates that will be agronomically beneficial.
8.02 MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS. Each pumping of every septic tank, holding
tank, cesspool, interceptor, separator and flammable waste trap shall be reported by the
maintainer to the Inspector on forms approved for that purpose by the end of the
following month.
8.03 MAINTENANCE INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS. A maintenance inspection shall
be conducted by a licensed SSTS professional and submitted on forms approved by the
Department.
8.04 OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
A. It is the responsibility of the property owner or the owner’s representative to
maintain the SSTS and alternate sites in accordance with this Ordinance.
B The owner shall be responsible for assuring both access to the SSTS for
maintenance and preventing damage to the SSTS from lot improvement activities
such as landscaping, installing an irrigation system, construction or placement of
small buildings, pools or other structures, and from activities that disturb or
compact the soil such as planting crops, gardening, and driving vehicles over the
SSTS.
8.05 NOTIFICATION. All owners who, according to Department records, have not had
their SSTS pumped within the last three calendar years shall be notified by the
Department.
8.06 PERMIT REQUIRED. A permit from the Department is required for each pumping
and each maintenance inspection of a septic tank, cesspool, leaching pit, drywell, holding
tank, pump chamber, or other portion of an SSTS. The licensed maintainer or permittee
shall obtain the permit prior to any work being done. There shall be only one permit
required for pumping all tanks one time in a single ISTS or per lot for a CSTS (unless
performed by the Subordinate Service District in which case no permit is required). If
there are more than one ISTS per property, a separate permit is required for each ISTS.
A permit is not needed to conduct a maintenance inspection.
1-4-22 Resolution 2010-015, Adopted January 26, 2010/Effective February 3, 2010
Permit and other related fees shall be established by resolution of the County Board.
8.07 RECORD KEEPING. Scott County shall maintain a record of each SSTS inspected or
pumped in Scott County.
9.00 LAND APPLICATION OF DOMESTIC SEPTAGE.
9.01 LICENSE REQUIRED. No person shall land apply septage without first obtaining a
license to conduct such operation. The license shall be issued by the Department; shall
be renewable and may be revoked or refused for cause, in accordance with the Scott
County Administrative Procedures Ordinance No. 13.
9.02 LICENSE TERM. Unless otherwise provided by the County Board, each license
granted pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance shall be nontransferable and shall be
for a period of not more than one year unless earlier suspended or revoked. The license
year shall be from January 1 to December 31.
9.03 LICENSE APPLICATION. An applicant for a license shall complete and submit an
application to the Department on a form approved by the Department. The application
shall not be considered complete until the Department receives all applicable fees and all
material required by this section. Applicants shall not commence any application
activities until the license application has been reviewed and approved by the
Department. In addition to the application form the applicant must submit the following:
A. A license bond, in an amount established by the County Board, for each land
application site.
B. A certificate of insurance as established by the County Board.
C. A field evaluation of each land application site.
D. A map at a scale acceptable to the Inspector showing the location of each site that
septage shall be applied. This shall include the parcel number, township, range,
section number, and the name and address of all property owners.
E. Soils information at each land application site. Soil information shall include soil
borings and a soil survey map of each site.
F. The proposed volumes of septage to be applied on each site.
G. The proposed application method.
H. The proposed date(s) of application.
1-4-23 Resolution 2010-015, Adopted January 26, 2010/Effective February 3, 2010
I. The maximum volume of septage that can be applied to each acre of land in each
land application site. The following equation shall be used to determine the
maximum volume applied:
AAR = N/0.0026
Where:
AAR = the annual application rate in gallons per acre per 365 day period.
N = the amount of Nitrogen in pounds per acre per 365 day period needed
by the crop or vegetation to be grown on the land.
The maximum allowable volume of septage shall also take into account any
nitrogen fertilizers applied in association with the septage.
9.04 SITE RESTRICTIONS AND APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
A. Domestic septage shall either be injected or incorporated within six hours of
surface application to a minimum depth of six inches. No significant amount of
the domestic septage shall be present on the land surface within one hour after the
domestic septage is injected.
B. The site must be a non-public contact site.
C. No land application is allowed in residential, shoreland, institutional or
commercial/industrial zones.
D. To avoid the uninformed public from coming into contact with the soil/septage
mixture, the application site must be fenced, posted or at a remote location.
E. Septage shall not be applied such that ponding or runoff occurs.
F. Septage must not be applied to soils unless the soil has dried adequately from
previous applications or rainfall so that ponding does not occur.
G. Septage shall not be applied by spray irrigation or other methods that will cause
aerosols to drift from the application site.
9.05 SOIL SUITABILITY. For the land application site to be suitable it must meet the
following requirements:
A. Have medium or fine surface textures with a surface permeability slower than
twelve inches per hour (five minutes per inch). Land application shall not be
done on sand or peat surface textures.
B. Have a three-foot separation to the water table or bedrock.
1-4-24 Resolution 2010-015, Adopted January 26, 2010/Effective February 3, 2010
C. Have six inches of available water holding capacity between the application depth
and the water table or bedrock.
D. Must be free from flooding hazards.
E. Have at least one horizon in the upper five feet that has a permeability of less than
six inches per hour (ten minutes per inch).
F. Must comply with Minn. Rules part 7041.1800 for pathogen reduction and vector
control.
9.06 SETBACK REQUIREMENTS. The following separation distances (in feet) shall be
met when land applying domestic septage:
Surface Applied Injected/Incorporated
Occupied Building 300 150
Residential Area 600 300
Recreational Area 600 300
Commercial Development 600 300
Recreational Trail 200 100
Municipal Well 1000 1000
Private Well 200 200
Property Line 25 25
Road Right-of-Way 50 25
Surface Water, drainage tile surface inlet, or sinkhole setback distances are as follows:
Percent
Slope
May to
October
November to April
Injected Surface applied Incorporated within 6 hours Surface Applied
Incorporated within 6 hours
0-2 150 300 600
2-6 300 600 not allowed
6-12 300 not allowed not allowed
SLOPE RESTRICTIONS:
Incorporated Surface Applied
Unfrozen soil 12% or less 6% or less
Frozen soil not allowed 2% or less
9.07 ANNUAL REPORTING. When septage is applied to the soil, the licensee shall submit
to the Department the following information:
A. The location of each site that septage is applied. This information shall include
the Parcel Number, the Township, Range, and Section numbers and the name and
address of the property owner(s).
B. The total volume of septage that was land applied to each land application site.
1-4-25 Resolution 2010-015, Adopted January 26, 2010/Effective February 3, 2010
C. An annual report shall not be required for one time only application sites.
D. The annual report must be submitted by January 31 of each year for the previous
year.
10.00 ABANDONMENT OF AN SSTS.
A. All tanks must be abandoned in accordance with Minn. Rules part 7080.2500.
B. A maintenance permit is required whenever a tank is abandoned.
11.00 VARIANCES.
A variance from the provisions of this Ordinance may be applied for according to the
provisions of section 6.00 of the Scott County Administrative Procedures Ordinance No.
13 as adopted herein. The County Board of Adjustment may grant variances from the
provisions of this Ordinance upon such conditions as it may prescribe, consistent with the
general purpose and intent of this Ordinance, the standards as adopted herein and
according to the provisions of section 6.00 of the Scott County Administrative
Procedures Ordinance No. 13.
12.00 LIABILITY.
The Inspector charged with the enforcement of this Ordinance, acting in good faith and
without malice in the discharge of their duties, shall not thereby render themselves
personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any
act or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of their duties. Any suit brought
against the Inspector because of such act or omission performed by them in the
enforcement of any provision of this Ordinance, shall be defended by this jurisdiction
until final termination of such proceedings, and any judgment resulting there from shall
be assumed by this jurisdiction. This Ordinance shall not be construed to relieve from or
lessen the responsibility of any person owning or controlling any parcel of property for
any damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall the Inspector or its
parent jurisdiction be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspections
authorized by this Ordinance or any certificates of inspection issued under this
Ordinance.
13.00 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
13.01 MISDEMEANOR. Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this
Ordinance may be charged with a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished thereof as provided by law. Any person who violates, omits, neglects or refuses
1-4-26 Resolution 2010-015, Adopted January 26, 2010/Effective February 3, 2010
to comply with the provisions or the enforcement of this Ordinance, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation of any provision of this Ordinance occurs or continues.
13.02 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF. In the event of a violation of this Ordinance, the County may
institute appropriate actions or proceedings, including requesting injunctive relief to
prevent, restrain, correct or abate such violations.
13.03 CIVIL ACTION OR COST AS SPECIAL TAX. If a person fails to comply with the
provisions of this Ordinance, the County may recover the cost incurred for corrective
action in a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
13.04 NOTICE ON PROPERTY TITLE. The County may, after giving the property owner
of record 30 days’ written notification by mailing said notice to the property owner at
their last known address on file for that parcel with the Scott County Land Records’
Office, file a notice of non-compliance of the SSTS on the property title for any property
served by a non-complying SSTS in addition to or in lieu of other remedies intended to
achieve compliance. The property owner shall be responsible for any fees established by
the County Board of Commissioners for posting, removing said notice and any
established administrative fees for that purpose.
14.00 EFFECTIVE DATE.
The standards, procedures and provisions adopted herein shall be effective immediately
upon the publication of the minutes of these proceedings in the official newspaper of the
County, unless otherwise noted.
15.00 SEVERABILITY.
It is hereby declared to be the intention that the several provisions of this Ordinance are
severable in accordance with the following: If any court of competent jurisdiction shall
adjudge any provision of this Ordinance to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any
other provisions of this Ordinance not specifically included in said judgment.
16.00 AMENDMENTS.
The procedure for amending this Ordinance is the same as prescribed by law for its
adoption.
Adopted by the Scott County Board of Commissioners this 26th day of January, 2010.
1-8-1
Mobile Home Ordinance 6
CHAPTER 1
TITLE 8
(Cite as e.g.)
(Scott County Mobile Home Ordinance No. 6 Section: )
Administered by
Planning, Inspections and Environmental Health
SCOTT COUNTY MOBILE HOME ORDINANCE No. 6

5-1-1 - SHORT TITLE
5-1-2 - ADMINISTRATION
5-1-3 - DEFINITIONS
5-1-4 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
5-1-5 - SITE REQUIREMENTS
5-1-6 - STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS
5-1-7 - PLAN REQUIREMENTS
5-1-8 - VIOLATION AND PENALTY
	

	
This Chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the Scott County Mobile Home
Ordinance, except as referred to herein, where it shall be known as this Chapter.
	
	
The provisions of this Chapter shall be administered by the Scott County Planning and
Zoning Commission, after which the Commission shall submit their recommendations to
the Scott County Board of Commissioners which shall have the final power to approve or
disapprove the application.
	 	
MOBILE HOME Any type of structure or vehicle which provides facilities for person(s) to
sleep and/or eat, which is mounted on wheels or has provisions for
1-8-2
wheels, such as a house trailer, converted bus or truck, or small structure.
MOBILE HOME COURT Ten (10) or more spaces for mobile homes in an area designated for such
use. The term, mobile home court, shall include the terms trailer park,
trailer court, and mobile home park.
STRUCTURE Any structure or building which is built for the support, shelter or enclosure
of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind which is
affixed to the land.
	 
	
A. Prohibited Mobile Homes: Mobile homes shall be prohibited that:
1. Do not conform to the requirements of the Mobile Home Building Code of the
State of Minnesota.
2. Are in an unsanitary condition of having an exterior in bad repair.
3. Are structurally unsound and do not protect the inhabitants against all elements.
B. Desired Objective: Excellence of design, development, and maintenance is the
desired objective.
C. Lot Area Requirements:
1. Approved mobile home parks shall contain at least ten (10) fully developed
coach sites.
2. All mobile home courts shall have at least ten percent (10%) of land areas
developed for recreational use (tennis courts, children’s play equipment,
swimming pool, golf greens, etc.) developed and maintained at the
owner/operator’s expense.
3. All land areas shall be property maintained; adequately drained; free from dust;
clean and free from refuse, garbage, rubbish, or debris.
4. A compact hedge, fence, or landscaped area shall be installed around each
mobile home park and be maintained in first class condition at all times as
approved.
5. The corners of each trailer shall be clearly marked and each site shall be
numbered.
6. All mobile home parks must have an area or areas set-aside for storage.
D. Conditional and Special Uses:
1. The requirements of a conditional use permit shall prevail over any and all other
requirements, standards, or conditions.
1-8-3
2. A conditional or special use permit for a mobile home park shall be reviewed
once each year and revoked if development and maintenance is not in full
compliance thereof.
E. Signs and Advertising:
1. Advertising shall be limited to one name plate not to exceed twenty five (25)
square feet, with lighting, height and location as approved by the County Board
and have a fifteen foot (15’) setback from the front lot line.
2. No public address or loud speaker system shall be permitted.
F. Mobile Home Park Office, Map:
1. Each trailer park shall have an office for the use of the operator distinctly marked
"OFFICE" and such marking shall be illuminated during all hours of darkness.
An adult caretaker must be on duty in or about the trailer park at all times.
2. A map of the trailer park shall be displayed at the trailer park office and be
illuminated during all hours of darkness.
G. Register Maintained: The operator of every trailer park shall maintain a registry in the
office of the trailer park showing:
1. The name and address of each guest or permanent resident.
2. The make, type and license number of each trailer and automobile.
H. Lights and Utilities:
1. The trailer park grounds shall be lighted as approved by the Zoning Coordinator
from sunset to sunrise.
2. All utility installation to site and individual trailer sites shall be as approved by the
County Engineer.
3. All utilities shall be underground; there shall be no overhead wires or supporting
poles except those essential for street or other lighting purposes.
4. The proposed method of garbage, waste, and trash disposal must be as
approved by the County Planning and Zoning Coordinator.
5. Fire hydrants should be located with three hundred feet (300’) of any unit.
I. Animals: Dogs and animals shall not be permitted to run at large within the trailer
park.
J. Roads and Accessways:
1-8-4
1. Each mobile home park shall maintain a paved off-street parking lot for guests of
occupants in the amount of one space for each three (3) coach sites and located
within three hundred feet (300’) of the unit to be served.
2. Roadways (public or private) shall be paved as approved by the County.
3. All roads shall have a concrete (mountable, roll type) curb and gutter.
4. Rights-of-way shall be no less than sixty feet (60’) in width.
5. There shall be a concrete sidewalk along both sides of all roads.
6. Access drives off roads to all parking spaces and coach sites shall be paved.
7. All streets shall be developed as approved by the County Engineer.
8. Street trees as approved shall be planted at intervals of one per trailer unit.
9. Access to mobile home parks shall be as approved by the County Engineer.
K. Sales Prohibited: No sales shall be carried on the premises.
L. Nonconforming Uses: Any lawful nonconforming use of land existing at the date of
enactment of this County shall be governed by the provisions of the nonconforming
use section of this Chapter.
M. Additional Requirements: The Planning and Zoning Advisory Commission may
require additional information as it deems necessary to insure the health, welfare
and safety of the tenants, developer and court.
	 
	
A. Each trailer site shall contain at least five thousand (5,000) square feet of land area for
the use of the occupant:
Width: No less than fifty feet (50’)
Depth: No less than one hundred feet (100’)
B. The area occupied by a trailer shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total area of
a trailer site; land may be occupied by a trailer, a vehicle, a building, a cabana, a
ramada, a carport, an awning, storage closet or cupboard, or any structure;
unoccupied land shall be landscaped, nontrailer sites shall be landscaped in
accordance with approved plans.
C. Each trailer site shall have a three hundred (300) square foot paved off-street parking
space for an automobile. The yards shall be landscaped except for necessary
driveway and sidewalk needs which shall not exceed one-half (1/2) of the width of the
site. Storage should not be allowed on lawn area.
1-8-5
D. Each trailer site shall have the following features.
1. Frontage on an approved roadway.
2. A sidewalk along the entire frontage with a sidewalk connecting from the trailer
entrance to the frontage sidewalk. Sidewalks shall be concrete.
3. Each site shall be property landscaped with at least one tree, hedges, grass,
fences, windbreaks, and the like.
4. No coach shall be parked closer than five feet (5’) to the side lot lines nor closer
than twenty feet (20’) to the front lot line, or within twenty five feet (25’) of the rear
lot line.
5. There shall be an open space of at least ten feet (10’) between the sides of the
adjacent trailer coaches.
6. Automobiles may park no closer than five feet (5’) to the side of any trailer coach;
automobiles shall not however, be parked nearer than five feet (5’) to any side lot
line.
7. Trailer sites with frontage to public streets shall conform to all setback and other
requirements of the zoning district in which said site is located.
E. The source of fuel for cooking, heating, or other purposes at each trailer site shall be
as approved by the County Planning and Zoning Commission.
F. All trailers must be connected to the public water and sanitary sewer systems. Plans
for disposal of surface storm water must be approved by the County Engineer and
appropriate State agencies.
G. No trailer coach, off-street parking space, or building shall be located within twenty
feet (20’) of the exterior boundary of any mobile home park.
H. No tents shall be erected or occupied, and there shall be no outdoor camping
anywhere in the trailer park.
I. Laundry or clothes shall be hung to dry on lines located in approved areas established
and maintained exclusively for that purpose.
	 
	
A. Every structure shall be developed and maintained in a safe, approved, and
substantial manner. The exterior of such structures shall be kept in good repair and
shall be repainted or refinished when directed by the County.
B. Periodic inspection by health, police, building inspector and other public personnel,
shall be required.
C. No obstruction shall be permitted that impedes the inspection of plumbing, electrical
1-8-6
facilities, and related trailer equipment. The area beneath a trailer coach shall be
enclosed except that such enclosure must be openable for inspection.
D. No persons shall erect, place, construct, reconstruct, relocate, alter, maintain, use or
occupy a cabana or structure in a trailer park without the written consent of the owner
or operator of the trailer park, and shall require a building permit.
E. No building, cabana, ramada, carport, awning, storage closet, cupboard or other
structure shall be permitted on a transient trailer site except plumbing and electrical
service connections.
	 
	
A. Five (5) copies of a plot plan drawn to scale and showing:
1. Location and size of trailer park.
2. Location and size of all trailer sites, storage areas, recreation areas, laundry
drying area, roadways, parking sites, and all setback dimensions (parking
spaces, exact trailer sites, etc.).
3. Detailed landscaping plans and specifications with time limit based on
occupancy.
4. Location and width of sidewalks.
5. Plans for sanitary sewage disposal, surface drainage, water systems, electrical
service, and gas service.
6. Location, size and character of each cabana and cabana site.
7. Location and size of all streets abutting the trailer park and all driveways from
such streets to the trailer park shall be passable to emergency vehicles at all
times.
8. Road construction plans and specifications.
9. Plans for any and all structures.
B. Such other information as required or implied by these mobile home park standards or
requested by public officials.
1. Name and address of developer.
2. Description of the method of disposing of garbage and refuse.
3. Detailed description of maintenance procedures and ground supervision.
4. Description of construction plans (i.e., time involved, cost estimates, stage
development, and so on).
1-8-7
	 

 	
Any person who violates or refuses to comply with any provision or provisions of this
Chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not more than three hundred
dollars($300.00) for every offense or imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days. Each
day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 6, 10-29-
71)
THE SCOTT COUNTY LAND
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE NO. 7
Adopted by the Scott County Board May 23, 2001, Effective May 23, 2001
Comprehensive Revision Adopted by Scott County Board May 24, 2011
AN ORDINANCE AUTHORIZING THE ADOPTION OF PROCEDURES FOR
SUBDIVISION AND PLATTING OF LAND, PROVIDING FOR THE ORDERLY,
ECONOMIC AND SAFE DEVELOPMENT OF LAND, AND PROVIDING FACILITIES TO
PROMOTE THE PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY AND WELFARE OF THE
UNINCORPORATED AREA OF SCOTT COUNTY.
Any amendments to the Subdivision Ordinance
will be posted on Scott County web site at
www.co.scott.mn.us
AMENDMENTS
Amended by the Scott County Board – June 3, 2014
Amend Chapter 6 – Administrative Subdivision, Section 6-5 Recording
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 Amendments
SCOTT COUNTY
LAND SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE NO. 7
Table of Contents
Chapter 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
1-1 Title.......................................................................................................................1.1
1-2 Purpose..................................................................................................................1.1
1-3 Jurisdiction............................................................................................................1.2
1-4 Platting Authority..................................................................................................1.2
1-5 Policy ....................................................................................................................1.2
1-6 Application of Rules .............................................................................................1.3
1-7 Definitions.............................................................................................................1.3
1-8 Restrictions on Recording and Building Permits................................................1.12
1-9 Compliance with Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Ordinance and Official Map ...1.13
1-10 Fees .....................................................................................................................1.13
Chapter 2: GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
2-1 Platting Required ..................................................................................................2.1
2-2 Build Out Plan (Ghost Plat) ..................................................................................2.1
2-3 Board of Adjustment/Variances............................................................................2.2
2-4 Premature Subdivisions ........................................................................................2.5
Chapter 3: SKETCH PLAN
3-1 Information Required for Sketch Plan ..................................................................3.1
3-2 Filing and Review of Application.........................................................................3.2
3-3 Determination of Requirement for Environmental Review Documents...............3.2
Chapter 4: PRELIMINARY PLAT
4-1 Information Required for Preliminary Plat ...........................................................4.1
4-2 Filing and Review of Application.........................................................................4.5
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 TC.1 Table of Contents
Chapter 5: FINAL PLAT
5-1 Filing and Requirements for Application .............................................................5.1
5-2 Review, Approval, or Denial ................................................................................5.2
5-3 Form and Content .................................................................................................5.2
5-4 Recording..............................................................................................................5.2
5-5 Security/Fees.........................................................................................................5.3
5-6 Partial Approval - Extension of Preliminary Plat Approval .................................5.3
5-7 Record Plans .........................................................................................................5.3
Chapter 6: ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISION
6-1 Application of Provisions .....................................................................................6.1
6-2 Administrative Subdivisions.................................................................................6.1
6-3 Filing and Review and Application ......................................................................6.1
6-4 Procedure ..............................................................................................................6.3
6-5 Recording..............................................................................................................6.3
Chapter 7: DESIGN STANDARDS
7-1 Conformity with the Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Ordinance.......................7.1
7-2 Land Requirements ...............................................................................................7.1
7-3 Lots .......................................................................................................................7.1
7-4 Street Interconnectivity.........................................................................................7.2
7-5 Street Design and Right-of-Way Standards..........................................................7.5
7-6 Easements .............................................................................................................7.6
7-7 Storm Water Management and Erosion & Sediment Control ..............................7.6
7-8 Public Utilities ......................................................................................................7.6
7-9 Access to Local, Collector and Arterial Roadways…………………………… 7.6
Chapter 8: PUBLIC LAND DEDICATION
8-1 Statement of Finding and Public Purpose.............................................................8.1
8-2 Dedication of Land for Park, Trail or Open Space ...............................................8.1
8-3 Payment in Lieu of Dedication of Park, Trail or Open Space Land.....................8.2
Chapter 9: TREE PRESERVATION
9-1 Purpose..................................................................................................................9.1
9-2 Scope of Application.............................................................................................9.1
9-3 Tree Preservation Standards .................................................................................9.2
9-4 Review Process .....................................................................................................9.3
9-5 Financial Guarantee ..............................................................................................9.3
9-6 Removal of Diseased Trees Required...................................................................9.3
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 TC.2 Table of Contents
9-7 Compliance with Plan...........................................................................................9.3
9-8 Mitigation..............................................................................................................9.3
Chapter 10: IMPROVEMENTS
10-1 Responsibility .....................................................................................................10.1
10-2 Standards and Requirements...............................................................................10.1
10-3 Subdivision Monuments .....................................................................................10.1
10-4 Street Improvements ...........................................................................................10.2
10-5 Sanitary Sewer and Water Distribution Improvements ......................................10.3
10-6 Storm Water Improvement Planning Charge......................................................10.4
10-7 Developer’s Agreement ......................................................................................10.4
10-8 Construction Plans ..............................................................................................10.5
10-9 Inspection............................................................................................................10.5
10-10 Completion of Improvements .............................................................................10.5
10-11 Maintenance of Improvements ...........................................................................10.6
10-12 Deferral or Waiver of Required Improvements ..................................................10.6
Chapter 11: FINANCIAL GUARANTEE
11-1 Escrow Deposit ...................................................................................................11.1
11-2 Letter of Credit....................................................................................................11.1
Chapter 12: ENFORCEMENT
12-1 Violations............................................................................................................12.1
12-2 Penalties ..............................................................................................................12.1
12-3 Application to County Personnel ........................................................................12.1
12-4 Injunction ............................................................................................................12.1
Chapter 13: SEVERABILITY, SUPREMACY AND EFFECTIVE DATE
13-1 Severability .........................................................................................................13.1
13-2 Supremacy...........................................................................................................13.1
Chapter 14: EFFECTIVE DATE..........................................................................................14.1
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 TC.3 Table of Contents
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
1-1 TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known as the Scott County Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7, and will
be referred to herein as the Ordinance.
1-2 PURPOSE
This Ordinance is adopted for the following purposes:
1. To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of the
County.
2. To preserve land in tracts large enough for viable agricultural operations and
future urban uses as identified in the Comprehensive Plan.
3. To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the County, the value of
buildings and improvements upon the land, and to minimize the conflicts among
the uses of land and buildings.
4. To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land and buildings
and the circulation of traffic throughout the County.
5. To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions and
resubdivisions, in order to further the orderly layout and use of land and to ensure
proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided land.
6. To prevent the pollution of air, streams, and lakes; to ensure the adequacy of
drainage facilities; to protect underground water resources and to encourage the
wise use and management of natural resources in order to preserve the integrity,
stability, and beauty of the County.
7. To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the County and to ensure
appropriate development with regard to these natural features.
8. To provide for open spaces through the most efficient design and layout of the
land while preserving the density of land as established in the Zoning Ordinance.
9. Promote cooperation between the County and Townships in the administration of
this Ordinance.
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 1.1 General Provisions
10. Require new subdivisions to provide financial support for infrastructure
improvements that are necessary to support new growth.
1-3 JURISDICTIONS
The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to all lands within the unincorporated areas of Scott
County.
1-4 PLATTING AUTHORITY
The County Board shall serve as the platting authority of the unincorporated areas of the County
in accordance with Minnesota Statute Chapters 394, 473 and 505, as may be amended. No plat
or replat shall be filed or accepted for filing by the Office of the County Recorder unless adopted
by the affirmative vote of the majority of the members of the County Board approving such plat
or replat.
1-5 POLICY
1. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the County to consider the subdivision of
land and the subsequent development of the plat as subject to the control of the
County pursuant to the Scott County Comprehensive Plan for the orderly,
planned, efficient and economical development of the County.
2. Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used safely for
building purposes without danger to health from fire, flood, or other menace.
Land shall not be subdivided unless proper provisions have been made for
drainage, stormwater management, wetland protection, potable water, domestic
waste water, streets, and capital improvements such as schools, parks, recreation
facilities, transportation facilities, stormwater improvements, and any other
necessary improvements.
3. Each lot created under the provisions of this Ordinance must be suitable in its
natural state for the proposed use with minimal alteration. Suitability analysis
shall consider susceptibility to flooding, existence of wetlands, soil and rock
formations with severe limitations for development, severe erosion potential,
steep topography, inadequate water supply or sewage treatment capabilities,
important fish and wildlife habitat, presence of significant historic sites, or any
other feature of the natural land likely to be harmful to the health, safety, or
welfare of future residents of the proposed subdivision or of the County.
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 1.2 General Provisions
4. The existing and proposed public improvements shall conform to and be properly
related to the Comprehensive Plan, Detailed Area Plan, applicable highway
corridor plans, Township Transportation Map, and the Capital Improvement Plan
of the County or Township. It is intended that these regulations shall supplement
and facilitate the enforcement of the provisions and standards contained in the
Building Code, Zoning Ordinance, the Comprehensive Plan, Township
Transportation Map, and Capital Improvement Plan.
1-6 APPLICATION OF RULES
The language contained in this Ordinance shall be interpreted in accordance with the following
rules of construction as applicable:
1. The singular includes the plural and the plural the singular.
2. The present includes the past and future tenses, and the future tense includes the
present tense.
3. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders.
4. Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in this Ordinance, its
meaning shall be construed as set forth in such definition.
5. In the event of conflicting provisions, the more restrictive shall apply.
6. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be
held to be the minimum requirement for the promotion of health, safety, and
welfare.
1-7 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Ordinance the following definitions have the meaning given them solely
for the purposes of implementation of this Ordinance:
Alley - A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of access to abutting
property.
Applicant – The owner, their agent or person having legal control, ownership and/or
interest in land for which the provisions of this Ordinance are being considered or
reviewed.
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 1.3 General Provisions
Best Management Practices (BMPs) –Best management practices as described in current
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency’s manual and other sources as approved by the
County.
Block - An area of land within a subdivision which is entirely bounded by streets or by a
combination of streets, railroad right-of-way, or public parks, the exterior boundary or
boundaries of the subdivision, or the shoreline of the above with a lake, stream, or river.
Bluff - A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff, or embankment having the following
characteristics (an area with an average slope of less than eighteen (18) percent over a
distance for fifty (50) feet or more shall not be considered part of the bluff):
1. The slope rises at least twenty five (25) feet.
2. The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to the top of the bluff averages
thirty (30) percent or greater.
Bluff Impact Zone - A bluff and land located within twenty (20) feet from the top of a
bluff.
Bluff, Toe – The lower point of a fifty (50) foot segment with an average slope exceeding
eighteen (18) percent.
Bluff, Top – The higher point of a fifty (50) foot segment with an average slope
exceeding eighteen (18) percent.
Boulevard - That portion of the street right-of-way between the curb line or edge of
pavement and the property line.
Buffer Yard – A strip of land utilized to screen or partially screen a use or property from
another use or property or to shield or mitigate noise, lights, or other impacts.
Build Out Plan (Ghost Plat) – A subdivision or resubdivision concept plan illustrating
possible future lot layout, street networks, and utility systems for oversized lots, outlots,
or undeveloped land within or adjoining a preliminary plat.
Buildable Land – Non-hydric land having a size and configuration capable of supporting
principal and accessory buildings, with an approved domestic waste water treatment
system and potable water system.
Building - Any structure having a roof which may provide shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals or property of any kind. When any portion thereof is completely
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 1.4 General Provisions
separated from every other part thereof by area separation, each portion of such building
shall be deemed as a separate building.
Building Line - A line parallel to the street right-of-way line, and ordinary high water
level, if applicable, at its closest point to any story level of a building and representing the
minimum distance which all or part of the building is set back from said right-of-way
line, or ordinary high water level.
Caliper – The diameter of replacement trees measured at a height of one (1) foot above
the ground level.
Capital Improvement Plan - An itemized program setting forth the schedule and details of
specific contemplated public improvements by fiscal year, together with their estimated
cost, the justification for each improvement, the impact that such improvements will have
on the current operating expense of the government, and such other information on
capital improvements as may be pertinent.
Certificate of Survey – A land survey prepared by a land surveyor registered in the State
of Minnesota with a certification that the information on the land survey is accurate.
Cluster Development - The development pattern and technique whereby structures are
arranged in closely related groups to make the most efficient use of the natural amenities
of the land.
Common Open Space - Any open space including parks, nature areas, playgrounds, trails
and recreational buildings and structures, which is intended for use by, and is an integral
part of, a development and is not owned on an individual basis by each owner of a
dwelling unit.
Community Water and Sewer Systems - Utility systems serving more than one building
or lot.
Comprehensive Plan - The Scott County Comprehensive Plan, as adopted and amended
by the County Board.
Conveyance System – Any path, including but not limited to, ditches, streams, overland
flow channels, and storm sewer systems, traveled by water as it passes through the
watershed.
Conveyor, Lateral – Any system that provides drainage for local areas that do not have
natural or artificial water storage or retention areas or natural channels. “Lateral
conveyors” outlet into natural or artificial water storage or retention areas or outlet
directly into “outflow conveyors.”
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 1.5 General Provisions
Conveyor, Outflow – Any system, including but not limited to, streams and other natural
channels, that forms the outlet for a natural or artificial water storage or retention area of
any landlocked depression where the accumulated runoff from extreme storm events
would pose risk of injury or property damage.
County Board - The Scott County Board of Commissioners.
Critical Root Zone (CRZ) – An imaginary circle surrounding the tree trunk with a radius
distance of one (1) foot per one (1) inch of tree diameter, e.g., a twenty (20) inch
diameter tree has a CRZ with a radius of twenty (20) feet.
Cul-de-sac - (See Street).
Developer - A person who submits an application for the purpose of land subdivision as
defined herein. The developer may be the owner or authorized agent of the owner of the
land to be subdivided.
Diameter – The diameter of a tree measured at diameter breast height (four and one-half
(4.5) feet from the uphill side of the existing ground level).
Drip Line – The farthest distance away from the trunk that rain or dew will fall directly to
the ground from the leaves or branches of the tree.
Easement - The right to use the land of another owner for a specified use. An easement
may be granted for the purpose of constructing and maintaining walkways, roadways,
individual sewage treatment systems, utilities, drainage, driveway, or other uses.
Engineer - The Township and/or County Engineer or an engineer employed by the
Township and/or County.
Escrow - The deposition of funds in an account maintained by the governmental unit
specifically for the purpose of ensuring fulfillment of certain obligations pursuant to this
Ordinance.
Filter Strip – A linear strip of land along a lake, wetland, river, creek, or stormwater
ponding area where vegetation is established and maintain as a means to slow the
velocity of stormwater drainage and to filter sediment and pollutants from the
stormwater.
Financial Guarantee – A financial security consistent with Chapter 11 of this Ordinance,
posted with the Township and/or County with the approval of a final plat, guaranteeing
compliance with the approved final plat, construction plans, and conditions of approval
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 1.6 General Provisions
set forth by the Township and/or County.
Floodplain Related:
1. Equal Degree of Encroachment - A method of determining the location of
floodway boundaries so that flood plain lands on both sides of a stream are
capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.
2. Flood - A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the stage of a
wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry areas.
3. Flood Frequency - The frequency for which it is expected that a specific flood
stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
4. Flood Fringe - That portion of the flood plain outside of the floodway. Flood
fringe is synonymous with the term "floodway fringe" used in the Flood Insurance
Study for Scott County.
5. Floodplain - The beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or
watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood.
6. Flood-Proofing - A combination of structural provisions, changes, or adjustments to
properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the reduction or
elimination of flood damages.
7 Floodway - The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and
those portions of the adjoining flood plain which are reasonably required to carry
or store the regional flood discharge.
8. Obstruction - Any dam, wall, wharf, dock, pier, embankment, levee, dike, pile,
abutment, projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building, wire,
fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across, or projecting
into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory floodplain which may impede, retard,
or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or
collecting debris carried by such water.
9. Reach - A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a
stream or river influenced by a natural or man-made obstruction. In an urban
area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive bridge crossings
would most typically constitute a reach.
10. Regional Flood - A flood which is representative of large floods known to have
occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can be
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 1.7 General Provisions
expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year
recurrence interval. Regional flood is synonymous with the term "base flood"
used in the Flood Insurance Study.
11. Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation - The Regulatory Flood Protection
Elevation shall be an elevation no lower than one (1) foot above the elevation of
the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by encroachments
on the flood plain that result from designation of a floodway.
Forester – A person holding a bachelor’s degree in forestry from an accredited four (4)
year college of forestry.
Frontage - That boundary of a lot which abuts a publicly maintained road.
Grade, Percentage of - The rise or fall of a street in feet and tenths of a foot for each one
hundred (100) feet of horizontal distance measured at the center line of the street.
Hydric Soil – For the purposes of this Ordinance, hydric soils shall include:
1. Hydric soils as shown on the Scott County Geographic Information System (GIS);
or
2. Land inside of the 100 year floodplain area, as determined by the County, using
two (2) foot contour surveys of relevant areas; or
3. A field delineation of the hydric soils by a Registered Soil Scientist following the
criteria found in the United States Army Corps of Engineers Wetland Delineation
Manual (1987 Manual) or the Natural Resource Conservation Service publication
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils in the United States.
Improved, Lot - Any building, structure, or other object, or improvement of the land on
which they are situated constituting a physical betterment of real property, or any part of
such betterment. Certain lot improvements may require financial guarantees under the
provisions of this Ordinance.
Improvement, Public - Any drainage facility, street, parkway, park, lot improvement or
other facility for which the local government may ultimately assume the responsibility for
maintenance and operation, or which may affect an improvement for which Township or
County responsibility is established.
Land Disturbance – Any area in which movement of earth, alteration in topography, soil
compaction, disruption of vegetation, change in soil chemistry, or any other change in the
natural character of the land occurs as a result of the site preparation, grading, building
construction or any other construction activity.
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 1.8 General Provisions
Landscape Architect – A person licensed by the State as a landscape architect.
Lot, Corner – A lot situated at the junction of, and abutting on two (2) or more
intersecting streets. On a corner lot, both streets shall be deemed front lines for the
application of this Ordinance.
Lot Depth - The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line
of a lot.
Lot Line - A property line bounding a lot except that where any portion of a lot extends
into the public right-of-way, the lot line shall be deemed to be the boundary of said public
right-of-way.
Lot, Through - A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines abutting two (2) substantially
parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot, both streets shall be
deemed front lines for the application of this Ordinance.
Lot Width - The horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured at the
building setback line, location of the principal building and, if applicable, ordinary high
water level. For corner lots, lot width shall be determined by measuring the horizontal
distance between a side lot line and the applicable opposite front lot line.
Metes and Bounds - A method of property description by means of their direction and
distance from an identifiable point of beginning.
Minimum Subdivision Design Standards - The guides, principles and specifications for
the preparation of subdivision plans indicating among other things, the minimum and
maximum dimensions of the various elements set forth in the preliminary plat.
Official Map - A map adopted in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Statute
394.361, as may be amended.
Ordinary High Water Level - The boundary of public waters and wetlands, and shall be
an elevation delineating the highest water level which has been maintained for a
sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape, commonly that point
where the natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly
terrestrial. For watercourses, the ordinary high water level is the elevation of the top of
the bank of the channel. For reservoirs and flowage, the ordinary high water level is the
operating elevation of the normal summer pool.
Outlot - A parcel of land shown on a subdivision plat as an outlot, and designated
alphanumerically, (for example - Outlot A.) Outlots are used to designate one of the
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 1.9 General Provisions
following: land that is part of the subdivision but is to be subdivided into lots and blocks
at a later date; land that is to be used for a specific purpose as designated in a developer's
agreement or other agreement between the Township or County and the developer; or for
a public purpose and for which no building permit shall be issued except for structures
allowed in Chapter 16 of the Zoning Ordinance.
Owner - Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust or any other
legal entity having proprietary interest in the land.
Plat - The drawing or map of a subdivision prepared for filing of record pursuant to
Minnesota Statute 505, as may be amended.
Plat, Final - The final map or drawing on which the developer's plan or subdivision is
presented to the County Board for approval and which, if approved, will be submitted to
the Office of the County Recorder for filing.
Plat, Preliminary - The preliminary map or drawing indicating the proposed layout of the
subdivision to be submitted to the Planning Advisory Commission and County Board for
their consideration for compliance with the Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning Ordinance,
and these regulations along with required supporting data.
Protective Covenant - A restriction of the use placed upon the property by a present or
former owner and recorded in the Office of the County Recorder. The County will not be
responsible to enforce private protective covenants.
Registered Land Survey - A survey map of registered land designed to simplify a
complicated metes and bounds description, designating the same into a tract or tracts of
Registered Land Survey Number.
Registered Land Surveyor - A land surveyor licensed and registered in the State of
Minnesota.
Resubdivision - A change in an approved or recorded subdivision plat if such change
affects any street layout on such map or area reserved for public use, or any lot line or if
it affects any map, or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations
controlling subdivisions.
Right-of-Way - A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, railroad,
road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer
main, or for another special use. The usage of the term right-of-way for land platting
purposes shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a final
plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and
not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. Right-of-way
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 1.10 General Provisions
intended for streets, water main, sanitary sewers, storm drains, or any other use involving
maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to public use by the recording of the
plat on which such right-of-way is established.
Road Right-of-Way Width - The horizontal distance between the outside edges of a road
right-of-way.
Setback - The minimum horizontal distance between a structure, individual sewage
treatment system, or other facility, and an ordinary high water level, sewage treatment
system, top of bluff, road, highway, property line, or other facility.
Shoreland - Land located within the following distances from public waters: one
thousand (1000) feet from the ordinary high water level of a lake, pond or flowage and
three hundred (300) feet from a river or stream or the landward extent of a floodplain
designated in Chapter 71 of the Scott County Zoning Ordinance No. 3 on a river or
stream, whichever is greater. The limits of shorelands may be reduced whenever the
waters involved are bounded by topographic divides which extend landward from the
waters for lesser distances and when approved by the Commissioner of the Department of
Natural Resources.
Significant Woodland – A grouping or cluster of coniferous and/or deciduous trees with
contiguous crown cover, occupying five hundred (500) or more square feet of property,
which are comprised of deciduous trees between four (4) inches and twelve (12) inches or
larger in diameter or coniferous trees between four (4) feet and twelve (12) feet or higher
in height.
Street - A right-of-way affording primary access by pedestrians and vehicles to abutting
properties, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway,
road, avenue, boulevard, court, way, trail or however otherwise designated. Private,
ingress and egress easements shall not be considered streets. The following designations
shall be used as described in the Scott County Transportation Plan:
Principal Arterial - Principal arterials consist primarily of Interstate highways and
other freeways or expressways, most of them owned and operated by Mn/DOT, with
some under the jurisdiction of counties or cities. The emphasis of principal arterials is
on mobility rather than land access. Among other functions, they connect the region
with other areas in the state and other states. Principal arterials also connect the metro
centers to major commercial concentrations. Principal Arterials provide for the
longest trips in the region and express bus service.
Minor Arterial - Highways which serve medium to short trips and provides access to
the principal arterial. They interconnect concentrations of commercial or industrial
land uses and connect cities and towns of the region to each other and to similar
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 1.11 General Provisions
places outside the region. The emphasis is on mobility rather than land access.
Collector - Streets that carry traffic from local streets to major and minor arterials,
including the principal entrance streets of a residential subdivision and streets used
for circulation between neighborhoods.
Local - Streets which are used principally for access to abutting properties, especially
residential properties.
Cul-De-Sac - A local street having one end open to traffic and the other end
permanently terminated by a vehicular turn-around.
Service or Frontage - A local street which is parallel and adjacent to a highway or an
arterial street and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from
through traffic.
Street Interconnectivity – The connecting of existing or planned streets with each other.
Street Width - The width of the improved surface of the street as measured at right angles
or radially to the centerline of the street from curb face to curb face, or on a street without
curbs from the outside edge of the improved shoulder to outside edge of improved
shoulder.
Subdivision - The creation of one or more lots under the provisions of this Ordinance.
Township Transportation Map - A detailed map developed by the Township showing
existing and proposed road corridors.
Tree – Any of the following type of trees, as each is defined herein:
1. Coniferous Tree. A woody plant which, at maturity, is at least twelve (12) feet or
more in height, having foliage on the outermost portion of the branches year
round.
2. Deciduous Tree. A woody plant which, at maturity, is at least fifteen (15) feet or
more in height, having a defined crown, and which sheds leaves annually.
3. Significant Tree. A healthy tree measuring a minimum of six (6) inches in
diameter for deciduous trees, or a minimum of twelve (12) feet in height for
coniferous trees (except Willow, Boxelder, Aspen, Silver Maple, and
Cottonwood).
4. Specimen Tree. A healthy hardwood tree measuring equal to or greater than
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 1.12 General Provisions
thirty (30) inches in diameter and/or a coniferous tree measuring fifty (50) feet or
greater in height.
Zoning Ordinance - The Scott County Zoning Ordinance No. 3, as may be amended,
regulating the use of land within the un-incorporated areas of the County.
1-8 RESTRICTIONS ON RECORDING AND BUILDING PERMITS
No subdivision shall be entitled to be recorded in the Office of the County Recorder, nor shall it
have any validity unless approved under the provisions of this Ordinance. The County shall not
issue building permits for any structure on any lot in a subdivision that has not received final
approval pursuant to this Ordinance.
1-9 COMPLIANCE WITH COMPREHENSIVE PLAN, ZONING ORDINANCE, AND
OFFICIAL MAP
No subdivision of land shall conflict with the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, Zoning
Ordinance, or Official Maps.
1-10 FEES
The fees for all applications and for all permits shall be established by the County Board by
resolution. The acceptance of all applications, issuance of permits, or recording of any plat shall
not occur until a complete application has been filed and the appropriate fees have been paid.
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 1.13 General Provisions
CHAPTER 2: GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR THE
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
2-1 PLATTING REQUIRED
1. All subdivisions of land resulting in lots less than forty (40) acres shall be
regulated by this Ordinance and shall be platted in accordance with the procedures
of Chapters 3, 4 and 5 of this Ordinance, with the exception of those subdivisions
of land specifically provided for in Chapter 6.
2. Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, regardless of whether the land has
been previously subdivided; before any contract is made for the sale of any part
thereof; and before any permit for the erection of a structure on such proposed
subdivision shall be granted; the subdividing owner or his authorized agent shall
receive final approval of such subdivision in accordance with the procedures in
Chapters 3, 4, and 5 of this Ordinance. A sign advertising the subdivision may be
erected after preliminary approval is granted, in compliance with Chapter 11 of
the Zoning Ordinance.
2-2 BUILD OUT PLAN (GHOST PLAT)
2-2-1 Application
A build out plan (ghost plat) shall be required for the following subdivision applications.
1. Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided and the subdivision plat shows one or
more lots that may be eventually resubdivided into smaller lots.
2. Cluster subdivisions or Planned Unit Development subdivisions that preserve
open space for future development.
2-2-2 Design Requirements
The build out plan (ghost plat) shall illustrate the following:
1. Lot design consistent with the long range planning for the area (Comprehensive
Plan).
2. The layout of future streets. Local streets shall be planned to provide street
connections to adjoining parcels, neighborhoods, and future development areas
Scott County General Provisions for the
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 2.1 Subdivision of Land
including outlots as a means of discouraging the reliance on Principal Arterial,
Minor Arterial and Collector roads for local trips.
3. Easement locations for utilities and storm water drainage.
4. Locations of buildings or structures on the lots to accommodate future
subdivision.
5. Additional information required for Future Development Outlots as identified in
Chapter 16 of the Zoning Ordinance.
2-2-3 Right-of-Way Dedication
The County may require easements or right-of-way dedication and/or cash escrow or other
financial guarantee in conjunction with plat approval to facilitate the future development of the
build out plan (ghost plat).
2-2-4 Procedure
The build out plan (ghost plat) will follow the Sketch Plan procedure outlined in Chapter 3 of
this Ordinance.
2-3 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT/VARIANCES
A plat or subdivision shall not be approved where a variance will subsequently be required in
order to use the lots for their intended use. But, where the Board of Adjustment finds that
extraordinary hardships or practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with these
regulations and/or the purposes of these regulations may be serviced to a greater extent by an
alternative proposal, the Board of Adjustment may approve variances from these subdivision
regulations, provided that such variances shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and
purpose of this Ordinance, the Zoning Ordinance, or the Comprehensive Plan, and further
provided the Board of Adjustment shall not approve or disapprove variances unless it shall make
findings based upon the evidence presented in each specific case that:
1. The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public safety, health, or
welfare or injurious to other property.
2. The conditions upon which the request for variance is based are unique to the
property for which the variance is sought and are not applicable generally to other
property.
Scott County General Provisions for the
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 2.2 Subdivision of Land
3. Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical
conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the owner
would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of this
Ordinance is carried out.
4. The purpose of the variance is not based exclusively upon a desire to increase the
value or income potential of the parcel.
5. The alleged hardship is caused by this Ordinance and has not been created by any
persons having an interest in the parcel and is not a self-created hardship.
6. The requested variance is the minimum action required to eliminate the hardship.
2-3-1 Procedure
1. Pre-Application Meeting. Prior to submittal of a variance application, the
property owner may submit a sketch plan and meet with the Zoning
Administration staff and Township representatives to discuss the variance
application. Through the pre-application, the Zoning Administration staff will
summarize the information requirements and issues related to the specific
variance request. A second pre-application meeting may be conducted if deemed
warranted to assist the applicant in preparing their application.
2. The property owner applying for a variance shall submit to the Zoning
Administration staff a completed variance application stating the hardship present,
and provide all other information required by the Zoning Administration staff.
The application shall be completed when the applicant has complied with the
following requirements:
a. A written and/or graphic description of the variance request including an
explanation of the reason the variance is required, the hardship involved,
why it is unique to this property, potential impact on development and
surrounding property and compliance with the Comprehensive Plan and
the Zoning Ordinance.
b. Supporting information described by the Zoning Administration staff
during the pre-application meeting and required by other sections of this
Ordinance including, but not limited to, covenants, deed restrictions, or
other legal provisions necessary to guarantee the full achievement of the
plan.
c. Applications must be accompanied by a fee established by the County
Scott County General Provisions for the
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 2.3 Subdivision of Land
Board.
3. The Zoning Administration staff, upon receipt of the application, shall notify the
applicant with fifteen (15) County business days if the application is found to be
incomplete.
4. Upon receipt of a complete application, the Zoning Administration staff shall
prepare a report and refer the application to the Scott County Board of
Adjustment and the appropriate Township Board for consideration.
5. The application shall be reviewed by the Township Board. A written
recommendation for application approval or denial from the Township Board may
be forwarded to the Zoning Administration staff. The Township
recommendations received by the Zoning Administration staff will be forwarded
to the Board of Adjustment for their consideration of the application at a public
hearing.
6. The Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing on the request. Notice of the
public hearing shall be published in the official newspaper designated by the
County Board at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. In unincorporated areas,
the property owners of record within five hundred (500) feet of the subject
property shall be notified in writing of the proposed variance. Where the subject
site adjoins an incorporated area, the County shall mail written notification of the
proposed variance to property owners within the incorporated area located within
three hundred fifty (350) feet of the subject site. Timing of the mailed notice shall
be the same as that for the published notice. The failure to give mailed notice to
individual property owners or defects in the notice shall not invalidate the
proceedings, provided a bona fide attempt to comply has been made.
7. The applicant or his representative shall appear before the Board of Adjustment in
order to answer questions concerning the proposed application.
8. The Board of Adjustment and Zoning Administration staff shall have the
authority to request additional information from the applicant concerning a
variance. Said information is to be declared necessary to establish performance
conditions in relation to all pertinent sections of this Ordinance. Failure of the
applicant to supply all necessary supportive information may be grounds for
denial of the request.
9. The Board of Adjustment shall act upon the request within the time permitted by
Minnesota Statutes 15.99 as may be amended.
Scott County General Provisions for the
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 2.4 Subdivision of Land
10. Any variance or modification granted or denied shall be recorded in the minutes
of the Board of Adjustment's record setting forth the reasons which justified the
action and filed in the Office of the County Recorder. The order issued by the
Board of Adjustment shall include the legal description of the property involved.
The Zoning Administration staff shall be responsible for the document recording
requirements of this section and shall maintain records of the variance request.
11. In approving variances, the Board of Adjustment may require such conditions as
will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements
of this Ordinance.
12. All decisions of the Board of Adjustment in granting variances shall be final,
except that any aggrieved person or persons, or any department, board or
commission of the jurisdiction or state shall have the right to appeal within thirty
(30) days, after receipt of notice of the decision, to the District Court in Scott
County on questions of law and fact.
13. A variance shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance if the variance is
not utilized. No application for a variance shall be resubmitted for a period of six
(6) months from the date of an order of denial.
14. If necessary, an extension of a variance shall be requested in writing and filed
with the Zoning Administration staff at least thirty (30) days before the expiration
date of the original variance. The request for extension shall state facts showing a
good faith attempt to utilize the variance in the allowed one (1) year. Upon
receipt of a request for variance extension, the Zoning Administration staff shall
review the request and make a decision to grant or deny the extension based on
the information submitted. At staff’s discretion, the request may be referred to
the Board of Adjustment. The applicant shall be informed of the decision within
the time permitted by State law. No extension shall be for more than one (1) year,
after which if the variance is not utilized the variance would become void.
2-4 PREMATURE SUBDIVISIONS
Any preliminary plat/final plat and/or development deemed premature pursuant to the criteria
listed below shall be denied by the County Board.
2-4-1 Condition Establishing Premature Subdivisions
A subdivision may be deemed premature should any of the provisions which follow exist:
1. Lack of Adequate Drainage. A condition of inadequate drainage shall be deemed
Scott County General Provisions for the
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 2.5 Subdivision of Land
to exist if:
a. Surface or subsurface water retention and runoff is such that it constitutes
a hazard resulting in flooding, loss of life, property damage, or other
losses.
b. The proposed subdivision will cause pollution of water bodies or damage
to other natural resources.
c. The proposed site grading and development will cause damage from
erosion, sedimentation, or slope instability.
d. The proposed subdivision fails to comply with the storm water
management requirements of Chapter 6 of the Zoning Ordinance.
e. Factors to be considered in making these determinations may include:
average rainfall for the area; area drainage patterns; the relationship of the
land to floodplains; the nature of soils and sub-soils and their ability to
adequately support surface water runoff and waste disposal systems; the
slope and stability of the land; and the presence of woodlands, wetlands,
hydric soils, water bodies, and/or other natural resources.
2. Lack of Adequate Potable Water Supply. A proposed subdivision shall be
deemed to lack an adequate potable water supply if the proposed subdivision does
not have adequate sources of water to serve the proposed subdivision if developed
to its maximum permissible density without causing an unreasonable depreciation
of existing water supplies for surrounding areas.
3. Lack of Adequate Roads or Highways to Serve the Subdivision. A proposed
subdivision shall be deemed to lack adequate roads or highways to serve the
subdivision when:
a. County or local roads which serve the proposed subdivision are of such a
width, grade, stability, vertical and horizontal alignment, site distance and
paved surface condition that an increase in traffic volume generated by the
proposed subdivision would create a hazard to public safety and general
welfare, or seriously aggravate an already hazardous condition, and when,
said roads are inadequate for the intended use.
b. The traffic generated by the proposed subdivision would create or
contribute to unsafe conditions on highways existing at the time of the
application or proposed for completion within the next two (2) years.
Scott County General Provisions for the
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 2.6 Subdivision of Land
c. The traffic generated by the proposed subdivision would negatively create
or contribute to traffic safety conditions on arterial and collector roadway
system if the proposed local road or private driveway access location is
inconsistent with i.) the County’s adopted minimum access spacing
requirements along current or future Arterials and Collectors as mapped
and identified in the County’s Transportation Plan, ii.) the access locations
identified in the County’s adopted Rural Residential Service Area
Detailed Area Plan (DAP) and corresponding future road and intersection
maps approved by the Townships, or iii.) the access locations identified in
long-range transportation corridor plans or studies.
4. Lack of Adequate Waste Disposal Systems. A proposed subdivision shall be
deemed to lack adequate waste disposal systems if in subdivisions for which
sewer lines are proposed, there is inadequate public or private sewer capacity in
the present system to support the subdivision if developed to its maximum
permissible density, or if in subdivisions where sewer lines are neither available
nor proposed, there is inadequate on-site sewer capacity potential to support the
subdivision if developed to the maximum permissible density indicated in the
Comprehensive Plan.
5. Inconsistency with Comprehensive Plan. A proposed subdivision shall be
deemed inconsistent with the Scott County Comprehensive Plan when the
subdivision is inconsistent with the purposes, objectives and/or recommendations
of the adopted Comprehensive Plan.
6. Public Service Capacity. The County, Township or School District lacks
necessary public service capacity when services such as recreational facilities,
schools, police and fire protection and other public facilities, which must be
provided at public expense, cannot reasonably be provided for within the next two
(2) years.
7. Minnesota Environmental Quality Board (MEQB) Policies. The proposed
subdivision is inconsistent with the policies of MEQB 25, as may be amended,
and could adversely impact critical environmental areas or potentially disrupt or
destroy historic areas, which are designated or officially recognized by the County
Board as being in violation of Federal and State historical preservation laws.
8. Inconsistency with Capital Improvement Plans. A proposed subdivision shall be
deemed inconsistent with capital improvement plans when improvements and/or
services necessary to accommodate the proposed subdivision have not been
programmed in the Scott County, Township or other regional Capital
Scott County General Provisions for the
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 2.7 Subdivision of Land
Improvement Plans. The County Board may waive this criteria when it can be
demonstrated that a revision to capital improvement plans can be accommodated.
2-4-2 Burden of Evidence
The burden shall be upon the applicant to show evidence that the proposed subdivision or
development is not premature.
Scott County General Provisions for the
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 2.8 Subdivision of Land
CHAPTER 3: SKETCH PLAN
Developers shall prepare, at the discretion of the Zoning Administration staff, a sketch plan
depicting a subdivision proposal. The sketch plan, and accompanying information, shall serve as
the basis for discussions between the developer, the Zoning Administration staff, the Town
Board representatives, and is intended to provide the developer with an advisory review of the
subdivision without incurring major costs.
3-1 INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR SKETCH PLAN
1. Sketch Plan Information. Prior to the formulation of a preliminary plat,
applicants may present a sketch plan to the Zoning Administration staff prior to
filing of a formal application. The sketch plan will include the following
information:
a. Name and address of developer/owner.
b. Date of plan preparation.
c. Scale of plan (engineering scale only).
d. North arrow indication.
e. Legal description.
f. Property location map illustrating the site location relative to adjoining
properties and streets.
g. Scaled drawing (engineering scale only) illustrating property boundaries
using Scott County’s GIS data base.
h. Scaled drawing of the proposed subdivision sketch plan including street
patterns and lot layout related to the natural features of the site, and
adjoining properties.
i. Densities based on underlying zoning district.
j. Natural Features. A generalized drawing of natural features showing
wetlands, lakes, drainage ways, woodland areas, and hydric soils.
k. Any required zoning changes.
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 3.1 Sketch Plan
l. Proposed timing and staging of development.
m. Proof of ownership or legal interest in the property in order to make
application.
n. Additional information as required by the Zoning Administration staff.
3-2 FILING AND REVIEW OF APPLICATION
3-2-1 Procedure
1. An application for sketch plan along with the associated information and fee
established by the County Board shall be submitted to the Zoning Administration
staff
2. The Zoning Administration staff shall submit copies of the sketch plan and
associated information to other staff, committees, consultants, or agencies as
appropriate.
3. Development Review Team (DRT) Meeting. The sketch plan shall be presented
to the Zoning Administration staff, other relevant agencies and departments, and
Township representatives to discuss the proposed subdivision. Through this
meeting, the Zoning Administration staff will summarize the information
requirements and issues related to the specific subdivision request.
4. The Zoning Administration staff shall advise the developer as to the conformance
of the subdivision with the Comprehensive Plan, the Subdivision Ordinance,
Zoning Ordinance, Township Transportation Map, and other applicable official
controls.
5. If the developer decides to proceed with the subdivision as proposed or revised,
he may proceed with the preparation of the preliminary plat as provided in
Chapter 4.
3-3 DETERMINATION OF REQUIREMENT FOR ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW
DOCUMENTS
County staff shall review the sketch plan and determine if an Environmental Assessment
Worksheet (EAW) or Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) is required pursuant to Minnesota
Rules. Additional sketch information may be needed to help determine if an EAW or EIS is
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 3.2 Sketch Plan
required. If an EAW or EIS is required, the benefits of an Alternative Urban Area-wide Review
(AUAR) may be considered and recommended in lieu of an EAW or EIS. The Zoning
Administrator shall notify the developer of the requirement.
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 3.3 Sketch Plan
CHAPTER 4: PRELIMINARY PLAT
4-1 INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR PRELIMINARY PLAT
After the completion of the sketch plan process, if requested, the owner or developer shall file
with the Zoning Administration staff an application for preliminary plat approval. The
preliminary plat stage is the point in the process that all information pertinent to the proposed
development is furnished by the developer for review by County staff, the Town Board, the
Planning Advisory Commission, the County Board, any other applicable agencies, and the
public. The information provides a basis for approval or denial of the application. The
information submitted in the application shall address both existing conditions and changes that
will occur during and after development. The preliminary plat is a plan of how property will be
subdivided and developed.
Additional information or modifications may be required by County staff, Town Board, the
Planning Advisory Commission or County Board and additional information may be requested
during the review process. In certain cases some information required by these standards may
not be appropriate or may need to be modified in order to provide an adequate basis for making a
decision.
Preliminary plat information is typically furnished on maps, however, some information is more
appropriately submitted in other forms. The plat, and associated information, shall be submitted
in a form that is legible, organized and understandable. The preliminary plat application shall
consist of maps and accompanying documents.
The applicant shall comply with all requirements of Chapter 6: Storm Water Management,
Erosion Control, and Wetlands of the Zoning Ordinance.
The detail of information required for a one lot plat shall be determined by the Zoning
Administration staff.
4-1-1 General Information
1. The proposed name of the plat.
2. Date of application, name, address, phone number and applicable license number
of the owner, developer, agent, applicant, engineer, surveyor, planner, attorney or
other principle involved in the development of the plat.
3. Proof of ownership or legal interest in the property in order to make application.
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 4.1 Preliminary Plat
4. Township, school district, watershed management organization, or other special
district in which the proposed plat is located.
5. Existing zoning or any zoning changes needed, or reference to any zoning or
similar land use actions that have already occurred that are pertinent to the
proposed development.
6. Total acreage of the land to be subdivided.
7. Boundary line survey and legal description. Identify any property within the
subdivision that is registered (Torrens).
8. Eight (8) folded paper copies of the preliminary plat and supporting documents,
plus any additional copies deemed necessary by the Zoning Administration staff,
plus one (1) reproducible copy reduced to 11" x 17”. One (1) copy of preliminary
plat and all related engineering plans in a digital format (PDF and DXF or GIS
Shapefile file in County coordinates) compatible with County DXF requirements.
Supporting plat documentation (wetland delineation reports, resource
management plan, soils information, septic information, etc.) shall also be
submitted in digital format (PDF or Microsoft Word.
9. North arrow and scale of one to two hundred (1/200) to one to fifty (1/50)
depending upon the size of the plat and the detail of the information to be shown.
10. Existing covenants, liens, or encumbrances.
11. Proposed street names.
12. Results of site evaluation, including percolation tests and soil borings.
13. Use of road right-of-way when determining density and minimum lot size. See
Chapter 4 of the Zoning Ordinance.
14. Any additional information as requested by the Zoning Administration staff.
4-1-2 Existing Features to Be Shown
1. Existing property lines and property lines extending two hundred (200) feet from
the exterior boundaries of the parcel to be subdivided, including the names of the
adjacent property owners shall be indicated.
2. Existing roads, both public and private, showing width of road, type of
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 4.2 Preliminary Plat
construction, and any associated easements.
3. Any and all existing public and private easements with purpose of easement and
types and location of any facility or installation that is located in the easement.
4. Location, size, capacity of all existing and abandoned drainage, stormwater, and
agricultural tiles; individual sewage treatment systems, wells, and utilities, including
poles located on the property and to a distance of two hundred (200) feet
beyond the property.
5. Permanent buildings or other substantial land uses located on the property and to
a distance of two hundred (200) feet beyond the property.
6. For all commercial and industrial developments and for residential developments
requiring a resource management plan, topography at two (2) foot intervals,
extending at least one hundred (100) feet beyond the limits of the property.
Topography at ten (10) foot intervals, extending at least one hundred (100) feet
beyond the limits of the property is required for all other development.
7. A tree and vegetation inventory survey prepared by a forester or landscape
architect identifying tree coverage in the proposed subdivision in accordance with
Chapter 9 of this Ordinance.
8. A report, prepared by a Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) licensed
designer, on the feasibility of individual sewage treatment systems (ISTS) and
water systems on each lot or a communal or shared sewage and water system
serving the subdivision. The report shall follow the rules of Scott County’s
Individual Sewage Treatment System Ordinance No. 4 and Minnesota Rules
Chapter 7080, as may be amended, and include soil boring analysis and
percolation tests to verify report conclusions.
9. A delineation of hydric soils within the subdivision. Acreage calculation for
buildable land for lots (non-hydric land, non-floodplain land, and area above the
ordinary high water level (OHWL) of lakes, rivers, and wetlands, determined
using one of the following methods:
a. Non-hydric soils as shown on the Scott County Geographic Information
System (GIS); or
b. Land outside of the 100 year floodplain area, as approved by the County,
using two (2) foot contour surveys of relevant areas; or
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 4.3 Preliminary Plat
c. A field delineation of the hydric soils by a Registered Soil Scientist
following the criteria found in the United States Army Corps of Engineers
Wetland Delineation Manual (1987 Manual) or the Natural Resource
Conservation Service publication Field Indicators of Hydric Soils in the
United States.
10. Waterways, watercourses, lakes, and wetlands with ordinary high water level and
one hundred (100) year flood elevations shown on the map and delineated in the
field.
11. The toe and top of any bluffs present.
4-1-3 Proposed Features to Be Shown
1. Proposed lot lines, dimensions, and the gross and non-hydric soil acreage of all
lots. When lots are located on a curve in a road or cul-de-sac, the lot width at the
building setback line shall be shown.
2. Proposed uses, including parks, stormwater retention areas, and areas of common
ownership.
3. Location, grade, and width of proposed streets, pedestrian ways, bicycle paths,
trails, walking paths and provision for extending streets to serve adjacent areas.
Access and street classifications shall be consistent with the Scott County
Comprehensive Transportation Plan.
4. Plans for the installation of electricity, street lights, telephone, gas, and drainage
and stormwater facilities.
5. Location of proposed structures, driveways, percolation tests and soil borings, if
applicable, and two (2) sites suitable for individual sewer treatment systems with
the method outlined for protecting the alternate individual sewage treatment
system site for future use.
6. Grading plans showing how the site will be graded and showing the final contours
into the existing contours. Grading and/or Resource Management Plans shall be
submitted consistent with Chapter 6 of the Zoning Ordinance, including erosion
and sediment control measures to be implemented both during and after
development. Locations for stockpiling of soils, the proposed 100 year floodplain
elevation, and a vegetation restoration plan for all areas disturbed by grading shall
be illustrated on the plan.
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 4.4 Preliminary Plat
7. Three (3) copies of the wetland delineation and wetland mitigation plan shall be
submitted in accordance with Chapter 6 of the Zoning Ordinance and Minnesota
Wetland Conservation Act of 1991, as amended.
8. A tree preservation plan consistent with Chapter 9 of this Ordinance.
9. Proposed easements for drainage, slope protection, flood protection, and
protection of wetlands and waterbodies, including stormwater retention areas and
easements for the installation of utilities.
10. The minimum setback requirements with resulting building envelope.
4-1-4 Additional Information Required
1. A build out plan (ghost plat), when applicable, depicting how the land within the
subdivision may be further subdivided in the future.
2. Documents outlining the content of proposed conservation easements, restrictive
covenants, deed restrictions, and establishment of homeowners associations for
review.
3. Proposed title declarations for residential lots adjoining potential future
development open spaces notifying the perspective homeowner of the intent to
have the open space develop in the future.
4. Information or easements showing how public and/or private utilities, drainage,
and roads can be extended to serve adjacent property.
5. Landscape and screening plans showing landscape plantings for street boulevards,
subdivision entrances, and buffer yards.
6. Any additional information as requested by the Zoning Administration staff.
4-2 FILING AND REVIEW OF APPLICATION
The preliminary plat application shall be considered to be officially filed when the Zoning
Administration staff has received and examined the application and has determined that the
application is complete.
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 4.5 Preliminary Plat
4-2-1 Procedure
1. Sketch Plan. Prior to submittal of a preliminary plat application, the property
owner may submit a sketch plan and meet with the Development Review Team
(DRT) to discuss the subdivision application in accordance with Chapter 3 of this
Ordinance.
2. The applicant shall meet with the Development Review Team (DRT) comprised
of the Zoning Administration staff, other agencies or departments, and Township
representatives to discuss the proposed preliminary plat application. Through this
DRT meeting, the Zoning Administration staff shall summarize the information
requirements and issues related to the request. A second DRT meeting may be
scheduled if deemed warranted to assist the applicant in the submission of a
complete application.
3. The person applying for preliminary plat approval shall submit to the Zoning
Administration staff a complete application and all other information required no
later than six (6) weeks prior to a regularly scheduled Planning Advisory
Commission meeting. The application shall address the informational
requirements and issues identified through the sketch plan review procedure.
4. A complete preliminary plat application shall include:
a. A graphic and written description of the information requirements outlined
in Section 4-1 of this Ordinance.
b. Supporting information described by the Zoning Administration staff
during the sketch plan review or subsequent DRT meeting. The Zoning
Administration staff may request the applicant to provide documentation
that describes the subdivision’s potential effects or impacts on public
facilities, utilities and services including, but not limited, to:
(1) Streets.
(2) Law enforcement.
(3) Ambulance/emergency services.
(4) Fire protection.
(5) County/Township administration.
(6) Schools.
(7) Utilities.
c. Applications must be accompanied by a fee and processing escrow
established by the County Board.
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 4.6 Preliminary Plat
5. The Zoning Administration staff, upon receipt of the application, shall notify the
applicant within fifteen (15) County business days if the application is found to be
incomplete.
6. The Zoning Administration staff shall refer copies of the preliminary plat to other
staff, committees, consultants, or agencies as appropriate.
7. Upon receipt of a complete application, the Zoning Administration staff shall
prepare a report and refer the application to the Scott County Planning Advisory
Commission and the appropriate Township Board for consideration.
8. The application shall be reviewed by Township Board. A written
recommendation for application approval or denial from the Township Board may
be forwarded to the Zoning Administration staff. The Township
recommendations received by the Zoning Administration staff will be forwarded
to the Planning Advisory Commission for their consideration of the application at
a public hearing.
9. The Planning Advisory Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed
preliminary plat. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the official
newspaper designated by the County Board at least ten (10) days prior to the
hearing. Notice shall be sent at least ten (10) days before the hearing date to the
governing bodies of townships and municipalities located within two (2) miles of
the property in question within the County. In un-incorporated areas of the
County, property owners of record within one-half (1/2) mile of the affected
property shall be notified in writing of the public hearing. Where the subject site
adjoins an incorporated area, the County shall mail written notification of the
proposed preliminary plat to property owners within the incorporated area located
within three hundred fifty (350) feet of the subject site. Timing of the mailed
notice shall be the same as that for the published notice. The failure to give
mailed notice to individual property owners or defects in the notice shall not
invalidate the proceedings, provided a bona fide attempt to comply has been
made.
10. The applicant, or his representative, shall appear before the Planning Advisory
Commission in order to answer questions concerning the proposed preliminary
plat.
11. The Planning Advisory Commission and Zoning Administration staff shall have
the authority to request additional information from the applicant concerning a
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 4.7 Preliminary Plat
preliminary plat. Said information is to be declared necessary to establish
performance conditions in relation to all pertinent sections of this Ordinance.
Failure of the applicant to supply all necessary supportive information may be
grounds for denial of the request by the County Board.
12. The Zoning Administration staff shall prepare a staff report of the findings and
recommendations of the Planning Advisory Commission. The recommendations
of the Planning Advisory Commission may be conditional and may be approval or
denial of all or part of the preliminary plat. The recommendation shall be
forwarded to the County Board for consideration.
13. The County Board shall take action on the application within one hundred twenty
(120) days following delivery of an application completed in accordance with the
regulations of this Ordinance. If it grants the preliminary plat, the County Board
may impose conditions it considers necessary to protect the public health, safety
and welfare.
14. The County Board shall take action on the application with a motion of approval
or denial which shall include findings of fact, and shall be entered in the
proceedings of the County Board and transmitted to the applicant in writing.
15. If the preliminary plat is approved by the County Board, the subdivider must
submit a complete application for final plat within six (6) months after said
approval or approval of the preliminary plat shall be considered void, unless a
request for time extension is submitted in writing by the applicant and approved
by the County Board or a time as provided in the developer’s agreement.
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 4.8 Preliminary Plat
CHAPTER 5: FINAL PLAT
5-1 FILING AND REQUIREMENTS FOR APPLICATION
Approval of a preliminary plat by the County Board is an acceptance of the general layout, as
submitted, and indicates to the developer that he may proceed toward final plat approval in
accordance with the County Board approval of the preliminary plat, including conditions.
A complete application for final plat shall be submitted no later than six (6) months after the date
of approval of the preliminary plat, or a time as provided in the developer’s agreement.
Otherwise, the preliminary plat approval shall be considered void, unless an extension is
requested in writing by the developer, and for good cause, is granted by the County Board.
The final plat application shall have incorporated all the conditions of County Board approval of
the preliminary plat. In all other respects the final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat. It
may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the developer proposes
to record and develop at that time, provided that such portion conforms with all the requirements
of this Ordinance.
Approval of the engineering specifications required by this Ordinance pertaining to drainage,
domestic waste water, street lighting, gas and electric service, grading, roadway standards,
widths, and surfacing of streets, shall be completed by the Town Board and the County staff and
appropriate development contracts signed prior to approval of the final plat by the County Board.
5-1-1 Information Required for Final Plat
1. Three (3) or four (4) mylar copies of the final plat (number to be determined by
the County Surveyor).
2. One (1) reproducible copy reduced to 11" x 17” of the final plat.
3. Eight (8) blueline copies of the final plat and supporting documents, plus any
additional copies deemed necessary by the Zoning Administration staff plus one
(1) reproducible copy reduced to 11” x 17”. One (1) copy of the final plat,
approved preliminary plat, wetland delineation, topography contours, and all
approved engineering plans in a digital format (PDF or DXF or GIS Shapefile file
in County coordinates) compatible with County DXF requirements.
4. One (1) up-to-date (within three (3) months) title insurance or opinion, as the
County Attorney or Zoning Administration staff may require.
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 5.1 Final Plat
5. One (1) copy of the three-way developer's agreement, including signature lines
for the Town Board, developer, and the County.
6. One (1) copy of any title declaration, deed restriction, restrictive covenant, or
homeowner's association documents in recordable form.
7. Two (2) copies of the final plat shall be submitted to the County Surveyor and
two (2) copies to the County Recorder to be checked for compliance with the
Minnesota Land Surveyors Association Plat Manual of Minnesota Guidelines
SCOTT COUNTY EDITION, as may be amended.
8. One (1) copy of the approved Resource Management Plan in compliance with the
requirements of Chapter 6 of the Zoning Ordinance.
9. Other information as may be required by the County.
5-2 REVIEW, APPROVAL, OR DENIAL
The final plat application shall be considered to be officially filed when the Zoning
Administration staff has received and examined the application and has determined that the
application is complete.
1. If all of the conditions for approval of the preliminary plat have been incorporated
into the final plat, the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to bypass
further review of the Planning Advisory Commission and forward directly to the
County Board for final action.
2. The County Board shall approve or deny the final plat by motion. The motion
shall include findings of fact supporting the approval or denial, and shall be
entered in the proceedings of the County Board and transmitted to the applicant in
writing.
5-3 FORM AND CONTENT
The final plat shall be of the form and content as prescribed in the Minnesota Land Surveyors
Association Plat Manual of Minnesota Guidelines SCOTT COUNTY EDITION, as may be
amended.
5-4 RECORDING
If the final plat is approved by the County Board, the developer shall record the plat within the
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 5.2 Final Plat
Office of the County Recorder within ninety (90) days after the date of approval, otherwise the
approval of the final plat shall be considered void.
5-5 SECURITY/FEES
Prior to recording of any final plat, all fees, charges, and escrows shall be paid in full covering
the costs of the Township and County related to the approved final plat.
5-6 PARTIAL APPROVAL - EXTENSION OF PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL
Upon receiving approval of a final plat for a portion of the approved preliminary plat, the
developer’s agreement shall identify an expiration date for the preliminary plat up to a maximum
of five (5) years from preliminary plat approval. If the development is a phased action, the
County Board shall recognize the phasing at the time of final approval of the phase of the
preliminary plat.
5-7 RECORD PLANS
The developer shall submit for review and approval all proposals to change the original plans
regarding road construction, drainage, and stormwater management. The developer must obtain
written approval by the Town Board and the County prior to changes to the plans. The developer
shall submit one (1) set of record plans and one (1) digital plan set (PDF and DXF or GIS
Shapefile) indicating all changes in the work, including accurate as-built locations, dimensions,
elevations, grades, slopes and all other pertinent information concerning the completed work.
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 5.3 Final Plat
CHAPTER 6: ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISION
6-1 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS
Notwithstanding the requirements of Chapter 2 of this Ordinance, the provisions of this Chapter
shall apply only to those subdivisions allowed through the administrative subdivision process.
6-2 ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISION
The following shall be considered administrative subdivisions:
1. The exchange of abutting land between owners, the addition of land to an existing
lot or the relocation of the boundary line between two abutting, existing parcels of
property, (platted or metes and bounds) provided such exchange, addition or
relocation shall not cause the creation of an additional parcel or parcels and the
resulting parcel(s) comply with the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.
2. The subdivision of a farmstead or homestead from a parcel 40 contiguous acres or
larger in size, where no vacant developable lots are being created or new roads or
other public infrastructure is needed, and the resulting parcel complies with the
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.
3. The platting of County road rights-of-way.
6-3 FILING AND REVIEW OF APPLICATION
Whenever any subdivision of land as outlined in Section 6-2 is proposed, before any contract is
made for the sale of any part thereof, and before any permit for the erection of a structure on
such proposed subdivision shall be granted, the subdividing owner or his authorized agent, shall
file an application and secure approval of an administrative subdivision.
The administrative subdivision application shall be considered to be officially filed when the
Zoning Administration staff has received the application and has determined that the application
is complete.
6-3-1 Information Required for Administrative Subdivision
1. A certificate of survey shall be prepared by a licensed land surveyor showing:
a) Name and address, including telephone number, of legal owner and/or agent
of property.
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 6.1 Administrative Subdivision
b) All contiguous property and all roads and their legal name.
c) Proposed new property lines with dimensions noted.
d) Existing and proposed driveway location.
e) Location of any existing and proposed legal rights-of-way or public and private
easements encumbering the property.
f) Proposed legal description of the original parcel(s) and proposed parcel(s).
g) Topographic data at ten (10) foot contour intervals. Data at two (2) foot contours
may be required if deemed necessary by the Zoning Administration staff
h) Location, purpose and dimensions of all existing buildings. Location shall note
distance of those buildings closest to property lines from the existing and
proposed property lines.
i) Location of any existing tile lines, abandoned wells, drainage ways, waterways,
watercourses, lakes, wetlands and the toe and top of any bluffs present. When
applicable, the ordinary high water level and 100-year flood elevations shall
be shown.
j) Location of a primary and an alternate site for individual sewage treatment
systems.
2. A copy of percolation tests and soil borings, if applicable, and two (2) sites suitable
for individual sewer treatment systems with the method outlined for protecting the
alternate individual sewage treatment system site for future use
The following additional information is required for farmstead/homestead subdivisions
3. Three (3) copies of the wetland delineation and wetland mitigation plan shall be
submitted in accordance with Chapter 6 of the Zoning Ordinance, and Minnesota
Wetland Conservation Act of 1991, as amended.
4. Proposed easements for drainage, slope protection, flood protection, and protection of
wetlands and waterbodies, including stormwater retention areas and easements for the
installation of utilities in accordance with Chapter 6 of the Zoning Ordinance.
5. Street right-of-way widths for County roads shall comply with the performance standards
of the Township or Scott County Highway Department reflective of the functional
classification of the subject site.
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 6.2 Administrative Subdivision
6-4 PROCEDURE
The Zoning Administration staff shall review the documents and may approve the administrative
subdivision when said application complies with the Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning
Ordinance, or any other official controls of the County.
Prior to approval of an application for administrative subdivision the County and/or the
Township reserves the right to require the vacation and/or dedication of street right-of-way,
drainage and utility easements.
The land exchanged, added to, or relocated and combined to a property as indicated in 6-2 (1),
shall be considered a single lot for zoning purposes. If possible the lots shall be combined under
one (1) Tax Parcel Identification Number (P.I.D.) and one (1) deed.
Two (2) or more parcels required to be considered one parcel for zoning purposes by the Zoning
Administration staff shall be consolidated or combined to form a single parcel. The combination
or consolidation shall be accomplished through the filing of the appropriate deed or contract for
deed transferring interest in all of the parcels to be merged, i.e., a deed by the property owner(s)
[the grantor(s)] deeding to herself or himself [the grantee(s)] setting forth the legal descriptions
of all said parcels required to be consolidated. The resulting single parcel shall be consolidated
under one (1) tax parcel identification number if permitted by the County Taxation Department.
A written request by the property owners to combine the parcels under one (1) parcel
identification number may be required by the County Taxation Department at the time the
consolidating deed is to be recorded. A note shall be placed on the deed as follows: “this is one
parcel for zoning purposes.”
6-5 RECORDING
If the administrative subdivision is approved by the Zoning Administration staff, the applicant
shall record the deed, and the accompanying survey, in the Office of the County Recorder within
forty-five (45) days after the date of approval, otherwise the approval of the administrative
subdivision shall be considered void.
For any administrative subdivision, including re-platting of existing platted lots, a plat prepared
in accordance with Minnesota Statute Chapter 505 may be recorded in lieu of a deed and survey.
A plat prepared in accordance with Minnesota Statute Chapter 505 can also be required for
recording as determined by the Scott County Surveyor and Zoning Administration staff. Said
plat shall be signed by the Scott County Zoning Administrator, or designee, to indicate
compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance and Minnesota Statute Chapter 505.03
Subdivision 1.
Lot fees and per-acre charge fees associated with Final Plats shall not apply to Administrative
Subdivisions.
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 6.3 Administrative Subdivision
CHAPTER 7: DESIGN STANDARDS
7-1 CONFORMITY WITH THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND ZONING
ORDINANCE
A proposed subdivision shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan, to related policies adopted by
the County, and to the Zoning Ordinance.
7-2 LAND REQUIREMENTS
1. Land shall be suited to the purpose for which it is to be subdivided. No plan shall
be approved if the site is not suitable for the purposes proposed by reason of
potential flooding, topography, adverse soil conditions, rock formations, or
wetlands.
2. No plan shall be approved if the site is not suitable for the purposes of accessing
the public road system.
3. Proposed subdivisions shall be coordinated with surrounding properties and/or
neighborhoods, so that the Township and County as a whole may develop
efficiently, harmoniously, and in an orderly manner.
7-3 LOTS
1. Area. The minimum lot area, width and depth shall not be less than that
established by the Zoning Ordinance in effect at the time of adoption of the final
plat.
2. Corner Lots. Corner lots for residential use shall have additional width to permit
appropriate building setback from both streets as required in the Scott County
Zoning Ordinance.
3. Side Lot Lines. Side lot lines shall be approximately at right angles to street lines
or radial to curved street lines.
4. Width. Every lot must have the minimum width measured at the front yard
setback and at the setback from the Ordinary High Water Level (OHWL) of an
abutting lake or stream and extending to the location of the principal building.
5. Setback Lines. Setback or building lines shall be shown on all lots intended for
residential use and shall not be less than the setback required by the Zoning
Ordinance.
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 7.1 Design Standards
6. Features. In the subdividing of any land, due regard shall be shown for all
natural features, such as tree growth, water courses, historic places or similar
conditions which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and stability to the
proposed development.
7. Lot Remnants. All remnants of lots below minimum lot size left over after
subdividing of a larger tract must be added to adjacent lots.
8. Political Boundaries. No singular plat shall extend over a political boundary or
school district line without document notification to the affected units of
government.
9. Frontage on Two Streets. Double frontage, or lots with frontage on two (2)
parallel streets shall not be permitted except where lots back on collector or
arterial streets, County or State highways, or where topographic or other
conditions render subdividing otherwise unreasonable. Said lots shall conform to
Chapter 4 of the Zoning Ordinance for buffering and screening requirements for
double frontage lots.
10. Irregular Shaped Lots. On single family residential lots determined to be irregular
in shape (e.g., triangular), the developer shall demonstrate to the County an ability
to properly place principal buildings and accessory structures upon the site which
are compatible in size and character to the surrounding area.
11. Required Yard Setback Infringements. All single family residential lots shall be
designed in consideration of potentials for buildings accommodating three (3) car
garages, porches and decks, etc. Said buildings and structures are to be
compatible in size and character with the surrounding area.
12. Outlots. Outlots may be platted within a subdivision to delineate future
development phases or commonly owned open spaces. An outlot shall be sized in
a manner to accommodate its intended use. No building permits shall be issued
for an outlot except for structures allowed under Chapter 16 of the Zoning
Ordinance.
7-4 STREET INTERCONNECTIVITY
Scott County hereby finds and determines that an interconnected street system is necessary in
order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare by ensuring that streets will function in an
interdependent manner, reduce traffic congestion on arterial streets, connect neighborhoods,
reduce travel time, provide continuous and more direct routes for vehicles, pedestrians and
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 7.2 Design Standards
bicyclists, and provide adequate access for emergency and service vehicles.
1. Streets, Continuous. Streets shall connect with streets previously dedicated in
adjoining or adjacent subdivisions (see Figure 1), provide for future connections
to adjoining unsubdivided tracts (see Figure 1), and shall be a reasonable
projection or continuation of streets in the nearest subdivided tracts. The
arrangement of arterial and collector streets shall be considered in their relation to
the reasonable circulation of traffic, topographic conditions, runoff of storm
water, public convenience and safety, and in relation to the proposed uses of the
area to be served.
Figure 1. Examples of Street Connections to Adjoining Parcels
2. Street Plans for Future Subdivisions. Where the plat application includes only
Previously dedicated
street in adjacent
subdivision
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 7.3 Design Standards
part of the tract owned or intended for development by the subdivider, a build out
plan (ghost plat) illustrating a proposed future street system for the unsubdivided
portion shall be prepared and submitted by the subdivider.
3. Provisions for Resubdivision of Large Lots and Parcels. When a tract is
subdivided into outlots or larger than normal building lots or parcels, such outlots,
larger lots or parcels shall be so arranged as to permit the logical location and
openings of future streets, allowing for interconnectivity as described above, and
appropriate resubdivision, with provision for adequate street and utility
connections for such resubdivision.
4. Temporary Cul-de-Sac. In those instances where a street is terminated pending
future extension in conjunction with future subdivision and more than two
hundred (200) feet between the dead-end and the nearest intersection, a temporary
turn around facility shall be provided at the closed end, in conformance with culde-
sac requirements. This temporary cul-de-sac must be placed inside a
temporary roadway easement if it is located outside street right-of-way. Financial
guarantee will be required for removal or restoration as determined by the
Township or County Engineer. For all temporary cul-de-sacs, a sign at the deadend
shall be installed (at the discretion of the Township) stating that the road will
be extended in the future.
5. Permanent Cul-de-Sacs/Dead-End Streets.
a. Dead-end streets (temporary or permanent) without cul-de-sac turn
arounds shall be prohibited.
b. Permanent cul-de-sacs shall be prohibited, except in cases where
shoreland, shallow wetlands (Type 3, Circular 39), deep wetlands (Type 4,
Circular 39), open water wetlands (Type 5, Circular 39), “exceptional” or
“high” quality wetlands based on a MNRAM vegetative assessment, bluff,
or steep slopes at a grade of 15% or greater preclude connection to
adjoining properties, or where connection to an arterial roadway does not
meet access spacing requirements, or in cases where plats proposed in the
Rural Residential Service Area (DAP study area) provide continuous
street connections to all adjacent developable parcels as described in this
Section, the cul-de-sac is interior to the development, and serves no more
than eight (8) lots.
c. Permanent cul-de-sacs meeting the exception criteria in section b., above,
connecting directly to another permanent cul-de-sac(s) shall be prohibited.
d. Permanent cul-de-sacs meeting the exception criteria in section b., above,
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 7.4 Design Standards
connecting directly to Principal or Minor Arterials shall be prohibited. See
Figure 2
Figure 2. Example of Prohibited Permanent Cul-de-Sac
Connecting Directly to Arterial Roadway
7-5 STREET DESIGN AND RIGHT-OF-WAY STANDARDS
1. Street design shall comply with the standards of the Township or Scott County
Highway Department. All local Township street designs shall be subject to the
review and approval of the respective Township Engineer.
2. Street Intersections. Under normal conditions, streets shall be laid out so as to
intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, except where topography or other
conditions justify variations. Under normal conditions, the minimum angle of
intersection of streets shall be eighty (80) degrees. Street intersection jogs with an
offset of less than three hundred (300) feet shall be avoided.
3. Street Grades. Except when, upon the recommendation of the County or
Township Engineer, the topography warrants a greater maximum, the grades of
all streets and alleys in any subdivision shall not be greater than ten (10) percent.
In addition, there shall be a minimum grade on all streets of not less than five-
Arterial Roadway
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 7.5 Design Standards
tenths (0.5) percent unless approved by the County or Township Engineer because
of existing conditions.
4. Subdivisions Abutting Major Rights-of-Way. Wherever the proposed
subdivision contains or is adjacent to the right-of-way of existing or planned
arterial or collector roadways, local street access must conform with the minimum
access spacing requirements in Section 7-9. The design shall include proper
circulation, setbacks from an intersection on the major rights-of-way, minimum
distance required for approach connections to future grade separations, and for lot
depths.
5. Half Streets. Dedication of half streets shall not be considered for approval
except where it is essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision and
in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations or where it is found
by the County that it will be practical to require the dedication of the other half
when the adjoining property is subdivided.
6. Compliance with the Scott County Transportation Plan. All subdivisions
incorporating road corridors which are identified in the County Transportation
Plan shall comply with the minimum right-of-way, surface width, and design
standards as outlined in said plan, and must be reviewed and approved by the
County Engineer.
7. Street right-of-way widths for County roads shall comply with the performance
standards of the Township or Scott County Highway Department reflective of the
functional classification of the subject site.
7-6 EASEMENTS
1. Drainage and utility easements shall be required over any stormwater
management facilities, natural drainageways, and wetlands. The size and location
of the necessary easements shall be reviewed and approved by the Zoning
Administration staff.
2. In subdivisions being served by communal or public sanitary sewer or water,
drainage and utility easements shall be required over all utilities.
3. In all Zoning Districts, except Agricultural Districts, any subdivision shall provide
easements for utilities and drainage at least ten (10) feet wide along all lot lines.
If necessary for the extension of main water or sewer lines or similar utilities,
easements of greater width may be required along lot lines or across lots.
7-7 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION AND SEDIMENT
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 7.6 Design Standards
CONTROL
All subdivisions shall comply with storm water management standards of Chapter 6 of the
Zoning Ordinance.
7-8 PUBLIC UTILITIES
Telephone, electric, cable, gas service lines and/or other public utilities are to be placed
underground in accordance with Township and County standards.
7-9 ACCESS TO LOCAL, COLLECTOR AND ARTERIAL ROADWAYS
All subdivisions shall comply with minimum access spacing requirements. All driveways or
street access locations proposed in a preliminary and final plat or administrative subdivision shall
be in accordance with these requirements. Access spacing along roadway corridors with existing
driveways and road intersections is a goal that will be achieved over time through a combination
of methods as adjacent land develops, such as driveway removals, re-locations, or
consolidations, or through future road dedications or road closures. This section shall be
enforced and interpreted to meet this long-term goal.
1. The minimum access spacing requirements in this section are based on roadway
classifications shown on the Future Functional Classification Map, as described
and mapped in the Comprehensive Plan.
2. The minimum access spacing tables in this section are based on the planned land
use categories described and mapped in the Comprehensive Plan.
3. Driveway access shall be provided to all legal, undeveloped properties with
building eligibility along roadway corridors, and minimum spacing shall be met to
the greatest extent possible.
4. Turn lanes (left, right, and/or by-pass) shall be required at all public road access
locations on County or State roads.
5. When there is an opportunity for private or public access on more than one public
roadway, access shall be taken on the lower functional roadway.
6. New access shall be either a.) located across from an existing or planned future
designated access point that meets minimum access spacing or b.) measured from
nearest planned future designated access location that meets minimum spacing.
Access requested at any future designated access location will be deemed to be
compliance with the minimum spacing requirements of this ordinance. If there is
an adopted County corridor study, access shall conform to this study.
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 7.7 Design Standards
7. Access spacing may be modified by County Highway Engineer.
8. Environmental constraints, geometric constraints, or sight distance requirements
may be considered when determining access spacing locations.
9. Access spacing within Interchange influence areas shall meet all stopping and
intersection site distance requirements on Principal Arterials.
10. All existing commercial, industrial or institutional properties in the
unincorporated area with more than one access point shall conform to these
requirements when the property is platted. Access for an existing institutional
campus (with more than one principal building) will be evaluated on a case-bycase
basis.
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 7.8 Design Standards
Minimum Access Spacing
Urban Expansion, Commercial/Industrial and Commercial Reserve Areas
Type of Access
Type of Highway Function
Principal
Arterial
Minor
Arterial Collector Local
Private Residential
(Up to 2 shared driveways
allowed)
Not Permitted Not Permitted 1/8 mile based on other
criteria
Commercial, Industrial, and
Institutional
(one access allowed per
property)
Not Permitted Not Permitted 1/4 Mile based on other
criteria
Local Street
Per Twp
Transportation
Map or corridor
study
RI/RO at 1/8
mile;
Full Access at
1/4 Mile
1/8 Mile 1/8 Mile
Collector Street
RI/RO at 1/2
Mile;
Full Access at 1
mile
RI/RO at 1/8
mile;
Full Access at
1/4 Mile
1/4 Mile 1/4 Mile
Minor Arterial 1 mile 1/2 to 1 mile 1/4 to 1 Mile 1/4 to 1 mile
*RI/RO allowed only on existing divided roadways
** Access ranges listed for Minor Arterials shall be determined by County Highway Engineer
11. In Urban, Urban Expansion, Commercial/Industrial and Commercial Reserve
Areas, no more than two (2) lots may utilize a shared driveway and the shared
driveway location must meet the access spacing requirement.
12. In Urban, Urban Expansion, Commercial/Industrial and Commercial Reserve
Areas, existing access on Principal Arterials may be relocated provided sight
distance is improved and opportunities for access consolidation do not exist.
Future alternative access and removal of access onto Principal Arterials must be
planned for and demonstrated.
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 7.9 Design Standards
Minimum Access Spacing
Rural Residential Service Area
Type of Access
Type of Highway Function
Principal
Arterial
Minor
Arterial Collector Local
Private Residential
(Up to 2 shared driveways
allowed under certain situations)
Not Permitted Not Permitted 1/4 Mile based on other
criteria
Commercial, Industrial,
Institutional and Private
Driveway (one access allowed
per property)
Not Permitted Not Permitted
RI/RO at 1/8
mile;
Full Access at
1/4 Mile
based on other
criteria
Local Street
Per DAP Twp
Transportation
Map or corridor
study
Full Access at
1/4 Mile 1/4 Mile 1/8 Mile
Collector Street
RI/RO at 1/2
Mile;
Full Access at 1
mile
RI/RO at 1/8
mile;
Full Access at
1/4 Mile
1/4 Mile 1/4 Mile
Minor Arterial 1 mile 1/2 to 1 mile 1/4 to 1 Mile 1/4 to 1 mile
*RI/RO allowed only on existing divided roadways
** Access ranges listed for Minor Arterials shall be determined by County Highway Engineer
13. In the Rural Residential Service Area along Minor Arterials, no more than two (2)
lots may utilize a shared driveway and only if the shared driveway is located at a
planned future public road intersection that meets access spacing requirements
and public road right-of-way is secured through the platting process. Otherwise,
any shared driveways serving new platted lots must take access from a local road.
14. In the Rural Residential Service Area along Collectors, no more than two (2) lots
may utilize a shared driveway and only if the shared driveway meets access
spacing requirements.
15. The 2009 Scott County Rural Residential Service Area Detailed Area Plan (DAP)
includes Township transportation maps showing planned Connector Roads and
optimum locations for access intersections where turn lanes and/or bypass lanes
are required.
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 7.10 Design Standards
Minimum Access Spacing
Agricultural and Urban Transition Areas
Type of Access
Type of Highway Function
Principal
Arterial
Minor
Arterial Collector Local
Private Residential
(Up to 3 shared driveways
allowed)
Not Permitted ¼ mile 1/8 mile based on other
criteria
Commercial, Industrial,
Institutional and Private
Driveway
Not Permitted Not Permitted
RI/RO at 1/8
mile;
Full Access at
1/4 Mile
based on other
criteria
Local Street
Not Permitted
unless per Twp
Transportation
Map or corridor
study
RI/RO at 1/8
mile;
Full Access at
1/4 Mile
1/8 Mile 1/8 Mile
Collector Street
RI/RO at 1/2
Mile;
Full Access at 1
mile
RI/RO at 1/8
mile;
Full Access at
1/4 Mile
1/4 Mile 1/4 Mile
Minor Arterial 1 mile 1/2 to 1 mile 1/4 to 1 Mile 1/4 to 1 mile
*RI/RO allowed only on existing divided roadways
** Access ranges listed for Minor Arterials shall be determined by County Highway Engineer
16. In Agricultural and Urban Transition Areas, no more than three (3) lots may utilize
a shared driveway and the shared driveway location must meet the access spacing
requirement.
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 7.11 Design Standards
CHAPTER 8: PUBLIC LAND DEDICATION
8-1 STATEMENT AND FINDING OF PUBLIC PURPOSE
1. The Scott County Board of Commissioners finds that it is necessary and in the
public interest to provide future parks, trails and other public open spaces for the
citizens of Scott County. The necessity for additional public open spaces is
caused, in part, by increased development occurring within Scott County. The
Scott County Board of Commissioners further finds that the financial burden of
creating additional public open space and recreational opportunities should not be
placed entirely upon the general property tax levy. Rather, new development
should contribute financially to and assist in off-setting the cost associated with
creating of additional public open spaces.
2. This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to and consistent with the authority granted
by Minnesota Statutes, section 394.25, subdivision 7. The Scott County Board of
Commissioners, consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, hereby finds that the
requirements of this Ordinance are necessary, proportionate, fair and reasonable
with respect to the need created by ongoing residential, commercial, industrial
and institutional development.
8-2 DEDICATION OF LAND FOR PARK, TRAIL OR OPEN SPACE
1. In all new subdivisions where the local or County/regional public park, trail or
open space land has been identified within a Township or County Park and Trail
Plan and/or Comprehensive Plan, the developer shall be required to dedicate park,
trail or open space of suitable quality containing at least seven (7) percent of the
gross area within the boundaries of the subdivision. The dedicated percent of the
gross area of the subdivision shall not include land platted as an outlot.
2. Land shall not be dedicated for parks, trails or open space until such lands have
been approved by the Town Board and County for the purpose to which they are
to be dedicated. Land shall be reasonably suitable for its intended use and shall
be at a location convenient to the people to be served. Factors used in evaluating
the adequacy of proposed park and recreation areas shall include size, shape,
topography, geology, hydrology, tree cover, access and location. Land with dead
trees, trash, junk, pollutants and unwanted structures is not acceptable.
3. The land shall be without restrictions or reservations and shall be transferred by
deed to the Township and/or County. The developer and the Town Board and/or
County shall agree upon the conditions of the dedicated land at the time of final
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 8.1 Public Land Dedication
plat approval, and this agreement shall be part of the developer's agreement. All
park, trail or open space land dedicated under this section shall be for public use
and have access from a publicly maintained road.
4. Where private open space for park and recreation purposes is provided in a
proposed subdivision, such areas may be used for credit at the discretion of the
Town Board against the Township’s local land or cash dedication requirements
for park and recreation purposes, provided the Town Board finds it is in the public
interest to do so.
5 The Township or County, upon consideration of the particular type of
development, may require larger or lesser parcels of land to be conveyed to the
Township or County if the Township or County determines that present or future
residents would require greater or lesser land for park purposes.
8-3 PAYMENT IN LIEU OF DEDICATION OF PARK, TRAIL OR OPEN SPACE
LAND
When land is not dedicated to the public for park, trail or open space in a new subdivision, as
defined in this Ordinance, the developer shall be required to pay, in lieu of park, trail or open
space dedication, a fee per lot or area for development of parks in the Township and the County.
A fee per lot or area shall be set by resolution of the Town Board to address local park and trail
system needs. The County shall establish a fee per lot or area by resolution of the County Board
that will be collected in addition to the Township fee to assist in the acquisition and development
of the County park and trail system.
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 8.2 Public Land Dedication
CHAPTER 9: TREE PRESERVATION
9-1 PURPOSE
The County finds it is in the best interest of the public to protect, preserve, and enhance the
natural environment and to encourage a resourceful and prudent approach to the development
and alteration of wooded areas. In the interest of achieving these objectives, the County has
established the tree preservation regulations herein.
9-2 SCOPE OF APPLICATION
9-2-1 Scope of Application
A tree preservation plan shall be submitted to and approved by the County and implemented in
accordance with all Planned Unit Developments and residential subdivision of five (5) or more
lots of five (5) acres or less located within a Natural Area Corridor or mapped high quality
woodland. The requirement for a tree preservation plan may be waived in these areas if the high
quality wooded areas are protected in a conservation easement. If the property proposed for
development is located outside of a Natural Area Corridor or mapped high quality wooded area,
a tree preservation plan will not be required.
9-2-2 Submittal Requirements
1. The tree preservation plan shall be submitted as part of a resource management
plan and an application for any grading permit as required by Chapter 6 of the
Zoning Ordinance. All tree preservation plans must be certified by a forester or
landscape architect retained by the applicant.
2. The tree preservation plan, along with associated subdivision or grading permit
plans, shall be submitted in accordance with this Ordinance and Zoning
Ordinance, whichever is applicable. All sites shall be staked, as depicted in the
approved grading plan, and the required tree protection fencing shall be installed
at the limits of the approved grading before grading is to commence. The County
shall inspect the construction site prior to the beginning of the grading to ensure
that protective fencing and other protective measures are in place. No
encroachment, grading, trenching, filling, compaction, or change in soil chemistry
shall occur within the fenced areas protecting the critical root zone of the trees to
be saved.
9-2-3 Plan Requirements
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 9.1 Tree Preservation
The tree preservation plan shall include the following information:
1. The name(s), telephone number(s), and address (es) of applicants, property
owners, developers and/or builders.
2. Delineation of the buildings, structures, or impervious surfaces situated thereon or
contemplated to be built thereon.
3. Delineation of all areas to be graded and limits of proposed land disturbance
within the subdivision. The limits of approved site grading shall be delineated in
the field. Significant trees shall be protected by fencing located at the perimeter of
its critical root zone.
4. An inventory of size, species, and location of all existing significant trees,
specimen trees, and significant woodlands located within seventy-five (75) feet of
the areas to be graded and limits of land disturbance created by the subdivision.
These significant trees and significant woodlands should be identified in both
graphic and tabular form. If no significant trees exist within seventy-five (75) feet
of the grading limits, a tree inventory will not be required.
5. Identification of all significant trees and significant woodlands proposed to be
saved or removed within the tree inventory area. These significant trees and
significant woodlands shall be identified in both graphic and tabular form.
6. Identification of all diseased, hazardous, or nuisance trees.
7. Measures to protect significant trees and significant woodlands.
8. Signature of the person(s) preparing the plan.
9-3 TREE PRESERVATION STANDARDS
9-3-1 Avoidance of Tree Disturbance
Subdivision design shall attempt to minimize damage to significant trees and significant
woodlands. The area of land disturbance and trees to be removed shall be delineated in the tree
preservation plan and are subject to County approval.
9-3-2 Protective Measures
Measures to protect significant trees and significant woodlands approved as part of the tree
preservation plan shall be included in sales information and disseminated to potential buyers of
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 9.2 Tree Preservation
wooded lots.
9-4 REVIEW PROCESS
The tree preservation plan shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administration staff to assess the best
possible layout to preserve significant trees and significant woodlands and to enhance the efforts
to minimize damage to significant trees and significant woodlands. The applicant shall meet
with the Zoning Administration staff prior to submittal of the development application or prior
to application for the grading permit, whichever is sooner, to determine the most feasible and
practical placement of buildings, parking, driveways, streets, storage and other physical features,
in order that the fewest significant trees and significant woodlands are destroyed or damaged.
9-5 FINANCIAL GUARANTEE
1. An applicant shall provide a financial guarantee of five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for each lot having significant trees located within seventy-five (75) feet of the
grading or land disturbance limits following the preliminary approval of the tree
preservation plan and prior to any construction and/or grading.
2. Following written request by the applicant for acceptance, the financial guarantee
will be released upon certification by the landscape architect or forester that the
tree preservation plan was followed, but in no event shall the financial guarantee
be released earlier than one (1) year after the date of the project closure.
9-6 REMOVAL OF DISEASED TREES REQUIRED
Prior to any grading, all diseased and hazardous trees on the subject property shall be removed
from the property.
9-7 COMPLIANCE WITH PLAN
The applicant shall implement the tree preservation plan prior to and during any construction.
The tree protection measures of the plan shall remain in place until all grading and construction
activity is terminated or until a request is made to and approved by the County. The County
shall have the right to inspect the development and/or building site in order to determine
compliance with the approved tree preservation plan. The County shall determine whether
compliance with the tree preservation plan has been met.
9-8 MITIGATION
1. No significant trees or significant woodlands shall be removed until a tree
preservation plan is approved by the County and escrow received in accordance
with the approved tree preservation plan. If a significant tree(s) or any significant
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 9.3 Tree Preservation
woodland that was intended to be preserved is removed without permission of the
County, or damaged so that it is in a state of decline within one (1) year from date
of project closure as determined by a forester or landscape architect, the applicant
shall mitigate tree loss by reforestation of appropriate areas within the
development area in accordance with the following replacement schedule. For
each significant tree removed that was intended to be preserved, two (2)
deciduous trees with a minimum of two and one-half (2.5) inch caliper or two (2)
coniferous trees with a height of not less than six (6) feet must be planted. For
each specimen tree removed that was intended to be preserved, four (4) deciduous
trees with a minimum of two and one-half (2.5) inch caliper or four (4) coniferous
trees with a height of not less than six (6) feet must be planted. Where
replacement of a significant woodland is required, the applicant shall be
responsible for furnishing and installing two (2) deciduous trees with a minimum
of two and one-half (2.5) inch caliper or two (2) coniferous trees with a height of
not less than six (6) feet for every five hundred (500) square feet of significant
woodland damaged or destroyed that was intended to be preserved, or any
increment thereof.
2. For entirely wooded parcels, the applicant shall work with County staff to identify
alternative locations for tree replacement.
3. Species of replacement trees shall be subject to County review and approval.
Where ten (10) or more replacement trees are required, not more than seventyfive
(75) percent of the replacement trees shall be of the same species of tree
without the approval of the County. To the extent possible any removed trees
shall be replaced with the same species. Replacement trees shall only include the
following species:
Deciduous Trees:
Walnut Linden (Basswood)
Birch Elm
Ginkgo (male only) Hackberry
Hickory Honeylocust
Kentucky Coffee Tree Maple
Oak Ironwood
Coniferous Trees:
Arborvitae Fir
Juniper (Cedar) Redwood, Dawn
Spruce Larch
Hemlock Pine
4. Setback requirement – At full maturity and to the greatest extent possible the tree
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 9.4 Tree Preservation
drip line shall not extend beyond the property lines.
5. The planting of trees for mitigation shall be in addition to any other landscape
requirements of the County.
6. All new trees shall be guaranteed for a full growing season from the time planting
has been completed. All trees shall be alive, of good quality and disease free at
the end of the warranty period or be replaced. Any replacements shall be
warranted for a full growing season from the time of planting. The growing
season is herein defined as the period from June 1 to September 30.
Tree planting operations shall be conducted under favorable weather conditions
during one of the following planning seasons as specified herein. For deciduous
trees, spring planting should occur from April 1 to June; and fall planting from
September 30 to November 15. For coniferous trees, spring planting should occur
from April 1 to May 15; and fall planting from August 15 to October 15.
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 9.5 Tree Preservation
CHAPTER 10: IMPROVEMENTS
10-1 RESPONSIBILITY
All required improvements shall be installed and furnished by the developer, including all costs
of inspection by the Township or County, at the sole expense of the developer and at no expense
to the Township or County. If any improvement installed within the boundaries of the
subdivision is determined to be of substantial benefit to lands beyond the boundaries of the subdivision,
the Town Board or County may make provisions for causing a portion of the cost of the
improvement, representing the benefit to such lands, to be assessed against the same and, in such
case, the developer will be required to pay only for such portion of the whole cost of said
improvements that represents the benefit to the property within the subdivision.
10-2 STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS
Engineering requirements, standards for plans, the required improvements, and the standards for
design and installation shall conform to such standards and specifications as adopted by the
Township and County and any additional or more restrictive standards adopted by the Township
and County in which the subdivision is located.
10-3 SUBDIVISION MONUMENTS
1. Official monuments, as designated and adopted by the County Surveyor’s Office
and approved by the County District Court for use as judicial monuments, shall be
set at each corner or angle on the outside boundary of the final plat or in
accordance with a plan as approved by the County Surveyor. The boundary line
of the property to be included with the plat shall be fully dimensioned; all angles
of the boundary excepting the closing angle shall be indicated; all monuments and
surveyor’s irons shall be indicated, each angle point of the boundary perimeter to
be so monumented.
2. Pipes or steel rods shall be placed at each lot and at each intersection of street
center lines. All United States, State, County, or other official benchmarks,
monuments or triangular stations in or adjacent to the property shall be preserved
in precise position and shall be recorded on the plat. All lot and block dimensions
shall be shown on the plat and all necessary angles pertaining to the lots and
blocks, as an aid to future surveys shall be shown on the plat. No ditto marks will
be permitted in indicating dimensions.
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 10.1 Improvements
3. To ensure that all irons and monuments are correctly in place following the final
grading of a plat and construction of utilities, financial security will be required as
determined by the County Surveyor. Proof of the second monumentation shall be
in the form of a surveyor’s certificate and this requirement shall additionally be a
condition of certificate of occupancy as provided for in the Zoning Ordinance.
10-4 STREET IMPROVEMENTS
1. The full width of the right-of-way shall be graded in accordance with the
provisions for construction approved as a condition of the plat.
2. All streets shall be improved in accordance with the Township and/or County
standards and specifications for street construction, as applicable.
3. All streets to be surfaced shall be of an overall width in accordance with the
standards and specifications for construction as approved by the Township and/or
County, as applicable. The portion of the right-of-way outside the area surfaced
shall be seeded/mulched or ripprapped by the developer per the resource
management plan.
4. Where required, the curb and gutter shall be constructed in accordance to the
standards and specifications for street construction as set forth and approved by
the County and/or Township.
5. Where a subdivision gains access from a County or State road, the subdivision
shall provide the following improvements:
a. Right turn lanes, left turn lanes, and/or bypass lanes shall be required on
County roadways providing access to a subdivision where the current or
projected average daily trips (ADTs), traffic speeds, turning movements,
and/or other safety considerations will be present, as directed by the
County Engineer.
b. Service roadways adjacent to arterial streets shall be required in order to
provide access to industrial or commercially zoned subdivisions.
6. The developer shall be responsible for the costs of providing 911 address signs for
all lots within the subdivision.
7. County approved street lighting shall be installed at developer’s expense at all
intersections with County and State roads. The Township and/or Homeowners
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 10.2 Improvements
Association shall be responsible for paying monthly utility expenses for the street
lights.
8. All roads serving a subdivision (both on-site and off-site) shall be paved. In the
absence of access from a paved road serving the subdivision, the developer shall
pay for the construction of the off-site transportation infrastructure improvements
necessitated by the subdivision or pay a transportation infrastructure charge (see
below). The choice of street construction and/or transportation infrastructure
charge shall be made by the Township in review of the subdivision in accordance
with this Ordinance.
9. Transportation Infrastructure Charge. In accordance with the Scott County
Comprehensive Plan as a condition of subdivision approval, the subdivider shall
pay a charge for the construction of off-site transportation infrastructure
improvements necessitated by development. The per unit charge shall be
established by resolution of Township and County Boards. The subdivision may
be given credit for regional/County transportation improvements constructed as a
part of the subdivision development.
10-5 SANITARY SEWER AND WATER DISTRIBUTION IMPROVEMENTS
1. Where public sewer and water facilities are not available for extension into the
proposed subdivision, individual sewer systems may be used in accordance with
Scott County Subsurface Sewage Treatment System Ordinance No. 4, as may be
amended. Private water wells shall conform to standards of the Minnesota
Department of Health.
2. Community water and sewer may be allowed within a subdivision provided:
a. All on-site community sewage treatment systems shall conform to the
performance standards of Minnesota Pollution Control Agency’s Standards
for Sewage Treatment Systems Minnesota Rules Chapter 7080 and its
appendices, and the Scott County’s Subsurface Sewage Treatment System
Ordinance No. 4.
b. A community water and sewage treatment system shall include an operating,
financing, and management plan that is controlled by a public entity with
taxing authority to insure proper maintenance, management, and financing
that is approved by the Township and County.
c. Subdivisions with communal sewage treatment systems shall reserve land area
for a replacement system.
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 10.3 Improvements
3. Community wells are required for all cluster residential development with 15 or
more lots in the Rural Residential Service Area as defined in the 2009 Scott
County Rural Residential Service Area Detailed Area Plan (DAP).
10-6 STORM WATER IMPROVEMENT PLANNING CHARGE
1. In accordance with the Comprehensive Plan as a condition of the subdivision
approval, subdividers shall pay a charge for storm water management and water
quality planning. The per acre charge shall be established by resolution of the
County Board. The charge shall be based upon the gross acreage of the
subdivision less the right-of-way for State highways. The charge shall be paid in
cash before the subdivision is approved by the County.
2. Property being replatted shall be exempt from the storm water improvement
planning requirements of this Section if the charges were paid in conjunction
with the initial platting of the property.
10-7 DEVELOPER'S AGREEMENT
Prior to installation of any required improvements and prior to approval of the final plat, the
developer shall enter into a three-way agreement in writing with the Town Board and County
requiring the developer to furnish and construct said improvements at his sole cost and in
accordance with plans and specifications and usual agreement conditions and/or pay appropriate
costs for improvements or other costs associated with the plat. Further, the agreement shall
provide for the development of any restrictions, covenants, easements, signage, park or open
space requirements, or other conditions of the approved preliminary plat and provide for the
proper execution, recording or other action required. Approval of the developer's agreement
shall be by Town Board resolution and County Board resolution.
1. The developer's agreement shall include provisions for the supervision of the
details of construction by the Township engineer and/Zoning Administrator or
designated agent, and grant to the Township engineer and/or Zoning
Administration staff, or agent, authority to coordinate the work to take place
under said agreement by any subcontractors authorized to proceed, and with any
other work being done or contracted by the Township and/or County in the
vicinity.
2. The developer's agreement shall require the developer to provide a financial
guarantee to ensure completion of all improvements as provided in Chapter 11.
3. The time for completion of the work, and the several parts thereof, shall be
determined by the Town Board and County upon recommendation of the
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 10.4 Improvements
Township engineer and/or Zoning Administration staff after consultation with the
developer and shall be reasonable in relation to the work to be done, the seasons
of the year, and proper coordination with construction activity in the subdivision.
4. One (1) copy of the three-way developer agreement which was signed by the
applicant, Town Board, and the County shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administration staff at time of final plat approval. The Zoning Administration
staff shall ensure that the developer’s agreement and all attachments, exhibits,
easements, and other associated documents are recorded in the County Recorder’s
Office with the final plat. All recording costs shall be the responsibility of the
developer.
10-8 CONSTRUCTION PLANS
Construction plans for the required improvements shall conform in all respects with the Zoning
Ordinance, and all applicable ordinances and standards of the Township or County.
Construction documents shall be prepared, at the expense of the developer, by a licensed
professional who is registered in the State of Minnesota, and said plans shall contain his
certification. Such plans, together with the quantities of construction items, shall be submitted to
the Township engineer and/or Zoning Administration staff for his approval and for his estimate
of the total cost of the required improvements. Upon approval, they shall become a part of the
developer's agreement. Two (2) reproducible copies of the plans approved by the Township
engineer and/or Zoning Administration staff shall be furnished to the County.
10-9 INSPECTION
All required improvements on the site that are to be installed under the provisions of the Scott
County Zoning Ordinance No. 3, as may be amended, and all applicable ordinances and the
developer's agreement shall be inspected during the course of construction by the Township
engineer and/or Zoning Administration staff, or his agent, at the expense of the developer.
10-10 COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS
1. Temporary Improvement. The applicant shall build and pay for all costs of
temporary improvements required by the Town Board and the County and shall
maintain the same for the period specified. Prior to construction of any temporary
facility or improvement, the developer shall file with the Town Board and County
a separate financial guarantee for temporary facilities, which guarantee shall
ensure that the temporary facilities will be properly constructed, maintained, and
removed.
2. Governmental Units. Governmental units to which these guarantee and
agreement provisions apply may file, in lieu of said agreement or financial
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 10.5 Improvements
guarantee, a certified resolution or ordinance from officers or agencies authorized
to act in their behalf, agreeing to comply with the provisions of this section.
3. Failure To Complete Improvement. For a subdivision for which no financial
guarantee has been posted, if the improvements are not completed within the
period specified by the Town Board and County in the resolution approving the
plat, the approval shall be deemed to have expired. In those cases where a
financial guarantee has been posted and required improvements have not been installed
within the terms of such financial guarantee, the Town Board and County
may declare the financial guarantee to be in default and require that all the
improvements be installed regardless of the extent of the building development at
the time the financial guarantee is declared to be in default.
4. Acceptance Of Dedication Offers. The approval by the County Board of a subdivision
plat shall be deemed to constitute or imply the acceptance by the Town
Board and County of any dedications required pursuant to this Ordinance.
5. Release of Financial Guarantee. Certification of Satisfactory Completion. The
Town Board shall not release a financial guarantee for those improvements
required by the Township until the Township engineer and/or Zoning
Administration staff has certified that all required improvements have been
satisfactorily completed and until the developer's engineer or surveyor has
certified to the Township engineer and/or Zoning Administration staff, through
submittal of detailed plans, or survey plat of the subdivision, indicating location,
dimensions, materials, and other information required by the Town Board and
County or Township engineer and/or Zoning Administration staff, that the layout
of the line and grade of all public improvements is in accordance with
construction plans for the subdivision and that the improvements are completed,
are ready for acceptance by the Town Board and are free and clear of any and all
liens and encumbrances. Upon such approval and recommendation, the Town
Board shall accept the improvements for dedication in accordance with
established procedure.
10-11 MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS
The developer shall be required to maintain all improvements in the subdivision or on the
individual subdivided lots and provide for snow removal and maintenance of streets, if required,
until acceptance of said improvements by the Town Board in coordination with the developer's
agreement.
10-12 DEFERRAL OR WAIVER OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 10.6 Improvements
1. The Town Board and/or County may defer or waive at the time of final plat
approval, subject to appropriate conditions, the provision of any or all such
improvements that, in its judgment, are not requisite to the interests of the public
health, safety, and general welfare, or which are inappropriate because of
inadequacy or lack of connecting facilities.
2. Whenever it is deemed necessary by the Town Board and/or County to defer the
construction of any required improvement because of incompatible grades, future
planning, inadequate or lack of connecting facilities, or for other reasons, the
developer shall pay his share of the costs of the future improvements to the Town
Board prior to approval and signing of the final plat and developer's agreement.
Or the developer may post a financial guarantee ensuring completion of said
improvements upon demand of the Town Board and/or County.
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 10.7 Improvements
CHAPTER 11: FINANCIAL GUARANTEE
The three-way developer's agreement provided in Chapter 10 requires the developer to provide a
financial guarantee. The Town Board and County shall determine the appropriate type of
financial guarantee which shall take one of the following forms.
11-1 ESCROW DEPOSIT
An escrow deposit in cash, certificate of deposit, time certificate or other approved form, shall be
made to the Town Board treasurer in the sum equal to one hundred twenty five percent (125%)
of the total cost as estimated by the Township engineer and/or Zoning Administration staff,
including the cost of inspection, legal and administrative costs incurred by the Town Board
and/or County, of all of the improvements to be furnished and installed by the developer
pursuant to the developer's agreement and which have not been installed by the developer prior
to the approval of the final plat.
1. The Town Board and/or County shall be entitled to reimburse itself out of said
deposit for any cost and expense incurred by the Town Board and/or County for
completion of work in a case of default of the developer under said agreement,
and for any damages sustained by the Town Board and/or County on account of
any breach thereof. Upon completion of the work and termination of any liability
to the Town Board and/or County of the developer under said agreement, the
balance remaining in deposit shall be refunded to the developer.
2. Immediately upon completion of said work, the Town Board and/or County shall
submit to the developer an itemized bill in detail, setting forth the actual cost of
inspection by the Town Board and/or County; said bill shall be paid prior to the
acceptance of said work by the Town Board and/or County.
3. In the event that the cash escrow is reduced below one hundred twenty-five (125)
percent of cost of work to be completed, the Township and/or County may stop
work on the subdivision until the escrow deposit is replenished to the amount of
one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the cost of the remaining development
work.
11-2 LETTER OF CREDIT
The developer may furnish the Town Board and/or County with a letter of credit from a financial
institution providing authorization and guarantee to the Town Board and/or County that the
Town Board and/or County may draw on the developer's account, amounts not to exceed the
required financial guarantee. The required financial guarantee shall be the sum equal to one
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 11.1 Financial Guarantee
hundred twenty five (125) percent of the total cost as estimated by the Township engineer and/or
Zoning Administration staff, including the cost of inspection by the Town Board and/or County,
of all of the improvements to be furnished and installed by the developer pursuant to the
agreement and which have not been completed prior to the approval of the final plat. The letter
of credit shall be irrevocable, and shall provide for forty-five (45) days notice to the Town Board
and/or County and approval by the Town Board and/or County of any change, amendment, or
termination. A letter of credit furnished to the County shall automatically renew on January 31,
of each calendar year. The letter of credit shall be accepted as a financial guarantee only after
review and approval, as to form and issuing bank, by the Township and County Attorney and the
Town Board and/or County.
In the event that the letter of credit is reduced below one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of
cost of work to be completed, the Township and/or County may stop work on the subdivision
until the letter of credit is replenished to the amount of one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of
the cost of the remaining development work.
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 11.2 Financial Guarantee
CHAPTER 12: ENFORCEMENT
12-1 VIOLATIONS
The violation of any provision of this Ordinance or the violation of the conditions or provisions
of any permit issued pursuant to this Ordinance shall be a misdemeanor, and upon conviction
thereof, the violator shall be subject to or imprisonment or both, as set forth in Minnesota
Statutes plus, in either case, the cost of prosecution.
12-2 PENALTIES
Unless otherwise provided, each act of violation and every day on which such violation occurs or
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
12-3 APPLICATION TO COUNTY PERSONNEL
The failure of any officer or employee of the County to perform any official duty imposed by
this Ordinance shall not subject the officer or employee to a penalty imposed for violation unless
a penalty is specifically provided for such failure.
12-4 INJUNCTION
In the event of a violation or the threatened violation of any provision of this Ordinance, or any
provision or condition of a permit issued pursuant to this Ordinance, the County, in addition to
other remedies, may institute appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent, restrain, correct, or
abate such violation or threatened violation.
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 12.1 Enforcement
CHAPTER 13: SEVERABILITY,
SUPREMACY, AND EFFECTIVE DATE
13-1 SEVERABILITY
Every section, provision, or part of this Ordinance or any permit issued pursuant to this
Ordinance is declared separable from every other section, provision, or part thereof to the extent
that if any section, provision, or part of this Ordinance or any permit issued pursuant to this
Ordinance shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not invalidate any
other section, provision, or part thereof.
If any court of competent jurisdiction shall judge invalid the application of any provision of this
Ordinance to a particular property, building, or structure, such judgment shall not affect other
properties, buildings or structures.
13-2 SUPREMACY
When any condition imposed by a provision of this Ordinance on the use of land or building or
on the bulk of buildings is either more restrictive or less restrictive than similar conditions
imposed by any provision of any other County ordinance or regulation, the more restrictive
conditions shall prevail.
This Ordinance is not intended to abrogate any easements, restrictions, or covenants relating to
the use of land within the County by private declaration or agreement, but where the provisions
of this Ordinance are more restrictive than any such easement, restriction, or covenant, or the
provision of any private agreement, the provisions of this Ordinance shall prevail.
Scott County Severability, Supremacy,
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 13.1 & Effective Date
CHAPTER 14: EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after June 1, 2011, as amended
SIGNED:
By: ____________________________________________
Chairman of County Board
ATTEST:
By: _____________________________________________
County Administrator
By: _____________________________________________
County Attorney
Scott County
Land Subdivision Ordinance No. 7 14.1 Effective Date
1
SCOTT COUNTY
ORDINANCE NO. 10
ADOPTING THE 2003 MINNESOTA
STATE BUILDING CODE
ADMINISTERED BY
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIVISION
BUILDING INSPECTIONS DEPARTMENT
2
Ordinance No. __10__ Adopting the Minnesota State Building Code
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE MINNESOTA STATE BUILDING CODE. THIS
ORDINANCE: PROVIDES FOR THE APPLICATION, ADMINISTRATION, AND
ENFORCEMENT OF THE MINNESOTA STATE BUILDING CODE BY
REGULATING THE ERECTION, CONSTRUCITON, ENLARGEMENT,
ALTERATION, REPAIR, MOVING, REMOVAL, DEMOLITION, CONVERSION,
OCCUPANCY, EQUIPMENT, USE, HEIGHT, AREA, AND MAINTENANCE OF ALL
BUILDINGS AND/OR STRUCTURES IN THE UNINCORPORATED AREAS OF THE
COUNTY OF SCOTT; PROVIDES FOR THE ISSUANCE OF PERMITS AND
COLLECTION OF FEES THEREOF; PROVIDES PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION
THEREOF; REPEALS ALL ORDINANCES AND PARTS OF ORDINANCES THAT
CONFLICT THEREWITH.
Scott County does ordain as follows:
Section 1. Application, Administration and Enforcement. The application,
administration, and enforcement of the building code shall be in accordance with
Minnesota Rule Chapter 1300. The code shall be enforced within the
extraterritorial limits permitted by Minnesota Statute 16B.62, subdivision 1 when
so established by this ordinance.
The code enforcement agency of Scott County is called the Building Inspections
Department within the Community Development Division.
This code shall be enforced by the Minnesota Certified Building Official
designated by Scott County to administer the code (Minnesota statute 16B.65)
subdivision 1.
Section 2. Permits and Fees. The issuance of permits and the collection of fees
shall be as authorized in Minnesota Statute 16B.62, subdivision 1.
Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by this code in accordance with
the Community Development Fee Schedule for the Scott County Building Code
Ordinance 10, which may be amended from time to time. Said fee schedule is
specifically adopted by this Ordinance. In addition, a surcharge fee shall be
collected on all permits issued for work governed by this code in accordance with
Minnesota Statute 16B.70.
3
Section 3. Violations and Penalties. A violation of the code is a misdemeanor
(Minnesota Statute 16B.69) and Minnesota Rules, Chapter 1300.
Section 4. Building Code. The Minnesota State Building Code, established
pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 16B.59 to 16B.75 is hereby adopted as the building
code for the County of Scott jurisdiction. The code is hereby incorporated in this
ordinance as if fully set out herein.
Adoptive Ordinance – Building Code
A. The Minnesota State Building Code includes the following chapters of
Minnesota Rules:
1. 1300 Administration of the Minnesota State Building Code
2. 1301 Building Official Certification
3. 1302 State Building Construction Approvals
4. 1303 Minnesota Provisions
5. 1305 Adoption of the 2000 International Building Code
6. 1307 Elevators and Related Devices
7. 1309 Adoption of the 2000 International Residential Code
8. 1311 Adoption of the 2000 Guidelines for the Rehabilitation of Existing
Buildings
9. 1315 Adoption of the 2002 National Electrical Code
10. 1325 Solar Energy Systems
11. 1330 Fallout Shelters
12. 1335 Floodproofing Regulations
13. 1341 Adoption of the Minnesota Accessibility Code
14. 1346 Adoption of the Minnesota State Mechanical Code
15. 1350 Manufactured Homes
16. 1360 Prefabricated Buildings
17. 1361 Industrialized/Modular Buildings
18. 1370 Storm Shelters (Manufactured Home Parks)
19. 4715 Minnesota Plumbing Code
20. 7670, 7672, 7674, 7676 and 7678 Minnesota Energy Code
B. No building or structure shall be used or occupied without a Certificate of
Occupancy.
4
Section 5. Effective Date of Ordinance. The effective date of this Ordinance is
May 6, 2003.
Scott County Board of Commissioners
By: ____________________________
Jon Ulrich, Chairman
Attest:
County Administrator
By: ____________________________
David J. Unmacht
Reviewed for Legal:
County Attorney
By: ____________________________
Patrick Ciliberto
1-3-1 Resolution 2013-227, Adopted November 19, 2013
CHAPTER 1
TITLE 3
Hazardous Waste Management Ordinance No. 12
(cite as eg.)
(Scott County Hazardous Waste Management Ordinance No. 12 Section )
Administered by
Community Services Division - Environmental Health & Inspections Dept.
1-3-2 Resolution 2013-227, Adopted November 19, 2013
SCOTT COUNTY HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE No. 12
INDEX
SECTION PAGE
1.00 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY 3
2.00 GENERAL PROVISIONS 3
3.00 STANDARDS FOR HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL PRESERVATION 7
4.00 LICENSING, REGISTRATION AND MANAGEMENT 15
5.00 TERMINATION OF OPERATION OR ABANDONMENT 21
6.00 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 22
7.00 MODIFICATION OF REQUIREMENTS 22
8.00 EFFECTIVE DATE 22
9.00 SEVERABILITY 23
10.00 PROVISIONS ARE CUMULATIVE 23
1-3-3 Resolution 2013-227, Adopted November 19, 2013
SCOTT COUNTY
HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT
ORDINANCE NO. 12
1.00 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY
1.01 Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish rules, regulations and standards
for hazardous waste management in Scott County, Minnesota, for the identification,
labeling, and classification of hazardous waste; the generation, handling, collection,
transportation, and storage of hazardous waste; the treatment, processing and disposal of
hazardous waste; the licensing or registration of hazardous waste generators and
hazardous waste facilities; the payment of license or registration fees; the penalties for
failure to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance; the issuance, denial,
modification, suspension and revocation of licenses and registrations; the imposition of
conditions upon licenses; and other matters as determined to be necessary for the health,
welfare and safety of the public. Further, this Ordinance shall be liberally construed so as
to protect the natural environment from hazardous waste contamination.
1.02 Authority. This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to Minnesota Statutes (Minn. Stat.),
Chapters (Ch.) 145A and 473.
The Scott County Board of Commissioners does ordain:
2.00 GENERAL PROVISIONS
2.01 Administrative Procedures. Provisions of the Scott County Administrative Procedures
Ordinance that are not covered by this Ordinance and do not conflict with provisions of
this Ordinance shall apply.
2.02 Administration. The Scott County Community Services Division, Environmental
Health and Inspections Department shall administer this Ordinance.
2.03 Definitions. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
A. “Agency” means the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA).
B. “Appliance” means any major appliance, as defined in Minnesota Statutes, section
115.A03, that contains components regulated under this Ordinance. Appliances
shall include any device that contains and uses a class I or II substance (as defined
by Code of Federal Regulations, title 40, section 82.3, subpart A, as amended) as a
refrigerant and that is used for household or commercial purposes, including any air
conditioner, dehumidifier, refrigerator, chiller or freezer.
C. “Appliance Generator” means any person that uses, installs, replaces, maintains,
services, or repairs appliances and, as a result, generates appliances or appliance
parts that are regulated under this Ordinance.
D. “Appliance Processor” means any person that scraps, recycles, or disposes of
appliances.
1-3-4 Resolution 2013-227, Adopted November 19, 2013
E. “Circuit Boards” means electrical equipment panels consisting of fiberglass, a paper
and epoxy blend, or other inert material and electrical conductors, traces, or foils.
Circuit boards shall include circuit board trimmings.
F. “Circuit Board Trimmings” means the pieces, including dust particles, that are cut or
trimmed off of circuit boards during the routing, drilling or punching process in
order to make the boards the proper size for use.
G. “County Board” means the Scott County Board of Commissioners.
H. “Department” means the Scott County Community Services Division,
Environmental Health and Inspections Department, its staff, and designated agents.
I. “Electronics” means electronic devices and/or electronic components.
J. “Electronic Component” means subassemblies or other parts derived from the
disassembly of electronic devices that exhibit the toxicity characteristic defined in
Minnesota Rules, part 7045.0131. Electronic components shall include circuit
boards.
K. “Electronic Device” means electronic equipment that contains one or more
electronic circuit boards, cathode ray tubes, or other circuitry or parts that exhibit the
toxicity characteristic defined in Minnesota Rules, part 7045.0131.
L. “Embargo” means an order by the Department prohibiting the movement, removal,
transport, use, treatment, sale, or disposal of a material which is, or is suspected to
be, a hazardous waste and that is being mismanaged or that the Department has
reason to suspect is being or will be managed in violation of this Ordinance.
M. “Facility” shall have the meaning set forth in Minnesota Rules, part 7045.0020,
subpart 24, and shall also include:
1. Facilities that handle, collect, treat, process, recycle, reclaim, store, or dispose
of wastes subject to regulation under this Ordinance, including but not limited
to: amalgam, material contaminated with amalgam, lead acid batteries, batteries
other than lead acid, electronics, lamps, mercury containing equipment,
pesticides, precious metal bearing hazardous waste, recyclable fuel, used oil,
used oil filters, material contaminated with oil, universal wastes, or waste
received at a very small quantity generator program or household hazardous
waste collection program.
2. Transfer facilities storing any amount of hazardous waste for any period of time.
However, transfer facilities are not regulated under this part if the waste is never
unloaded from the transport vehicle while it is at the site and enters and leaves
the site in the same vehicle within ten days.
N. “Generator” has the meaning in Minnesota Rules, part 7045.0020, subpart 31, and
shall include any person, by site, whose act or process produces a universal waste or
electronic waste or whose act first causes a universal waste or electronic waste to
1-3-5 Resolution 2013-227, Adopted November 19, 2013
become subject to regulation. This includes owners of property upon which
hazardous waste or hazardous materials have been abandoned or released.
O. “Hazardous Waste” means any refuse, sludge, spent solutions or other waste
material or combinations of refuse, sludge, spent solutions or other waste materials
in solid, semisolid, liquid, or contained gaseous form which because of its quantity,
concentration, or chemical, physical, or infectious characteristics may (a) cause or
significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious
irreversible, or incapacitating reversible illness; or (b) pose a substantial present or
potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated,
stored, transported, or disposed of, or otherwise managed. Categories of hazardous
waste materials include, but are not limited to, explosives, flammables, oxidizers,
poisons, irritants and corrosives. Hazardous waste does not include source, special
nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42
U.S.C. § 2014), as amended.
P. “Minimal Generator” means any very small quantity generator which generates one
or more of only the following wastes:
1. Any amount of the following wastes:
a. Used oil, waste contaminated with used oil, used oil filters or petroleum
fuel filters;
b. Spent lead-acid batteries managed under Minnesota Rules, part 7045.0685;
c. Universal wastes and electronic wastes as defined by this Ordinance;
d. Waste photographic fixer solution that is shipped off site for recycling;
e. Waste photographic fixer solution if treated on site to remove eighty (80%)
or more percent of the hazardous constituents;
f. Waste recyclable fuel that is not stored or accumulated on site; or
2. One hundred (100) pounds or less per year of hazardous waste not listed in item
1 above, including feedstocks and by-products. None of the waste can be acute
hazardous waste.
Q. “Person” means any human being, any municipality or other governmental or
political subdivision or other public agency, any public or private corporation, any
partnership, firm, association, or other organization, any receiver, trustee, assignee,
agent or other legal representative of any of the foregoing or any other legal entity.
R. “Release,” “Released” or “Releases” means the accidental or intentional spilling,
leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping,
leaching, dumping, or disposing of a waste into the environment.
S. “Universal Waste” shall have the meaning given in the Code of Federal Regulations,
title 40, section 273.9.
1-3-6 Resolution 2013-227, Adopted November 19, 2013
2.04 Compliance. No person shall cause or permit the generation, transportation, disposal or
processing of hazardous waste, or the construction or operation of hazardous waste
facilities, except in full compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, including but
not limited to all provisions requiring full disclosure of information regarding such
generation, transportation, disposal or processing.
2.05 Conditions. The Department may impose conditions on any license, registration, permit,
or variance as deemed necessary to monitor the operation, ensure the public health and
safety and to protect the environment. A person who violates any condition imposed by
the Department on a license, registration, permit or variance shall be deemed in violation
of this Ordinance and subject to the penalty provisions in this Ordinance.
2.06 False Information. Any person who omits any information or submits false information
is in violation of this Ordinance and subject to the penalty provisions in this Ordinance.
2.07 Listing, Delisting and Waste Classification. In the event the Agency modifies the lists
of wastes by listing or delisting, or classifies a waste as hazardous, the County Board
may, by resolution, amend the lists of wastes set forth in this Ordinance, or classify
certain wastes as hazardous, to incorporate said Agency action.
2.08 Agency Program Management Decisions and Policies. The Department may allow
generators and facilities to abide by lesser standards as set forth in Program Management
Decisions and Policies published and authorized by the Agency. If the generator or
facility fails to abide by any Program Management Decision or Policy standards, the
generator or facility is subject to all applicable regulations in Minnesota Rules, Chapter
7045 and this Ordinance.
2.09 Inspection. To ensure compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, the Department
may inspect and evaluate hazardous waste facilities, short-term storage facilities, transfer
facilities, generators, or other sites where the Department has reason to believe hazardous
wastes are or have been present. The Department shall provide the owner and/or operator
with notice of any deficiencies, recommendations for their correction and the date by
which the corrections shall be accomplished. The owner and/or operator shall allow the
Department or its authorized agent access for the purpose of making such inspections as
may be necessary to determine compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance. At
the Department’s election, the owner/operator shall provide free of charge or shall allow
the Department or its agent to collect samples of waste, soils, surface waters, ground
waters, air, raw materials, sewage discharges, or other materials or residues present at or
emanating from the site for testing. The owner and/or operator shall allow for free access
at all reasonable times to inspect and copy all business records related to an owner’s
and/or operator’s generation, collection, processing, and transportation of waste. The
owner and/or operator shall keep all records required to be kept under this Ordinance at
the licensed site and shall make the records readily available for review during the
inspection. The owner and/or operator shall allow the Department to record and
document its findings in any reasonable and appropriate manner including, but not
limited to, notes, photographs, photocopies, readouts from analytical instruments,
videotapes, audio recordings, and computer storage systems or electronic media. When
requested by the Department, the owner and/or operator shall provide photocopies of
records.
1-3-7 Resolution 2013-227, Adopted November 19, 2013
2.10 Right of Entry. Whenever necessary to perform an inspection to enforce any of the
provisions of this Ordinance, or whenever the Department has reasonable cause to
believe that hazardous waste exists in any building or upon any premises, the Department
or its authorized agent may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to
inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the Department by this Ordinance,
provided that if such building or premises is occupied, the authorized agent shall first
present proper credentials and demand entry; and if such building or premises is
unoccupied, the Department shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or
other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and demand entry.
Advance notice is not required. If such entry is refused, or cannot be obtained, the
Department shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry,
including administrative search warrants. If the owner or other person having control of
the premises has threatened an authorized agent of the Department that they will refuse to
allow the Department entry for inspection in the future, then the Department shall have
the authority to obtain an administrative search warrant in advance of an inspection at
that premises, without first being denied entry.
3.00 STANDARDS FOR HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL
PRESERVATION
3.01 Standards Adopted. Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7045, except for Minnesota Rules, parts
7045.1000 through 7045.1030, relating to hazardous waste, which were in effect on
November 19, 2013, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this Ordinance.
3.02 Standards Amended. The above adopted rules are hereby amended as follows:
A. Wherever the term “Minnesota Pollution Control Agency,” “Pollution Control
Agency,” or “agency” appears in these adopted rules, it means “Department” except
in the following Minnesota Rules:
7045.0020, subparts 4, 9c and 73h;
7045.0070;
7045.0075;
7045.0080;
7045.0090 when referenced by
7045.0545, 7045.0546, 7045.0547 and
7045.0548;
7045.0125, subpart 9, item D;
7045.0129;
7045.0133;
7045.0135, subpart 5, item E;
7045.0218;
7045.0243, subpart 3, item D;
7045.0261, subpart 6;
7045.0275, subpart 2;
7045.0302;
7045.0361;
7045.0395;
7045.0397;
7045.0450;
7045.0452, subpart 2;
7045.0468, subpart 2;
7045.0498 through 7045.0524;
7045.0540;
7045.0546;
7045.0552, subpart 3, item A;
7045.0554;
7045.0556, subpart 2;
7045.0574, subpart 2;
7045.0608 through 7045.0624;
7045.0645;
7045.0655, subpart 1;
where used with “Environmental
Protection Agency,” or “federal or
state agency.”
For all exceptions cited above, the referenced terms remain unchanged.
1-3-8 Resolution 2013-227, Adopted November 19, 2013
B. Wherever the term “commissioner” appears in these adopted rules, it means
“Department” except in the following Minnesota Rules:
7045.0020, subpart 6a, item B and
subparts 9c, 22, 34, 43b, 73h and 85a;
7045.0075;
7045.0080;
7045.0090 when referenced by
7045.0545, 7045.0546, 7045.0547 and
7045.0548;
7045.0120, subpart 1, item X;
7045.0125, subpart 4, item N and subpart
9, item D;
7045.0129;
7045.0218;
7045.0265, subparts 1, 2, 3 and 4;
7045.0294, subpart 1a, item B;
7045.0302;
7045.0310, subpart 3, items B and C and
subpart 5, items C and D;
7045.0320, subparts 9 and 10;
7045.0395;
7045.0476, subpart 3, item A;
7045.0498 through 7045.0524;
7045.0528 subpart 4, item D(4);
7045.0545;
7045.0546;
7045.0552, subpart 1a;
7045.0582, subpart 3, item A;
7045.0608 through 7045.0624;
7045.0628, subpart 4, item D(4);
7045.0652, subpart 2, item B;
7045.0665;
7045.0686;
7045.0845;
7045.0875, subpart 8, item B;
7045.0990;
7045.1309;
7045.1315, subpart 2, item G.
For all exceptions cited above, the term “Commissioner” remains unchanged.
C. Wherever the term “permit,” “permittee,” “permitting” or “permitted” appears in
these adopted rules, it means “license,” “licensee,” “licensing” or “licensed” except
in the following Minnesota Rules:
7045.0020, subparts 10b, 15, 23a, 24 and
58a;
7045.0121, subpart 2, item D;
7045.0135, subpart 5, item E;
7045.0208;
7045.0210;
7045.0261, subparts 2 and 6;
7045.0310, subpart 3, item D and subpart
6, item D;
7045.0320;
7045.0397;
7045.0450;
7045.0498 through 7045.0524;
7045.0546;
7045.0552;
7045.0554, subpart 1;
7045.0608 through 7045.0624;
7045.0692, subpart 6, item F;
7045.0790, subpart 7;
where used with “National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System Permit,”
“NPDES Permit,” “State Disposal
System Permit,” “Emission Facility
Operating Permit,” “permit-by-rule,” or
”Air Quality Permit.”
For all exceptions cited above, the referenced terms remain unchanged.
D. The term “Minnesota” or “State of Minnesota” means “County of Scott” in the
following Minnesota Rules:
7045.0210;
7045.0212;
7045.0214;
7045.0240;
7045.0302, subpart 1;
7045.0351, subpart 1;
7045.0355;
7045.0361.
1-3-9 Resolution 2013-227, Adopted November 19, 2013
E. Minnesota Rules, part 7045.0020, subpart 66 is deleted.
F. Minnesota Rules, part 7045.0060 is amended to read as follows:
“No variance may be granted if granting the variance would result in noncompliance
with Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regulations or Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency (MPCA) rules for the generation, storage, processing, treatment,
transportation or disposal of hazardous waste or the operation of hazardous waste
facilities.”
G. Minnesota Rules, part 7045.0135, subpart 5, item C(4) is amended to read as
follows:
“the fee requirements of the Department, unless a generator demonstrates
performance of a PCB phase-out agreement under Minnesota Statutes, section
116.07, subdivision 2b(b).”
H. Minnesota Rules, part 7045.0225, subpart 1 is amended by deleting the last two
sentences.
I. The first paragraph of Minnesota Rules, part 7045.0230, subpart 1 is amended to
read as follows:
“Information required. An application must be on a form provided by the
Department and must include the following information:”
J. Minnesota Rules, part 7045.0230, subpart 1a is deleted.
K. Minnesota Rules, part 7045.0240 is amended by the deletion of the second sentence
in subpart 3.
L. Minnesota Rules, part 7045.0243 is amended by the deletion of subpart 1 and
subpart 3, item C.
M. The first paragraph of Minnesota Rules, part 7045.0248, subpart 1 is amended to
read as follows:
“Applicability. A licensed generator must submit a license renewal application to
the Department on forms provided by the Department. A generator must submit the
application and report by the January 31 preceding the expiration of the generator
license. The application must contain the following information for each hazardous
waste produced during the preceding calendar year.”
N. Minnesota Rules, part 7045.0248, subpart 1, item B is deleted.
O. Minnesota Rules, part 7045.0250 is amended by the deletion of subparts 2, 3 and 4.
P. In Minnesota Rules, part 7045.0292, subparts 1, 5, 6 and 8, the phrase “without a
permit” is amended to read “without a facility permit or license.” The word
“permit” in these references remains unchanged.
1-3-10 Resolution 2013-227, Adopted November 19, 2013
Q. The first paragraph of Minnesota Rules, part 7045.0302, subpart 2 is amended to
read as follows:
“Notification. When shipping hazardous waste outside the state of Minnesota to a
foreign country, the primary exporter must notify the commissioner, the Department
and the EPA of an intended export before the waste is scheduled to leave the United
States. The primary exporter must submit a complete notification 60 days before the
initial shipment is intended to be shipped off site. This notification may cover
export activities extending over a 12-month or lesser period.”
R. The third paragraph of Minnesota Rules, part 7045.0302, subpart 2 is amended to
read as follows:
“The primary exporter must provide the commissioner, the Department and the EPA
with written renotification of any changes to the notification, except for changes to
the telephone number, decreases in the quantity indicated in item B, subitem (3), and
changes in the means of transport in item B, subitem (5). The waste shall not be
shipped until the primary exporter receives an EPA Acknowledgment of Consent
reflecting the receiving country’s consent to the changes.”
S. Minnesota Rules, part 7045.0460, subpart 1, item A is amended to read as follows:
“Procedures are in effect which will cause the waste to be removed safely before
floodwaters can reach the facility to a location where the wastes will not be
vulnerable to floodwaters. The location to which wastes are moved must be a
facility that is either licensed by this Department, or permitted by the EPA or by a
state with a hazardous waste management program authorized by the EPA, or which
has interim status.”
T. The phrase “in chapter 7001” is deleted wherever it appears.
U. The phrase “under chapter 7046” is deleted wherever it appears.
3.03 Standards for Minimal Generators.
A. Management. Minimal generators must manage their waste in accordance with all
applicable federal, state and local rules and regulations, including this Ordinance. A
generator that fails to comply with these requirements may lose or be denied
minimal generator status and be subject to generator standards and fees as described
in this Ordinance.
B. Generation Limits. Minimal generators whose hazardous waste generation does not
conform to the limits defined in section 2.03 P shall lose minimal generator status.
C. Waste Accumulation. A minimal generator must dispose of each of its wastes within
six (6) years of the accumulation start date or as otherwise required by the
Department, this Ordinance or federal universal waste regulations, whichever occurs
first. Minimal generators that fail to ship wastes as required in this section or that
exceed any of the waste accumulation amounts listed in items 1-3 below may lose
minimal generator status. A minimal generator may accumulate up to:
1-3-11 Resolution 2013-227, Adopted November 19, 2013
1. One thousand (1,000) gallons of used oil in tanks and up to two hundred (200)
gallons in containers;
2. One thousand (1,000) pounds each of used oil-contaminated sorbents, used oil
filters and petroleum fuel filters;
3. Sixty-five (65) gallons of hazardous waste as described in section 2.03 P above.
3.04 Standards for the Management of Electronic Waste.
A. Management. Electronic wastes that are managed in compliance with the
management standards specified in this section are not subject to the hazardous
waste management requirements in Minnesota Rules, parts 7045.0205 to 7045.0990
and parts 7045.1390 to 7045.1400, except for those provisions specified by reference
in this Ordinance. Electronic wastes that are not managed in compliance with the
standards specified in this section must be managed in accordance with all applicable
hazardous waste management requirements in Minnesota Rules, parts 7045.0205 to
7045.0990 and parts 7045.1390 to 7045.1400. The provisions of this section apply
to all generators and facilities. Facilities must not accumulate electronic waste in a
manner that is considered speculative accumulation as defined in Minnesota Rules,
part 7045.0020.
B. Household Electronic Waste. A person who collects electronic waste generated by
households or commingles electronic waste generated by households with any
electronic waste defined in this Ordinance shall manage the collected electronic
waste or commingled electronic waste under the requirements of this Ordinance.
C. Storage and Handling. Electronics must be handled and stored in a manner to
prevent damage, breakage or harm to human health or the environment. Indoor and
outdoor storage areas must be designed to prevent release of electronic waste,
including components or residues of electronics, to soil or water and protect
electronics from exposure to precipitation. Electronics must be stored to allow for
adequate aisle space and for the unobstructed movement of personnel and equipment
in an emergency.
D. Storage limits.
1. Accumulation Time and Quantity Limits.
a. Generator: A generator may accumulate electronic waste no longer than
one (1) year from the date the waste is generated or up to ten thousand
(10,000) pounds, whichever occurs first. Generators may not exceed the
one year time limit or the 10,000 pound quantity limit without prior written
approval from the Department.
b. Facility: A facility may store up to 40,000 pounds of electronic waste for
up to one year. Upon reaching 40,000 pounds or one year, whichever
occurs first, all electronic waste must be shipped within ten days. Facilities
must not exceed these time or quantity limits without prior written approval
from the Department.
1-3-12 Resolution 2013-227, Adopted November 19, 2013
c. Generators and facilities must be able to demonstrate the length of time that
the electronic waste has been accumulated from the date it becomes a
waste.
E. Labeling of Containers. Generators and facilities shall label each waste container
with a brief description of the waste such as the words “used electronics,” “waste
electronics” or “electronics for recycling.”
F. Responses to Releases or Detection of Inadequate Container. In the event of a
release, any electronic waste generator, collector, or facility shall immediately stop
and contain any release of an electronic waste, including all components or residues
of an electronic waste.
G. Treatment.
1. A generator is prohibited from conducting any treatment of electronic waste
except for activities associated with shredding or cutting up circuit boards or
hard drives.
2. The Department will establish site specific licensing conditions governing
treatment by facilities. No treatment of electronics is allowed without prior
written approval by the Department.
H. Record Keeping. Any person, generator or facility shipping electronic waste must
keep records for all shipments and shall make the records immediately available
during an inspection. Each record shall be maintained on-site for a period of three
(3) years from the date the shipment was initiated. The records or shipping
documents must include the following information:
1. The name, address, and telephone number of the shipper.
2. The name, address, and telephone number of the destination(s) where the
electronic waste was sent.
3. The description and quantity of each type of electronic waste sent.
4. The date the shipment of electronic waste left the site.
3.05 Standards for the Management of Universal Waste.
A. Management. Generators and facilities must manage universal waste in accordance
with Minnesota Rules, part 7045.1400 and this section. Universal wastes that are not
managed in accordance with the standards in Minnesota Rules 7045.1400 and this
section are subject to all applicable hazardous waste management requirements in
Minnesota Rules, parts 7045.0205 to 7045.0990 and part 7045.1390.
B. Household Universal Waste. A person who collects universal waste generated by
households or commingles universal waste generated by households with any
universal waste shall manage the collected universal waste or commingled universal
waste under the requirements of this Ordinance.
1-3-13 Resolution 2013-227, Adopted November 19, 2013
C. Applicability. The term handler adopted in Minnesota Rules, part 7045.1400 shall
mean:
1. Generator: when the universal waste activity meets the definition of
“generator” in this Ordinance.
2. Facility: when the universal waste activity meets the definition of “facility” in
this Ordinance.
D. Record Keeping. Any person, generator or facility shipping universal waste must
keep records of all shipments and shall make the records immediately available
during an inspection. Each record shall be maintained on-site for a period of three
years from the date the shipment was initiated. The record may take the form of a
log, invoice, uniform hazardous waste manifest, bill of lading, or other shipping
document. The record for each shipment of universal waste must include the
following information:
1. The name, address, and telephone number of the shipper.
2. The name, address, and telephone number of the destination(s) where the
universal waste was sent.
3. The description and quantity of each type of universal waste sent.
4. The date the shipment of universal waste left the site.
E. Storage and Handling. Universal wastes must be handled and stored in a manner to
prevent damage, breakage or harm to human health or the environment. Universal
wastes must be stored to allow for adequate aisle space and for the unobstructed
movement of personnel and equipment in an emergency. Wastes stored outside
must be placed in a closed, structurally sound non-leaking container that is
compatible with the contents.
F. Additional Storage Standards. Any person, generator or facility must store mercury
or mercury containing equipment in a securely closed container. The container must
be structurally sound, compatible with the contents, and must lack evidence of
leakage, spillage, or damage that could cause leakage under reasonably foreseeable
conditions and must be reasonably designed to prevent the escape of mercury into
the environment by volatilization or any other means.
3.06 Standards for Appliance Generators and Processors.
A. Appliance generators and processors shall manage their waste in accordance with all
applicable federal, state and local rules and regulations.
B. Appliance generators and processors must not accumulate appliances or appliance
waste in a manner that is considered speculative accumulation as defined in
Minnesota Rules, part 7045.0020.
C. Appliance processors shall ensure that all capacitors and light ballasts that may
contain PCBs are removed and managed as hazardous waste.
1-3-14 Resolution 2013-227, Adopted November 19, 2013
D. Appliance processors shall remove and reclaim, destroy or properly dispose of
chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) or hydrochlorofluorocarbon (HCFC) (commonly called
by the trade name “Freon”) refrigerants.
E. Appliance processors shall remove and properly manage any hazardous solutions or
vapors contained in gas air conditioners and gas refrigerators as hazardous waste.
F. Appliance processors shall remove and properly manage switches, relays,
temperature devices, lamps, and other components containing mercury.
G. After complying with 3.06 A through F, the appliance is scrap metal as defined by
Minnesota Rules, part 7045.0020, subpart 79a and, if recycled, may be excluded
from further regulation under this Ordinance.
H. Appliance processors shall be licensed as a hazardous waste facility.
I. Appliance generators that generate no other hazardous wastes do not need a
generator license unless the Department determines that the appliance generator is
not managing its waste in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local rules
and regulations. In that case, the Department may require that the appliance
generator obtain a Very Small Quantity Generator license, subject to the license
terms in Section 4.12, item C for denial of minimal generator status.
J. Appliance processors shall comply with the refrigerant technician certification
requirements in Code of Federal Regulations, title 40, part 82 and shall provide
proof of certification if requested by the Department.
K. Persons who take the final step in the disposal process of appliances (including but
not limited to scrap recyclers) must obtain a signed statement from the persons from
whom the appliance or shipment of appliances is received pursuant to Code of
Federal Regulations, title 40, section 82.156. The signed statement must verify that
all refrigerants have been removed from the appliances and must be made available
to the Department upon request.
L. Storage and Handling. Appliances must be handled and stored in a manner to
prevent damage, breakage or harm to human health or the environment. Appliances
must be stored to allow for adequate aisle space and for the unobstructed movement
of personnel and equipment in an emergency.
M. Record Keeping. Appliance generators and processors shall keep records for all
shipments they make of appliances that contain hazardous components and
hazardous components that have been removed from appliances. Appliance
generators and processors shall maintain each record on site for a period of three (3)
years from the date the shipment was initiated and shall keep the records easily
available for inspection. The record may take the form of a log, invoice, uniform
hazardous waste manifest, bill of lading, or other shipping document. The record for
each shipment must include the following information:
1. The name, address, and telephone number of the shipper.
1-3-15 Resolution 2013-227, Adopted November 19, 2013
2. The name, address, and telephone number of the destination(s) where the
appliances or hazardous components were shipped.
3. The description and quantity of each type of appliance or hazardous component
shipped.
4. The date the shipment of waste left the site.
4.00 LICENSING, REGISTRATION AND MANAGEMENT
4.01 License or Registration Required. Unless otherwise provided by this Ordinance, no
person shall, within the County, make or allow property under that person’s control to be
used for any activity that generates wastes regulated under this Ordinance except at an
individual generation site for which a hazardous waste generator license or registration
has been granted by the Department. Unless otherwise provided by this Ordinance, no
person shall, within the County, store, deposit, keep, collect, accumulate, process, treat,
reclaim, recycle, dispose of, or otherwise handle, process or cause to be transported,
wastes regulated under this Ordinance except at a site or facility for which a facility
license has been granted by the Department. The Department may allow a person that
does not possess a facility license to accept at the site wastes regulated under this
Ordinance if: the person is regulated by the Department, the Agency is not requiring a
permit for that facility activity, the person is in full compliance with this Ordinance, and
taking the waste is only an ancillary service and source of revenue to the person’s
primary business activity.
4.02 Licensing or Registration not Exclusive. Obtaining any license or registration required
by this Ordinance does not exclude the necessity of obtaining other appropriate licenses
or permits except as expressly provided in this Ordinance. Compliance with the
provisions of this Ordinance shall not relieve any person of the need to comply with any
and all other applicable rules, regulations and laws.
4.03 Fees.
A. Generators and facilities shall pay fees as established by resolution of the County
Board.
B. The County Board may, by resolution, establish other such fees as may be necessary
for the administration of this Ordinance.
C. Fees for new licenses and registration are due thirty (30) days after the billing date.
Fees for renewal of generator licenses are due on the last day of February prior to the
expiration of the current license. Fees for renewal of facility licenses shall be
received by the Department no later than May 31. As used herein, this includes all
fees as established by resolution of the County Board.
D. Fees for generator license renewal are based on the past year’s rate of generation. If
the license is for new waste generation, the fee is based on an estimated rate of
generation which is acceptable to the Department.
1-3-16 Resolution 2013-227, Adopted November 19, 2013
4.04 License Term. Unless otherwise provided by the County Board, each license granted
pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance is nontransferable and valid for a period of
not more than one year, except that initial generator licenses may be issued for a period
of up to fifteen (15) months, unless earlier suspended or revoked. The license year for
hazardous waste generators shall be from April 1 through March 31. The license year for
hazardous waste facilities shall be from July 1 through June 30.
4.05 License or Registration Application.
A. Applications. Applicants shall submit applications for registration, license or license
renewal to the Department on forms provided by the Department. Applicants shall
provide such information as may be needed for the administration of this Ordinance.
B. Generators. Generators shall submit to the Department a license or registration
application. The license or registration application shall include the information
specified in Minnesota Rules, parts 7045.0230 or 7045.0248, or as requested by the
Department. Applications for a generator license or registration received more than
seventy-five (75) days after first producing a hazardous waste, or applications for
license renewal received after January 31, are late and subject to a late application
penalty. Applications for license modification are late and subject to the late
application penalty if received later than provided in Minnesota Rules, part
7045.0243, subpart 3, item G. The date of receipt is the postmark date if mailed or
the Department date of receipt if hand delivered or submitted electronically.
C. Facilities. All facilities shall submit to the Department a license application. Where
an Agency permit is required, applicants shall also submit, on request, all of the
documents and supporting information required by the Agency in its permitting
process. The County Board or Department shall impose license conditions as
deemed necessary to monitor the operation, ensure public health and safety, and to
protect the environment. A facility shall not commence any activity or operation
that would require a facility license until the facility has been issued a facility license
by the Department. The facility license must be posted in a public area at the site.
D. Collection Events. A collection event is the collection of waste as defined by this
Ordinance by a person for a period of not more than three (3) consecutive days.
Collection event applicants must register with and submit the required fee, if any, to
the Department ten (10) days prior to the actual collection event. Applicants shall
provide such information as may be needed for the administration of this Ordinance
on forms provided by the Department. If the registration is not complete, does not
conform with the requirements of this Ordinance or the requirements of the city
and/or township in which the collection event is taking place, or may otherwise
cause harm to the public or environment, the application may be denied. The
collection event may not commence until such time that the registration is approved
by the Department and any required fee is paid. Applications and fees submitted
less than 10 (ten) days prior to the proposed collection event shall be subject to a late
application penalty fee as established by resolution of the County Board.
4.06 Incomplete or Non-Conforming Application.
A. Generator. If an application for a generator registration, license or license renewal is
not complete or otherwise does not conform with the requirements in this Ordinance,
1-3-17 Resolution 2013-227, Adopted November 19, 2013
the Department shall advise the applicant within thirty (30) days of application
receipt of the reasons for non-acceptance and may request that the applicant
resubmit, modify or otherwise alter the application. The applicant shall comply with
such requests within the time specified by the Department.
B. Facility. If an application for a facility license or license renewal is not complete or
otherwise does not conform with the requirements in this Ordinance, the Department
shall advise the applicant within forty-five (45) days of application receipt of the
reasons for non-acceptance and may request that the applicant resubmit, modify or
otherwise alter the application. The applicant shall comply with such requests
within the time specified by the Department.
4.07 Renewal.
Generator. Generator applications for license renewal shall be received by the
Department no later than January 31. Applications for license renewal must be
accompanied by a statement of any change in information submitted in the last approved
license or in the license renewal application. If there are no changes, it shall be so stated
in the license renewal application. If the Department does not act on a generator license
renewal application, which is complete and submitted on time, the current license shall
continue in force until action is taken.
Facility. Facility applications for license renewal shall be received by the Department no
later than February 28. Applications for license renewal must be accompanied by a
statement of any change in information submitted in the last approved license or in the
license renewal application. If there are no changes, it shall be so stated in the license
renewal application. If the Department does not act on a facility license renewal
application, which is complete and submitted on time, the current license shall continue
in force until action is taken.
4.08 Denial.
A. Generator. Failure by the Department to act on an initial generator license or
registration application within sixty (60) days from the date of receipt of a completed
application shall constitute grounds for the applicant to request a hearing.
B. Facility. Failure by the County Board or Department to act on an initial facility
license application within sixty (60) days from the date of receipt of a completed
application shall constitute grounds for the applicant to request a hearing.
C. Denial For Cause. The Department may deny a license when there is evidence of
noncompliance with this Ordinance. The Department may deny a license in cases
where a local unit of government has informed the Department that the applicant’s
site is not zoned for a specific type of hazardous waste activity or when the
hazardous waste activity may otherwise cause harm to human health or the
environment.
4.09 Waste Management.
A. On-site Treatment. For licensing purposes, the Department may consider on-site
treatment by the generator of on-site generated hazardous waste as part of the
1-3-18 Resolution 2013-227, Adopted November 19, 2013
generator’s licensure or registration and may exempt such on-site treatment from
facility licensing requirements. Such exemption shall be limited to the following
types of treatment: the specific treatment activities allowed in Minnesota Rules, parts
7045.0450, subpart 3, item K; 7045.0652; and 7045.0855, subpart 3; and/or recovery
of reusable solvents by distillation. The treatment must be described in the generator
license or registration application and approved by the Department. The Department
may require generators who do on-site treatment as identified above to comply with
the requirements of Minnesota Rules, parts 7045.0558; 7045.0562, subparts 1 and 2;
and 7045.0566 through 7045.0576 or may impose such license or registration
conditions as may be deemed necessary to monitor the treatment operation and ensure
public health and safety.
B. Speculative Accumulation. A person, generator or facility must not accumulate waste
in a manner that is considered speculative accumulation as defined in Minnesota
Rules, part 7045.0020.
C. Use of Household Hazardous Waste Collection Site. Delivery of waste regulated
under this Ordinance to a household hazardous waste collection site is prohibited.
D. Sewered Wastes or Waste Discharged to Waters of the State. Facilities and
generators utilizing any sewer system or waters of the state for the disposal or
conveyance of hazardous wastes, or the disposal of residuals of hazardous waste
after treatment, shall comply with all federal, state, and local laws, including the
requirements of this Ordinance. Facilities and generators shall maintain a copy of
any permits or reports required by the Metropolitan Council Environmental Services
(MCES) or other Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW), or as a condition of a
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) or State Disposal
System (SDS) permit concerning the character, concentration and quantity of the
sewered hazardous waste or residuals of hazardous waste after treatment. Facilities
and generators shall maintain these records on site and make them easily available
for inspection by the Department for a period of three years from the report date.
The Department may impose conditions to a facility or generator license as deemed
necessary to monitor the discharge operation and ensure public health and safety.
E. Prohibited Discharge. Any disposal of hazardous waste or industrial waste into
Class V Injection Wells, as defined by Code of Federal Regulations, title 40, section
144.6, including septic tanks, trenches and dry wells, is prohibited.
4.10 Financial Assurance and Insurance.
A. In General.
1. Facilities Licensed by the County Board. A facility license shall be contingent
upon the applicant furnishing financial assurance in accordance with section
4.10 B below and proof of adequate insurance in accordance with section 4.10 C
below.
2. Generators and Facilities Licensed by the Department.
a. Unless otherwise provided by the County Board or Department, applicants
for a generator or facility license issued by the Department are not required
1-3-19 Resolution 2013-227, Adopted November 19, 2013
to provide evidence of financial assurance or insurance as a condition to
licensure.
b. Whenever the Department concludes that hazardous waste has been
mismanaged by a licensed generator or facility, or that it is likely the
generator or facility will not be able to meet its financial obligations to
properly manage its hazardous waste, the Department may require that the
generator or facility furnish to the Department financial assurance in
accordance with section 4.10 B below. The amount and form of the
financial assurance are subject to the approval of the County Risk Manager
and the County Attorney’s Office.
B. Financial Assurance.
1. License Contingent on Financial Assurance. When required by this Ordinance
and unless otherwise provided by the County Board, issuance of any license
pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance shall be contingent upon the
applicant furnishing to the Department financial assurance in an amount and
form set by the County Board and naming the County as obligee.
At the time of renewal or extension of any facility or generator license for which
financial assurance was required, the amount and financial assurance
mechanism previously approved shall continue to be required, unless otherwise
changed by the Department as provided in section 4.10 B. 3 below.
2. Requirements for Financial Assurance Mechanisms. When financial assurance
is required, the licensee shall provide financial assurance through a financial
institution acceptable to the County Risk Manager and the County Attorney’s
Office using one or a combination of the following mechanisms:
a. Single Access Cash Account. The funds in this account may only be
withdrawn by, or with the consent of, the County. The Department shall
notify the licensee when financial assurance funds are being withdrawn and
shall state the reasons for such withdrawal.
b. Irrevocable Letter of Credit.
c. License and Permit Bond. Acceptable surety companies include those
companies that are licensed and authorized to transact corporate surety
business in the State of Minnesota and that are listed as acceptable sureties
on federal bonds in Circular 570, issued by the United States Department of
the Treasury, as published annually in the Federal Register on July 1.
3. Annual Review and Adjustment. All financial assurance required by this
Ordinance is subject to annual review by the Department. Adjustments shall be
based on published economic indicators deemed relevant by the County Risk
Manager and the County Attorney’s Office, modifications to the specifications
or operations of the licensed facility or generator, and/or changes in the
licensee’s costs to manage its hazardous waste. The licensee shall have the
right to appeal the adjustment to the County Board.
1-3-20 Resolution 2013-227, Adopted November 19, 2013
C. Insurance. Issuance of a facility license shall be contingent upon the applicant
furnishing to the County satisfactory evidence of compliance with Minnesota Rules,
parts 7045.0518 and 7045.0620, or as otherwise required by the County Board or the
Department . The County shall be notified 30 days prior to the effective date of a
cancellation or change of insurance. Cancellation or significant change of coverage
relative to the concerns of a license are cause for revocation of a license.
Unless otherwise provided by the County Board or Department, issuance of a license
to a facility shall be contingent upon the applicant furnishing to the County a
certificate of insurance showing that the applicant maintains the following minimum
coverage:
1. A commercial general liability insurance policy covering all premises and
operation with limits of not less than $1,000,000 for personal injuries arising
from one occurrence, $1,000,000 for damages arising from death and/or total
bodily injuries arising from one occurrence, and $1,000,000 for property
damage arising from one occurrence, or a combined single limit thereof, with a
$2,000,000 annual aggregate.
2. A business automobile liability insurance policy, if applicable, with limits of
$1,000,000 per accident for death, bodily injury and/or damages to any one
person, $1,000,000 for total bodily injuries and/or damages arising from one
accident and with limits of not less than $1,000,000 per accident for property
damage.
3. Workers compensation coverage at the statutory limits or written confirmation
that the applicant is a qualified self-insured or is otherwise exempt under Minn.
Stat.§ 176.041.
4.11 Change in Facility Operation. No change shall be made in the operation of a hazardous
waste facility unless such change is first approved by the Department.
4.12 Minimal Generators. Minimal generators shall comply with the following registration
requirements:
A. Registration Term. Registration shall be effective as long as the generator meets the
minimal generator definition and standards pursuant to section 3.03 above.
B. Registration Modification. Minimal generators shall notify the Department within
thirty (30) days whenever any of the following occurs:
1. The business closes.
2. The business is sold or otherwise changes ownership.
3. The business moves to a new location.
4. The business produces other hazardous waste not disclosed in their current
registration.
5. The business assumes a new name.
1-3-21 Resolution 2013-227, Adopted November 19, 2013
6. The generator’s hazardous waste generation does not conform to the limits
defined in section 2.03 P above.
C. Loss of Minimal Generator Status. Any generator who loses or is denied minimal
generator status pursuant to section 3.03 above shall be subject to the full generator
licensing standards of this Ordinance. The generator shall not be eligible to regain
minimal generator status for a period of two (2) full license years and to regain
minimal generator status, the generator must be in compliance with the minimal
generator standards defined in this Ordinance. An inspection by the Department
may be required to confirm compliance with these standards.
Once minimal generator status has been lost or denied, the generator shall not gain
minimal generator status except under the terms defined in section 3.03 above.
5.00 TERMINATION OF OPERATION OR ABANDONMENT
5.01 Termination of Operation.
Any person who, for any reason, terminates operations at a site, must remove all
hazardous waste and materials contaminated with hazardous waste prior to termination of
operations. Termination of operations may include the sale of a site or operation to a new
entity, the forfeiture of a property, the simple shutdown of a business or site that is then
not operating, the relinquishing of lease or rental rights to a property, or a change in
operation eliminating all generation of hazardous waste. The person must remove the
waste from the site in a timely manner as determined by the Department and
accomplished in full compliance with this Ordinance and Minnesota Rules, Chapter
7045.
The person must retain copies of records demonstrating compliance with this section,
including reports, contracts, evaluation documentation meeting the requirements of
Minnesota Rules, part 7045.0214, uniform hazardous waste manifests, shipping papers,
invoices, receipts, or bills of lading, for at least three (3) years and shall make the records
available for inspection if requested by the Department.
Materials remaining on the site of a terminated operation are waste materials. A person
who continues to store hazardous waste(s) on the site of a terminated operation shall do
so in compliance with the hazardous waste storage facility rules in Minnesota Rules,
Chapters 7045 and 7001 and this Ordinance.
5.02 Abandonment.
Any person who owns property on which hazardous waste or materials contaminated
with hazardous waste has been abandoned must remove all waste and contaminated
materials. The person must remove the waste and contaminated materials in full
compliance with this Ordinance and in a timely manner as determined by the Department.
Continued storage of the waste on the abandonment site is prohibited.
1-3-22 Resolution 2013-227, Adopted November 19, 2013
6.00 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
6.01 Misdemeanor. Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance is
guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
6.02 Injunctive Relief. In the event of a violation or a threat of violation of this Ordinance,
the County may institute appropriate actions or proceedings, including requesting
injunctive relief to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such violations or threatened
violations.
6.03 Civil Action or Cost as a Special Tax. If a person fails to comply with the provisions of
this Ordinance, the County may recover costs incurred for corrective action in a civil
action in any court of competent jurisdiction or, at the discretion of the County Board, the
costs may be certified to the County Auditor as a special tax against real property.
6.04 Embargo. The Department may embargo and forbid the movement, removal, transport,
disposal, treatment, sale, or use of any material that is or is suspected to be a hazardous
waste or material contaminated with hazardous waste and that is being mismanaged or
that the Department has reason to suspect is being or will be managed in violation of this
Ordinance. The Department shall place a tag to indicate the embargo on the suspect
material. No person shall remove the tag or remove, transport, dispose, treat, sell, or use
such embargoed material except as authorized by the Department. Such action by the
Department shall not be considered to impute ownership or management responsibility
upon the County.
7.00 MODIFICATION OF REQUIREMENTS
7.01 Waivers or Modifications. The County Board may waive or modify the strict
application of the provisions of this Ordinance by reducing or waiving certain
requirements when such requirements are unnecessary or impractical, or by imposing
additional requirements necessary to reduce risk of harm to persons, property or the
environment.
7.02 Agency Approval. No modification or waiver may be granted if it would result in
noncompliance with Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7045 unless such modification or waiver
has been approved or granted by the Agency.
7.03 Closure and Post-Closure. For facilities permitted or granted interim status by the
Agency, the Department shall grant amendments to the facility closure and post-closure
plans and extensions to the closure and post-closure period only where the amendments
or extensions have been approved by the Agency.
8.00 EFFECTIVE DATE
8.01 This Ordinance is effective upon the publication of the minutes of these proceedings in
the official newspaper of the County.
1-3-23 Resolution 2013-227, Adopted November 19, 2013
8.02 This Ordinance shall not be construed to hold the Department or County of Scott or its
officers or employees responsible for any damage to persons or property by reason of the
inspection or re-inspection authorized; or by reason of the approval or disapproval of
equipment or licensing; nor for any action in connection with the inspection or control of
hazardous waste or related business records or in connection with any other official
duties.
9.00 SEVERABILITY.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the County Board that the provisions of this
Ordinance shall be severable in accordance with the following:
A. Validity of Provisions. If any Court of competent jurisdiction determines that any
provision of this Ordinance is invalid, such determination shall not affect any of the
provisions of this Ordinance not specifically included in said judgment.
B. Application to Site or Facility. If any Court of competent jurisdiction determines
that the application of any provision of this Ordinance to a particular structure, site,
facility or operation is invalid, such determination shall not affect the application of
the provision to any other structure, site, facility or operation not specifically
included in the Court’s ruling, judgment, or action.
10.00 PROVISIONS ARE CUMULATIVE
The provisions of this Ordinance are cumulative to all other current and future laws,
ordinances and regulations covering any subject matter in this Ordinance.
Adopted by the Scott County Board of Commissioners on April 1, 1980.
Amended by the Scott County Board of Commissioners on:
- November 20, 1984
- July 23, 1985
- July 29, 1986
- July 21, 1987
- December 12, 1989
- January 17, 1995
- October 7, 2003
- November 19, 2013
CHAPTER 1
TITLE 1
Administrative Procedures Ordinance No. 13
(Cite as eg.)
(Scott County Administrative Procedures Ordinance No. 13 Section)
Administered by
Planning, Inspections and Environmental Health
Scott County
Administrative Procedures Ordinance
2
INDEX
1.00 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.............................................................................................................3
2.00 DEFINITIONS..............................................................................................................................................3
3.00 LICENSE PROVISIONS ..............................................................................................................................4
4.00 DUTIES OF THE COUNTY ........................................................................................................................6
5.00 PROCEDURES FOR PROCESSING LICENSE APPLICATIONS, RENEWALS,
SUSPENSIONS, AND REVOCATIONS..............................................................................................................6
6.00 VARIANCE....................................................................................................................................................8
7.00 APPEALS PROCEDURES...........................................................................................................................9
8.00 SEVERABILITY. ........................................................................................................................................12
9.00 PROVISIONS ACCUMULATIVE...........................................................................................................12
10.00 NO CONSENT..........................................................................................................................................12
Scott County
Administrative Procedures Ordinance
3
SCOTT COUNTY
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 13
1.00 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY
1.01 PURPOSE. It is the purpose of this ordinance to establish a
uniform standard for the administration and enforcement of
the provisions of the Scott County ordinances.
1.02 APPLICABILITY. The provisions of this ordinance shall apply
to the administration and enforcement of all Scott County
ordinances, unless otherwise expressly provided for in
another ordinance.
2.00 DEFINITIONS.
The following words and phrases, unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise, shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this section.
2.01 "ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING" shall mean a department hearing
subject to the procedural requirements of section 7.01 of
this ordinance.
2.02 "ADMINISTRATOR" shall mean the Scott County Administrator.
2.03 "COUNTY" shall mean the County of Scott.
2.04 "COUNTY BOARD" shall mean the Scott County Board of
Commissioners.
2.05 "DEPARTMENT" shall mean the Commission, Department, Office,
Agency, Board or Officer, authorized by law to administer a
Scott County Ordinance.
2.06 "FORMAL HEARING" means a proceeding in which the legal
rights, duties or privileges of a party are required by this
ordinance to be reviewed by a Hearing Officer subject to the
procedural requirements of Section 7.02 of this ordinance.
2.07 "HEARING OFFICER" means an individual appointed to conduct a
hearing.
2.08 "LICENSE" includes the whole or part of any departmental
permit, certificate, approval, registration, or similar form
of permission or renewal required by law.
2.09 "LICENSEE" shall mean the person who has been given the
authority by the issuance of a license, by the County to
establish, operate and/or maintain a facility or activity
regulated by Scott County Ordinances.
Scott County
Administrative Procedures Ordinance
4
2.10 "LICENSING" includes the departmental process respecting the
issuance, denial, renewal, revocations, suspension, or
amendment of a license.
2.11 "PARTY" means each person or department named or admitted as
a party.
2.12 "PERSON" shall mean any individual person, partnership,
corporation, association, governmental subdivision, or
public or private organization of any character other than a
Department.
3.00 LICENSE PROVISIONS
3.01 LICENSE REQUIRED. Unless otherwise provided by ordinance,
no person shall, within the County, operate any facility,
engage in any activity, or permit property under his or its
control to be used for any activity, which is regulated by a
Scott County Ordinance without the appropriate license
issued by the Department permitting such activity.
3.02 APPLICATION FORM. Application for a license or license
renewal shall be on forms furnished by the department. The
applicant shall provide such information as may be required
by the ordinance under which the license is issued and any
further information as the Department may require for the
administration and enforcement of said license.
3.03 GROUNDS FOR DENIAL. Omission of any information or
submission of false information may constitute grounds for
the denial of the license applied for or the suspension or
revocation of an issued license.
3.04 LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE
A. License obtained pursuant to a Scott County ordinance shall not be transferable.
B. All licensees, other than a government, shall submit written notice to the
department of any change of name or address of the person designated by the licensee to
receive legal process on or before thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of said
change.
3.05 LICENSEE RESPONSIBILITY. The licensee shall:
A. Be responsible for compliance with all applicable provisions of the Scott County
ordinance under which the license is issued.
B. Allow the department, county board or their authorized representatives, access to
the site or facility subject to the license at any time for the purpose of making
such inspections or obtaining such free samples as may be necessary to determine
Scott County
Administrative Procedures Ordinance
5
compliance with the requirements of the ordinance under which the license is
issued.
C. Allow the department or their authorized representative access to records
concerning the licensed operation.
3.06 LICENSE AVAILABLE. The license shall be maintained and
available upon request by the department, or its authorized
representative, at all times at all facilities or activities
licensed under a Scott County Ordinance.
3.07 FEE REQUIRED
A. All license and renewal applications must be accompanied by the appropriate fee.
The amount of each license or license renewal fee, or such other fees as may be
needed for the administration of the applicable ordinance, plus the method and
time of payment thereof shall be determined by resolution of the County Board.
B. Unless otherwise provided in the ordinance under which a license was issued,
new license applications received by the department after the date specified in the
ordinance, shall be considered late and shall be assessed a late application penalty
of 25 percent of the license fee.
C. Unless otherwise provided in the ordinance under which a license was issued,
license renewal applications received by the department less than thirty (30) days
before commencement of the applicable license year or in the case of seasonal
operations, less than thirty (30) days before commencement of the seasonal
operation, shall be considered late and shall be assessed a late application penalty
of 25 percent of the license fee.
3.08 CONDITIONS
A. Violation of any condition imposed by the County on a license, permit, or
variance, shall be deemed a violation of the ordinance and subject to the penalty
provisions set forth in the ordinance and/or revocation of the license, permit or
variance.
B. Violations of an ordinance that necessitate follow-up inspections by the
department shall, in addition to any other penalties, be subject to an administrative
charge for each follow-up inspection. This inspection charge shall be established
by County Board resolution. The reinspection payment must be received by the
department within ten (10) days following the reinspection. Failure by the
licensee to pay a reinspection charge shall be grounds for revocation of a license.
This charge shall not apply to permits or variances, except where a licensee is
performing a permitted activity.
Scott County
Administrative Procedures Ordinance
6
4.00 DUTIES OF THE COUNTY
4.01 ADMINISTRATOR RESPONSIBILITY. The administrator, under the
general supervision of the County Board, shall be
responsible for the administration of this ordinance and all
other county ordinances.
4.02 DEPARTMENT DUTIES. The duties of the department shall
include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following:
A. To review and consider all license applications submitted to the County which are
regulated by county ordinance and, after consideration to recommend an
application disposition to the county board or issue said license as may be
appropriate.
B. To inspect regulated facilities or activities with such frequency as to insure
consistency and compliance with the provisions of the ordinance under which the
license is issued.
C. To refer, according to department procedures, information indicating violation(s)
of ordinance provisions to the Scott County Attorney's Office.
5.00 PROCEDURES FOR PROCESSING LICENSE APPLICATIONS, RENEWALS,
SUSPENSIONS, AND REVOCATIONS
5.01 APPLICATION REVIEW. The following provisions shall apply to
the department review of initial license applications.
A. Unless otherwise provided in the ordinance under which a license is issued, the
department shall have thirty (30) days to issue or deny the license. Failure by the
department to act on an application within the thirty (30) days shall constitute a
denial.
B. Once the department has decided on the disposition of the license application or
renewal application, the applicant shall be notified in writing of its decision.
C. Where a license is denied, the department shall state the factual basis for its
decision and notice of its decision shall be personally served on the applicant or
shall be served by registered or certified mail to said applicant at the address
designated in the license application. The applicant shall have a right to request
an administrative hearing in accordance with the provisions in section 7.01 of this
ordinance.
5.02 SUSPENSION
A. Any license required under a Scott County ordinance may be suspended by the
department for violation of any provision of the ordinance under which the license
was issued. Upon written notice to the administrator, said license may be
Scott County
Administrative Procedures Ordinance
7
suspended by the department for a period not longer than sixty (60) days or until
the violation is corrected.
B. Such suspension shall not occur earlier that five calendar days after written notice
of suspension has been served personally or by registered or certified mail on the
licensee or, if a hearing is requested, until written notice of the action has been
served personally or by registered or certified mail on the licensee. Such written
notice shall contain the effective date of the suspension, the nature of the violation
or violations constituting the basis for the suspension, the facts which support the
conclusion that a violation or violations has occurred, and a statement that if the
licensee desires to appeal, he must within five (5) county working days, exclusive
of the day of service, file a request for an administrative hearing in accordance
with the provisions of section 7.01 of this ordinance.
C. If said suspension is upheld and the licensee has not demonstrated within the sixty
(60) day period that the provisions of the ordinance have been complied with and
that such compliance will be continued, the department may serve notice of
continued suspension for up to sixty (60) days or initiate revocation procedures as
provided for in section 5.05 of this ordinance.
5.03 SUMMARY SUSPENSION
A. If the department finds that the public health, safety or welfare imperatively
requires emergency action, and incorporates a finding to that effect in its order,
summary suspension of a license may be ordered by the department upon
notification of the County Attorney's Office and the administrator. Written notice
of such summary suspension shall be personally served on the licensee, or shall be
served by registered or certified mail to said licensee at the address designated in
the license application. In addition, the department may post copies of the notice
of summary suspension of the license on the licensed facility or property being
used for the licensed activity. Said posting shall constitute the notice required
under this section.
B. The written notice in such cases shall state the effective date of the suspension
and the nature of the violation requiring emergency action, the facts which
support the conclusion that a violation or violations has occurred and a statement
that if the licensee desires to appeal he must, within five county working days,
exclusive of the day of service, file a request for a hearing in accordance with the
provisions of section 7.01 of this ordinance.
C. The Summary Suspension shall not be stayed pending an appeal but shall be
subject to disposition or reinspection pursuant to the provisions of section 5.04 of
this ordinance.
5.04 SUSPENSION, REINSPECTION. Upon written notification from
the licensee that all the violations for which a suspension
or summary suspension was invoked have been corrected, the
department shall reinspect the facility or activity within a
Scott County
Administrative Procedures Ordinance
8
reasonable length of time, but in no case more than three
(3) county working days after receipt of the notice from the
licensee. If the department finds upon such a reinspection
that the violations constituting the grounds for the
suspension have been corrected, the department shall
immediately terminate the suspension by written notice to
the licensee, the County Attorney's Office, and the
Administrator.
5.05 REVOCATION
A. Any license granted pursuant to a Scott County ordinance may be revoked by the
department for violation of any provision of said ordinance, upon written notice to
the Administrator and the County Attorney's Office.
B. Revocation shall not occur earlier than five (5) county working days from the
time that written notice of revocation is served personally or by registered or
certified mail on the licensee, or if a hearing is requested, until the written
findings of the hearing have been served personally or by registered or certified
mail on the licensee. Such written notice shall contain the effective date of the
revocation, the nature of the violation or violations constituting the basis for the
revocation, the facts which support the conclusion that a violation or violations
has occurred, and a statement that if the licensee desires to appeal, he must within
five (5) county working days, exclusive of the day of service, file a request for a
hearing in accordance with the provisions in section 7.01 of this ordinance.
5.06 Omission of any information or submission of false
information may constitute grounds for the denial of the
license applied for, or the suspension or revocation of an
issued license.
6.00 VARIANCE
6.01 VARIANCE PERMITTED. In any case where, upon application to
the department, it appears by reason of exceptional
circumstances, the strict enforcement of any provision of
the standards of a Scott County Ordinance would cause
unnecessary hardship, or that strict conformity with the
standards would be unreasonable, and impractical, or not
feasible under the circumstances, the County Board may
permit a variance therefrom upon such conditions as it may
prescribe for management consistent with the general
purposes and intent of the applicable ordinance and of all
other applicable state and local regulations and law.
Application for variance must be submitted in accordance
with the provisions of section 7.02 of this ordinance.
6.02 VARIANCE CONDITIONS. Unless otherwise provided, the County
Board shall consider all applications for variance in
accordance with the provisions in section 7.02 of this
ordinance. A variance may be granted provided that:
Scott County
Administrative Procedures Ordinance
9
A. The conditions causing the hardship are unique to the property, applicant or
licensee.
B. The variance is proved necessary in order to secure for the applicant right or
rights that are enjoyed by other persons in the same area or district.
C. Granting of the variance will not be contrary to public interest of damaging to the
rights of other persons or of properties in the same area or district.
D. The granting of the variance will not be contrary to the policy and intent of the
ordinance or detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare.
E. No variance shall be granted simply because there are no objections, because
those who do not object outnumber those who do, or for any reason other than a
proved hardship.
7.00 APPEALS PROCEDURES
7.01 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING. Any person wishing to appeal a
departmental decision may request an administrative hearing.
The request shall be in writing, stating the grounds for
appeal and served personally or by registered or certified
mail on the department by 4:00 p.m. the fifth county working
day following service of the departmental decision in
question. After receipt of an appeal request, the
department shall set a time and place for the hearing. The
department shall reply as soon as possible, not to exceed
five (5) county working days of the receipt of the request
for hearing and identify a hearing time within twenty (20)
calendar days of the receipt of the request for hearing. If
the department fails to grant an administrative hearing, or
if after the hearing, the person wishes to appeal the
decision reached as a result of the administrative hearing,
they may request a formal hearing.
7.02 FORMAL HEARING. Any person denied an administrative hearing
or aggrieved by the decision reached at the administrative
hearing, or requesting a variance pursuant to section 6.00
may request a formal hearing. The request shall be in
writing, stating the grounds for appeal and served
personally or by registered or certified mail on the
department by 4:00 p.m. the fifth county working day
following the: 1.) administrative hearing, or 2.) service of
notice by the department to deny the request for an
administrative hearing, or 3.) at any time, pursuant to a
variance request. After receipt of an appeal request, the
department shall set a time and place for the hearing. The
department shall reply as soon as possible, not to exceed
five (5) county working days of the receipt of the request
Scott County
Administrative Procedures Ordinance
10
for formal hearing, and identify a hearing time within
twenty (20) calendar days of the receipt of the request for
hearing. The department shall notify the administrator as
soon as possible upon receipt of a request for formal
hearing.
A. Unless otherwise provided, the hearing officer in a formal hearing shall be
appointed by the County Board upon request by the Administrator.
B. Notice of the hearing shall be published in the official county newspaper at least
ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. The notice shall include:
1. A statement of the time, place and nature of the hearing;
2. A statement of the legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing
is to be held;
3. A reference to the particular section of the ordinance and rules involved;
4. A short and plain statement supporting the departmental action.
C. Opportunity shall be afforded all parties to respond and present evidence, cross
examination, and argument on all issues involved.
D. Unless precluded by law, informal disposition may be made of any appeal for
formal hearing by stipulation, agreed settlement, consent order, or default.
E. The record in a formal hearing shall include:
1. All pleadings, motions, intermediate rulings;
2. Evidence received or considered;
3. A statement of matters officially noticed;
4. Questions and offers of proof, objections and rulings thereon;
5. Proposed findings and exceptions;
6. Any decision, opinion, or report by the officer presiding at the hearing;
7. All staff memoranda or data submitted to the hearing officer.
F. Oral proceedings or any part thereof shall be transcribed on the request of any
party at the cost of the party so requesting.
G. Findings of Fact shall be based exclusively on the evidence and matters officially
noticed.
Scott County
Administrative Procedures Ordinance
11
H. Unless otherwise provided the County Board shall review the Hearing Officer's
decision and notify the applicant or licensee in writing as to its decision. The
County Board may, at its discretion, consult privately with the department or
hearing officer on any part of the proceedings.
7.03 RULES AND EVIDENCE: OFFICIAL NOTICE
A. Irrelevant, and immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. The
Rules of Evidence as applied in the District Courts of this state shall be followed.
When necessary to ascertain facts not reasonably susceptible of truth under those
rules, evidence not admissible thereunder may be admitted (except where
precluded by law) if it is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonable prudent
men in the conduct of their affairs. Objections to evidentiary offers may be made
and shall be notified n the record. Subject to these requirements, when a hearing
will be expedited and the interests of the parties will not be prejudiced
substantially, any part of the evidence may be received in written form.
B. Documentary evidence may be received in the form of copies or excerpts, if the
original is not readily available. Upon request, the parties shall be given an
opportunity to compare the copy with the original.
C. A party, or a party through his counsel, may conduct cross examinations required
for a full and true disclosure of the facts.
D. Notice may be taken of judicially cognizable facts. In addition, notice may be
taken of generally recognized technical or scientific facts within the department's
specialized knowledge. Parties shall be notified either before or during the
hearing, or by reference in preliminary reports or otherwise, of the material
noticed or being requested to be noticed, including any staff memoranda, and they
shall be afforded an opportunity to contest the material so noticed. The
department's experience, technical competence, and specialized knowledge, may
be utilized in the evaluation of the evidence.
7.04 HEARING OFFICER RECOMMENDATION
A. The final recommendation of the Hearing Officer in a contested case shall be in
writing. The final recommendation shall include Findings of Fact and
Conclusions, separately stated. Findings of Fact, including any statutory
language, shall be accompanied by a concise and explicit statement of the
underlying facts supporting the findings. Parties shall be notified either
personally or by mail of the Hearing Officer's recommendation. Upon request, a
copy of the recommendation shall be delivered or mailed forthwith to each party
and to his attorney of record.
B. The Hearing Officer's Findings of Fact and Conclusions shall be forwarded to the
County Board for action.
Scott County
Administrative Procedures Ordinance
12
7.05 FAILURE TO APPEAR. If the license applicant, licensee or
authorized representative fails to appear at the hearing,
any opportunity for a hearing shall be forfeited.
8.00 SEVERABILITY.
If any provision of a Scott County Ordinance or the
application thereof to any person or circumstances is held
invalid, said invalidity does not affect other provisions of
application of the ordinance which can be given effect
without the invalid provision or application, and for this
purpose the provisions of all Scott County Ordinances are
severable.
9.00 PROVISIONS ACCUMULATIVE.
The provisions of all Scott County Ordinances are cumulative
and are additional limitations upon all other laws and
ordinances heretofore passed covering any subject matter.
10.00 NO CONSENT.
Nothing contained in any Scott County Ordinance shall be
deemed to consent, license, or permit to locate, construct,
or maintain any site, facility, or operation, or to carry on
any activity.






Retail Tobacco Sales Ordinance 17
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE
SALE OF TOBACCO-RELATED PRODUCTS
1.0 TITLE
2.0 PURPOSE
3.0 JURISDICTION
4.0 APPLICATION OF RULES
5.0 DEFINITIONS
6.0 LICENSE REQUIRED
7.0 LICENSEE FEE
8.0 PROHIBITED SALES
9.0 MOBILE SALES
10.0 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
1.0 TITLE.
This ordinance shall be known, cited and referred to as the Scott County Retail
Tobacco Sales Ordinance and shall be referred to herein as the Ordinance.
2.0 PURPOSE.
The Scott County Board of Commissioners finds that substantial scientific
evidence exists that use of tobacco-related products causes cancer, heart disease, and
various other medical disorders. This Ordinance is adopted for the purpose of
promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of Scott County,
particularly those residents under eighteen (18) years of age, by prohibiting the sale or
dispensing of tobacco products through vending machines and regulating self-service
merchandising and sales of tobacco products.
3.0 JURISDICTION.
The provisions of this Ordinance will apply to all businesses selling tobaccorelated
products within the unincorporated areas of Scott County, and in any town or a
home rule charter or statutory city within the county, if the town or city does not license
and regulate retail tobacco sales.
4.0 APPLICATION OF RULES.
The language contained in this Ordinance shall be interpreted in accordance with
2
the following rules as applicable:
1. The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.
2. The present includes the past and future tenses, and the future tense
includes the present tense.
3. The word “shall” is mandatory, and the word “may” is permissive.
4. In the event of conflicting provisions, the more restrictive shall apply.
5. The provisions of this Ordinance shall be construed and interpreted to
give full force and effect to its intent and purpose.
6. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of health,
safety and welfare.
7. The meanings of words, unless otherwise defined herein, shall have the
meaning given in other applicable Scott County ordinances, state statutes
and rules, and federal laws.
5.0 DEFINITIONS.
The following words and terms when used in this Ordinance shall have the
following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
Adult - A person eighteen (18) years of age or older.
Applicant - A person as defined herein, who completes or signs an application
for a license to sell tobacco-related products individually or on behalf of a
business.
Business - A business selling tobacco-related products.
License Holder - The owner of a business licensed to sell tobacco related
products.
Finance Division - The Scott County department charged with the enforcement of
the Ordinance.
Minor - A person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
Movable Place of Business - A business whose physical location is not
permanent or is capable of being moved or changed.
3
Person - One (1) or more natural persons; a partnership, including a limited
partnership; a corporation, including a foreign, domestic, or nonprofit corporation;
a trust; a political subdivision of the state; or any other business organization.
Self-service merchandising - A method of displaying tobacco-related products so
as to make the products accessible to the public without the intervention of an
applicant, license holder or their agents or employees.
Tobacco-related products - Cigarettes, cigars, cheroots, stogies, perique,
granulated, plug cut, crimpt cut, ready, rubbed and other smoking tobacco; snuff,
snuff flower, cavendish, plug and twist tobacco; fine cut and other chewing
tobaccos; shorts, refuse scripts, clippings, cuttings, and sweepings of tobacco;
and other kinds of forms of tobacco prepared in such manner as to be suitable
for chewing, sniffing, or smoking in a pipe, rolling paper or other tobacco-related
devices.
Vending machine - Any mechanical, electric or electronic, self-service device
which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment, dispenses
tobacco products and includes vending machines equipped with manual, electric
or electronic locking devices.
6.0 LICENSE REQUIRED.
No person shall keep for retail sale, sell at retail or otherwise dispense any
tobacco-related product at any place within the jurisdiction of this Ordinance without first
obtaining a license and paying a license fee.
1. Application. An application for a license to sell tobacco or tobacco-related
products or devices shall be made on a form provided by the Finance Division. The
application shall include, but is not limited to, requiring the full name of the applicant,
the applicant’s residential and business address and telephone numbers, the name of
the proposed license holder, the business location for which the license is sought, and
a copy of the educational materials the applicant intends to use to educate employees.
The completed application along with the application fee shall be submitted to the
Finance Division for approval. If the Finance Division determines that an application is
incomplete, it shall be returned to the applicant with notice of the deficiencies.
2. Action. The Finance Division may either approve or deny the license or
may delay action for such reasonable period of time to permit the completion of any
investigation of the application or the applicant deemed necessary. If the license
application is approved, a license shall be issued to the applicant. If the application is
denied, a notice of denial shall be sent to the applicant at the business address
provided on the application with the reason(s) for the denial. The notice shall also
inform the applicant of the right to appeal the Finance Division’s decision to the hearing
officers, as appointed by the Scott County Board, or his designees, pursuant to the
process set forth in section 11.0 herein. If a license is mistakenly issued to an applicant
4
or license holder, or renewed, it shall be revoked by the Finance Division upon the
discovery that the person, applicant, or license holder was ineligible for the license
under this section.
3. Term. All licenses shall be issued for a period of one year. The license
period is from January 1 to December 31.
4. Revocation or Suspension. Any license issued under this section may be
revoked or suspended as provided in the Violations and Penalties section of this
ordinance pursuant to the process set forth in section 10.0.
5. Transfers. All licenses issued under this section shall be valid only on the
business premises for which the license is issued and shall be exhibited to any person
upon request.
6. Display. Every license shall be conspicuously posted at the place of
business for which the license is issued and shall be exhibited to any person upon
request.
7. Renewals. The renewal of a license under this section shall be handled in
the same manner as the original application. The request for renewal shall be made at
least thirty (30) days but no more than sixty (60) days before the expiration of the
current license. The issuance of a license under this ordinance shall be considered a
privilege and not an absolute right of the applicant and shall not entitle the holder to
automatic renewal of the license.
8. Instructional Program. No person shall be issued a license or renewal
license to sell tobacco-related products unless an applicant or license holder has an
approved program for instructing all employees regarding the legal requirements
pertaining to the sale of tobacco-related products at the business premises for which
the license was issued. The instructional program shall include, but is not limited to,
reviewing the law on the sale of tobacco-related products and requiring employees to
request identification from every customer who is under 27 years of age. No license
shall be issued unless the applicant or license holder signs a county form attesting that
each employee of the applicant or license holder has received training and instruction
on the sale of tobacco-related products and the date such training occurred. The
training shall include information that the sale of tobacco-related products to minors is
illegal, explanation of what proof of age is legally acceptable, and that a sale to a minor
can subject the applicant or license holder and their employees to criminal and/or civil
liability.
9. Denials. The following shall be grounds for denying the issuance or
renewal of a license under this section. The following list is not exhaustive or exclusive:
a. The applicant is under the age of eighteen (18) years.
5
b. The applicant has been convicted within the past five (5) years of a
violation of any provisions of this Ordinance or a violation of a federal, state, or
local law, ordinance, or other regulations relating to tobacco or tobacco-related
products or devices.
c. The applicant or license holder has had a license to sell tobacco or
tobacco-related products or devices revoked within the preceding twelve (12)
months of the date of application, or is subject to penalties under section 10.0.
d. The applicant fails to provide any information required on the license
application, or provides false or misleading information.
e. The applicant or license holder has outstanding fines, penalties, or
property taxes owed to the county.
7.0 LICENSEE FEE.
The application fee shall be determined by the Scott County Board of
Commissioners and shall be paid at the time of application. License fees are not prorated.
8.0 PROHIBITED SALES.
1. Prohibited Sales. No person shall sell, offer for sale, give away, furnish,
or otherwise deliver any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco-related device:
a. To any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
b. By means of any type of vending machine.
c. By means of self-service merchandising or any means whereby the
customer may have access to such items without having to request the item from
the license holder, their agents or employees. All tobacco-related products shall
be stored behind a counter.
d. By any other means, or to any other person, prohibited by federal, state,
or other local law, ordinance provision, or other regulation.
2. Exception. A license holder who operates an establishment that sells only
tobacco-related products is exempt from the self-service merchandising provision if the
license holder prohibits anyone under eighteen (18) years of age from entering the
establishment, unless accompanied by a parent, and the license holder conspicuously
displays a notice prohibiting persons under eighteen (18) years of age from entering the
establishment unless accompanied by a parent.
9.0 MOBILE SALES.
6
No license shall be issued for the sale of tobacco-related products at a movable
place of business, including but not limited to, motorized vehicles, mobile sales kiosks,
or trailers.
10.0 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
1. Revocation or Suspension. Any violation of this Ordinance shall be
grounds to revoke or suspend a license.
2. Criminal Penalty. As set forth in Minnesota Statutes Chapter 609:
a. It shall be a gross misdemeanor for anyone to sell tobacco or tobaccorelated
products to a person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
b. It shall be a misdemeanor to furnish tobacco-related products to a person
under the age of eighteen (18) years.
c. It shall be a petty misdemeanor for anyone under the age of eighteen (18)
years to smoke, chew, sniff or otherwise use, tobacco or tobacco-related
products.
d. It shall be a petty misdemeanor for anyone under the age of eighteen (18)
years of age to have in his or her possession any tobacco-related products. This
section shall not apply to an employee of the license holder under the age of
eighteen (18) years while stocking tobacco-related products or lawfully involved
in a compliance check..
e. It shall be a petty misdemeanor for anyone under the age of eighteen (18)
years to purchase, or attempt to purchase tobacco-related products, or for any
person to purchase or otherwise obtain such items on behalf of a minor. This
section shall not apply to a person under the age of eighteen (18) years who
purchases or attempts to purchase tobacco-related products while under the
direct supervision of a responsible adult for training, education, research, or
enforcement purposes.
f. It shall be a petty misdemeanor for anyone under the age of eighteen (18)
years to sell, furnish, or give away any tobacco-related products.
g. It shall be a petty misdemeanor for any minor to attempt to disguise his or
her true age by the use of a false form of identification, whether the identification
is that of another person or one on which the age of the minor has been modified
or tampered with to represent an age older than the actual age of the minor.
h. Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the Scott County Sheriff’s Office
shall investigate and if appropriate, shall issue a criminal citation to the individual
7
who made the prohibited sale and, where appropriate, to the minor who
purchased the tobacco, as set forth in the previous paragraphs of this
subsection.
3. Civil Enforcement. The license holder shall be responsible for the conduct
of its agents or employees while they are on the licensed premises. Any violation of
this Ordinance shall be considered an act of the license holder for purposes of imposing
a civil penalty, license suspension, or revocation. Each violation, and every day in
which a violation occurs or continues, shall constitute a separate offense.
a. Notice of Violation. Upon the occurrence of a suspected violation, the
Scott County Sheriff’s Office shall inform the Finance Division of the suspected
violation. The Finance Division shall then send to the license holder a written
notice of the civil violation. The notice shall advise the license holder of the
penalty and the license holder’s right to request a hearing regarding the violation
of this ordinance pursuant to section 11.0.
b. Civil Penalties. Each license issued hereunder shall be subject to
suspension or revocation for violation of any provisions of this Ordinance or the
laws of the State of Minnesota as follows:
1. First Violation. The first violation of this Ordinance shall be
punishable by a civil penalty of $300, a suspension of thirty (30) days and
administrative costs of $100.00.
2. Second Violation. A second violation of this Ordinance within any
36-month period shall be punishable by a civil penalty of $700, a
suspension of the license of ninety (90) days and administrative costs of
$125.00.
3. Subsequent Violation. A third or subsequent violation of this
Ordinance within any 36-month period shall be punishable by a civil
penalty of $1,000, the revocation of the license and administrative costs of
$150.00. Any licensee whose license is revoked under this section shall
not be eligible for renewal for a period of two (2) years after the
revocation.
c. Any individual under the age of eighteen (18) years who attempts to
purchase, purchases or possesses tobacco shall be subject to a civil fine of $100
and administra-tive/education costs of $50.00. Any individual under the age of
eighteen (18) years who attempts to purchase or purchases tobacco with a false,
forged or fake identification shall be subject to a civil fine of $100 and
administrative/education costs of $50.00.
d. Any civil penalty, suspension or revocation or combination thereof under
this section does not preclude criminal prosecution under this ordinance or
8
Minnesota Statutes Section 609.685.
11.0 HEARING ON DENIAL OR VIOLATION.
1. Notice of violation. Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the alleged
violator shall be issued, personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the alleged
violation and which shall inform the alleged violator of the right to be heard regarding
the alleged violations.
2. Hearing. Following receipt of a notice of denial issued under section 6.0 or a
notice of a violation and penalty issued under section 10.0, an applicant or license
holder may request a hearing before the Scott County Administrator, as appointed
hearing officer by Scott County Board of Commissioners, or his designees. A request
for a hearing shall be made by the applicant or license holder in writing and filed with
the Finance Division within ten (10) days of the mailing of the notice of denial or alleged
violation. Following receipt of a written request for hearing, the applicant or license
holder shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing before the hearing officer.
3. Findings. If after the hearing, the applicant or license holder is found
ineligible for a license, or in violation of this ordinance, the hearing officer may affirm the
denial, impose a fine, issue a suspension or revocation, or impose any combination
thereof as set forth in section 10.0. The decision shall be in writing and set forth the
reasons for the findings of the hearing officer. A copy shall be provided to the applicant
or license holder. Likewise, if the hearing officer finds that no violation occurred or finds
grounds for not imposing any penalty, such findings shall be recorded and copy
provided to the applicant or license holder.
4. Appeal. Appeals of any decision made by the hearing officer may be filed
with the Scott County Board of Commissioners. Any appeal of the decision of the
hearing officer must be filed in writing within ten days of the mailing of the hearing
officer’s decision. Appeals of the decision of the Scott County Board of Commissioners
shall be filed in District Court.
5. Default. If the applicant or license holder has been provided written notice
of the denial or violation and if no request for a hearing is filed within the ten (10) day
period, then the denial, penalty, suspension and/or revocation imposed pursuant to
section 10.0 shall take immediate effect by default. The Finance Division shall mail
notice of the denial, fine, suspension, and/or revocation to the applicant or license
holder. The Scott County Sheriff’s Office shall investigate compliance with the
suspension or revocation.
12.0 COMPLIANCE CHECKS.
All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by local law enforcement during
regular business hours. The Scott County Sheriff’s Office shall conduct unannounced
compliance checks at least once each calendar year at each location where tobacco is
9
sold to test compliance with Minnesota Statutes Section 609.685 and this ordinance.
Compliance checks shall utilize minors over the age of fifteen (15), but under the age of
eighteen (18), who, with the prior written consent of a parent or guardian, attempt to
purchase tobacco under the supervision of a law enforcement officer or other
designated personnel. Nothing in this section shall prohibit compliance checks
authorized by state or federal laws for educational research or training purposes or
required for the enforcement of a particular state or federal law.
13.0 AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE.
It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this Ordinance if the license holder
proves by a preponderance of the evidence that the license holder reasonably and in
good faith relied on proof of age as described in Minnesota Statues Section 340A.503,
subd. 6, in making the sale of tobacco-related products.
14.0 SEVERABILITY.
If any provision of this Ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid, that
provision of the Ordinance shall be considered severable from the rest of the Ordinance
and any decision declaring a provision of this Ordinance to be invalid shall not affect the
validity of the remaining provisions of this Ordinance.
15.0 NOTICE.
The County shall make reasonable efforts to send the Scott County Community
Health Services and tobacco retailers thirty (30) days mailed notice of proposed
amendments to this ordinance.
10
16.0 EFFECTIVE DATE.
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after
___________________, 1998.
Adopted this ______ day of ________, 1998, by the Scott County Board of
Commissioners
SCOTT COUNTY
By______________________________
Art Bannerman, Chair
Scott County Board of
Commissioners
Date: ________________, 1998
Attest:
_________________________________
David J. Unmacht
Scott County Administrator
Date: _______________, 1998
Approved as to form:
________________________________
Thomas J. Harbinson
Scott County Attorney
Date: ______________, 1998
ORDINANCE NO. 20
COUNTY OF SCOTT, MINNESOTA
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING THE SCOTT COUNTYVERMILLION
RIVER WATERSHED MANAGEMENT TAX DISTRICT
The Board of Commissioners of Scott County, Minnesota, hereby ordains as
follows:
Section 1. Pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 103B.231, subd. 3(b), wherein Scott County
is obligated to prepare, adopt and implement the watershed plan for the Vermillion River
Watershed Management Organization located within the jurisdictional boundaries of
Scott County, and pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 103B.211 to 103B.255, wherein Scott County
has planning, review, permitting, and financing authority in the watershed management
organization, and pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 103B.245, subd. 1, wherein Scott County may
establish a Watershed Management Tax District for the purposes of paying the costs of
the planning required by law, there is hereby established a special tax district to be known
as the Scott County-Vermillion River Watershed Management Tax District.
Section 2. The territory of the Scott County-Vermillion River Watershed
Management Tax District is comprised of all the lands delineated on the attached map.
Section 3. From and after the effective date of this ordinance, Scott County may
annually levy a tax on all taxable property in the Scott County-Vermillion River
Watershed Management Tax District for the purposes for which this tax district is
established. The proceeds of the tax shall be paid into a fund reserved for these purposes.
Passed and duly adopted by the Board of Commissioners of Scott County this 3rd
day of September, 2002.
SCOTT COUNTY, MINNESOTA
By: __________________________
Barbara Marschall, Chair
Scott County Board of Commissioners
Attest:
______________________
David J. Unmacht
Scott County Administrator
SCOTT COUNTY ORDINANCE, CHAPTER NO. 21
PERMITTING EXTENDED HOURS OF SUNDAY ON-SALE
INTOXICATING LIQUOR SALES
1. Purpose
Minnesota Statutes, Section 340A.504 authorizes counties to issue on-sale Sunday
permits allowing the sale of intoxicating liquors beginning at 10:00 o’clock Sunday
morning to qualifying and licensed establishments. There are a growing number of
restaurants in the townships of Scott County offering a Sunday brunch to their patrons.
Pursuant to the authority granted it by the Minnesota Liquor Act, Minnesota Statutes
Chapter 340A, and the Twenty-first Amendment to the United States Constitution, the
Board of Commissioners of Scott County prescribes the following licensing procedures
and regulations governing the extension of hours for the sale and/or consumption of
alcoholic beverages on Sundays.
2. Definitions
Bowling center. An establishment under the control of a single proprietor or
manager, where the game of bowling occurs and meals are regularly prepared on
the premises and served at tables to the general public, and having a minimum
seating capacity of thirty (30) guests at one time.
Club. An incorporated organization organized under the laws of the State of
Minnesota for civic, fraternal, social, or business purposes, intellectual
improvement, the promotion of sports, or a congressionally chartered verterans’
organization, which:
a. Has more than thirty members; and
b. Has owned or rented a building or space in a building for more than
one (1) year that is suitable and adequate for the accommodation of its
members; and
c. Is directed by a board of directors, an executive committee, or other
similar body chosen by the members at a meeting. No member, officer,
agent, or employee shall receive any profit from the distribution or sale of
beverages to the members of the club or their guests, beyond a reasonable
salary or wages fixed and voted each year by the governing body.
Hotel. An establishment where food and lodging are regularly furnished to
transients and which has a dining room serving the general public at tables with
facilities for seating at least thirty (30) guests at one time and at least ten (10)
guests rooms.
Intoxicating liquor. Ethyl alcohol, distilled, fermented, spirituous, vinous, and
malt beverages containing more than 3.2 percent of alcohol by weight.
Licensed premises. The premises described in the approved license application.
In the case of a restaurant, club or exclusive liquor store, licensed for on-sale of
alcoholic beverages and located on a golf course, “licensed premises,” means the
entire golf course, except for areas where motor vehicles are regularly parked or
operated.
Restaurant. An establishment, other than a hotel, under the control of a single
proprietor or manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the premises and
served at tables to the general public, and having a minimum seating capacity of
thirty (30) guests at one time.
Sale and sell. All barters and all manners or means of furnishing or providing
intoxicating liquor.
3. Permit to Licensed Establishments
An on-sale Sunday liquor permit may be issued to a restaurant, hotel, bowling center, or
public or private club, to which an on-sale intoxicating liquor license has been issued, on
the following conditions:
a. The licensed premises has facilities for serving not less than thirty (30) guests
at one time;
b. The sale of intoxicating liquor must be in conjunction with the serving of food
or consumption on the premises;
c. The township in which the applicant establishment is located has held an
election, on the day of the annual election of township officers, at which the
Sunday on-sale liquor licenses have been approved by the voters of the township
and verification of the authorizing vote has been filed with the County.
4. 10:00 a.m. Sunday Sales
A restaurant, hotel, bowling center, or club that has a Sunday on-sale liquor license
may sell intoxicating liquor for consumption on the premises, in conjunction with the sale
of food, between the hours of 10:00 a.m. on Sundays and 1:00 a.m. on Mondays,
provided that it is compliance with the Minnesota Clean Indoor Air Act, Minnesota
Statutes Section 144.411, et seq.
5. General License Restrictions
a. A license issued under this ordinance is only effective for the compact and
contiguous space specified in the approved license application.
b. A licensee under this ordinance shall be responsible for the conduct of the
business being operated and shall maintain conditions of sobriety and order.
6. Period of License for Extended Sunday Sales
The license allowing for extended hours of Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor shall be
issued for a period of one (1) year.
7. Permit Fee
The fee for an extended Sunday on-sale liquor license shall be set by Scott County Board
of Commissioners and shall not exceed an amount allowed by statute.
.
SCOTT COUNTY
Ordinance Number 22
Management of the
Public Right-of-Way
Information Packet Includes:
•Right of Way Ordinance
•Permit Fee Schedule
•Forms and Applications
• Registration Information and Form
• Application for Utility Permit
• Application for Excavating/Grading
• Application for Obstruction Permit
• Application for Landscaping
• Application for Street or Commercial
Access Permit
• Application for Residential or Field
Access Permit
Adopted by the Scott County Board of
Commissioners on May 6, 2003
Amended November 21, 2017
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SCOTT COUNTY ORDINANCE NO. 22
SECTION PAGE
Sec. 101 Purpose and Scope 1
Sec. 102 Statutory Authority to Manage the Public Right-of-Way 1
Sec. 103 Definitions 2
Sec. 104 Administration 8
Sec. 105 Registration and Right-of-Way Occupancy 8
Sec. 106 Registration Information 8
Sec. 107 Reporting Obligations 9
Sec. 108 Permit Requirement 10
Sec. 109 Permit Applications 10
Sec. 110 Insurance Required 11
Sec. 111 Construction Performance Bonds 12
Sec. 112 Issuance of Permit; Conditions 12
Sec. 113 Permit Fees 13
Sec. 114 Right-of-Way Patching and Restoration 13
Sec. 115 Joint Applications 15
Sec. 116 Supplementary Applications 16
Sec. 117 Other Obligations 16
Sec. 118 Denial of Permit 17
Sec. 119 Installation Requirements 17
Sec. 120 Inspection 17
Sec. 121 Emergency Situations 18
Sec. 122 Work Done Without a Permit 18
Sec. 123 Supplementary Notification 19
Sec. 124 Revocation of Permits 19
Sec. 125 Mapping Data 20
Sec. 126 Location and Relocation of Facilities 22
Sec. 127 Pre-excavation Facilities Location 23
Sec. 128 Damage to Other Facilities 23
Sec. 129 Right-of-Way Vacation 23
Sec. 130 Indemnification and Liability 23
Sec. 131 Abandoned or Unusable Facilities 24
Sec. 132 Appeal 24
Sec. 133 Reservation of Regulatory and Police Powers 25
Sec. 134 Severability 25
Sec. 135 Permit Fee Schedule 25
Scott County Ordinance No. 22
3
The Board of Commissioners of Scott County, Minnesota, does hereby ordain and adopt
this Ordinance establishing regulations and standards for the management of the County
rights-of-way pursuant to Minn. Stat. Chapters 160 and 163, § 237.163 and Minnesota
Rules Chapter 7819.
Right-of-Way Management
Sec. 101 Purpose and Scope
To provide for the health, safety and welfare of its citizens and to ensure the integrity of
its roads and streets and the appropriate use of the rights-of-way, the County strives to
keep the right-of-way under its jurisdiction in a state of good repair and free from
unnecessary encumbrances.
Accordingly, the County hereby enacts this Ordinance relating to right-of-way permits
and administration. This Ordinance imposes regulation on the placement and
maintenance of facilities and equipment currently within its right-of-way or to be placed
therein at some future time. It is intended to complement the regulatory roles of state and
federal agencies. Under this Ordinance, persons excavating and obstructing the right-ofway
will bear financial responsibility for their work. Finally, this Ordinance provides for
recovery of out-of-pocket and projected costs from persons using the public right-of-way.
Sec. 102 Statutory Authority to Manage the Public Right-of-Way
This Ordinance is created to manage and regulate the public use of the County’s right-ofway
along county roads pursuant to the authority granted to the County under state and
federal statutory, administrative and common law. The County hereby elects to manage
right-of-way under its jurisdiction. All right-of-way users, including the County, are
subject to the provisions in this Ordinance. The County is exempt from the obligation of
paying for permits or other fees imposed by this Ordinance. This Ordinance shall be
interpreted consistent with 1997 Session Laws, Chap. 123, substantially codified in Minn. Stat. §§
237.16, 237.162, 237.163, 237.79, 237.81, 238.086 (the “Act”), as amended by 2017 Session
Laws, Chapter 94, Minn. Stat. Chap. 216D and the other laws governing applicable rights of
the County and users of the right-of-way. This Ordinance shall also be interpreted consistent
with Minnesota Rules 7819.0050 – 7819.9950 where possible. To the extent any provision of
this Ordinance cannot be interpreted consistently with the Minnesota Rules, that interpretation
most consistent with the Act and other applicable statutory and case law is intended. This
Ordinance shall not be interpreted to limit the regulatory and police powers of the County to adopt
and enforce general ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
“Manage the Right- of-Way” means the authority of the County to do any or all of the
following (Minn. Stat. § 237.162, subd. 8, (1998)):
a. require registration;
Scott County Ordinance No. 22
4
b. require construction performance bonds and insurance coverage;
c. establish installation and construction standards;
d. establish and define location and relocation requirements for equipment and
facilities;
e. establish coordination and timing requirements;
f. require right-of-way users to submit, henceforth required by the County, project
data reasonably necessary to allow the County to develop a right-of-way
mapping system including GIS system information;
g. require right-of-way users to submit, upon request of the County, existing data
on the location of user’s facilities occupying the public right-of-way within the
County. The data may be submitted in the form maintained by the user in a
reasonable time after receipt of the request based on the amount of data
requested;
h. establish right-of-way permitting requirements for access, excavating/grading,
utility services, landscaping and obstruction;
i. establish removal requirements for abandoned equipment or facilities, if
required, in conjunction with other right-of-way repair, excavation or
construction; and
j. impose reasonable penalties for unreasonable delays in construction.
Sec. 103 Definitions
The following definitions apply in this Ordinance. References hereafter to "sections" are,
unless otherwise specified, references to sections in this Ordinance. Defined terms
remain defined terms whether or not capitalized.
103.1 Abandoned Facility means a facility no longer in service or is physically
disconnected from a portion of the operating facility, or from any other
facility, that is in use or still carries service. A facility is not abandoned
unless declared so by the right-of-way user.
103.2 Access means the physical connection to public or private property over rightof-
way for residential, agricultural, commercial or municipal street purposes.
103.3 Access Permit means the permit which must be obtained from the County
before a person may make a physical connection to a County road or highway.
Scott County Ordinance No. 22
5
103.4 Access Permit Fee means money paid to the County by a permittee to cover
the costs as provided in Sec. 113 and required to obtain the permit.
103.5 Applicant means any person requesting permission to access, excavate/grade,
place a utility service, landscape or obstruct a right-of-way.
103.6 Commission means the State Public Utilities Commission.
103.7 Commercial Access means access requested for commercial, retail or
industrial purposes, public, or institutional facilities.
103.8 Congested Right-of-Way means a crowded condition in the subsurface of the
public right-of-way that occurs when the maximum lateral spacing between
existing underground facilities does not allow for construction of new
underground facilities without using hand digging to expose the existing
lateral facilities in conformance with Minn. Stat. § 216D.04, subd. 3, over a
continuous length in excess of 500 feet.
103.9 Construction Performance Bond means any of the following forms of
security provided at permittee’s option:
a. individual project bond;
b. cash deposit;
c. security of a form listed or approved under Minn. Stat. Sec 15.73,
sub3;
d. letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the County;
e. self-insurance in a form acceptable to the County;
f. blanket bond for projects within the County or construction bond for
a specified time and in a form acceptable to the County.
103.10 County means the County of Scott, Minnesota. For purposes of Sec. 129
Indemnification and Liability, County means its elected and appointed
officials, officers, employees and agents.
103.11 Degradation means a decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused by
excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to
reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation
did not occur.
103.12 Department means the Scott County Highway Department.
Scott County Ordinance No. 22
6
103.13 Department Inspector means any person authorized by the director to carry
out inspections related to the provisions of this Ordinance.
103.14 Director means the Scott County Engineer, or her or his designee.
103.15 Emergency means a condition that (1) immediately endangers the life or
safety of persons, (2) will cause an immediate threat of significant loss or
injury to property; or (3) requires immediate repair or replacement in order to
restore service to customers.
103.16 Equipment means any tangible asset used to install, repair, or maintain
facilities in any right-of-way.
103.17 Excavate/Grade means to dig into or in any way remove or physically
disturb or penetrate any part of a public right-of-way.
103.18 Excavation/Grading Permit means a permit issued by Scott County
authorizing the permittee to excavate in County right-of-way as specifically
described in the permit.
103.19 Excavation/Grading Permit Fee means money paid to the County by an
applicant to cover the costs as provided in Sec. 113 and required to obtain a
permit.
103.20 Facility or Facilities means any tangible asset, including equipment, in the
right-of-way which is required to provide utility service.
103.21 Five-year Project Plan shows road projects adopted by the County for
construction within the next five years.
103.22 High Density Corridor means a designated portion of the public right-ofway
within which telecommunications right-of-way users having multiple and
competing facilities may be required to build and install facilities in a
common conduit system or other common structure.
103.23 Hole means an excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a
length less than the width of the pavement.
103.24 Landscaping means vegetative plantings, gardens, in-ground sprinkler
systems and related features.
103.25 Landscaping Permit means a permit issued by Scott County authorizing the
permittee to landscape in County right-of-way as specifically described in the
permit.
Scott County Ordinance No. 22
7
103.26 Landscaping Permit Fee means money paid to the County by an applicant to
cover the costs as provided in Sec. 113 and required to obtain a permit.
103.27 Local Representative means a local person or persons, or designee of such
person or persons, authorized by a registrant to accept legal notice or service
and to accept communications and to make decisions for that registrant
regarding all matters within the scope of this Ordinance.
103.28 Management Costs means the actual costs the County incurs in managing its
public rights-of-way, including, but not limited to such costs, if incurred, as
those associated with registering applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying
right-of-way permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration projects;
maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving user equipment and facilities
during public right-of-way work; determining the adequacy of right-of-way
restoration; restoring work inadequately performed after providing notice and
the opportunity to correct the work; and revoking right-of-way permits.
Management costs do not include payment by a telecommunications right-of-way
user for the use of the right-of-way, the fees and cost of litigation relating to the
interpretation of Minnesota Session Laws 1997, Chapter 123; Minn. Stat. §§
237.162 or 237.163 or any ordinance enacted under those sections, or the County
fees and costs related to appeals taken pursuant to Sec. 131 of this Ordinance.
103.29 Mapping Information shall mean the information required in Sec. 124, Subd.
3 of this Ordinance.
103.30 Obstruct means to place any tangible object in a public right-of-way so as to
hinder free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.
103.31 Obstruction Permit means the permit which, pursuant to this Ordinance,
must be obtained before a person may obstruct any part of a right-of-way,
allowing the holder to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion
of that right-of-way by placing any tangible object therein for the duration
specified. An obstruction permit is not required if a public right-of-way user
already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same project that includes
an obstruction.
103.32 Obstruction Permit Fee means money paid to the County by a permittee to
cover the costs as provided in Sec. 113 and required to obtain the permit.
103.33 Patch or Patching means a method of pavement replacement that is
temporary in nature. A patch consists of (1) the compaction of the subbase
and aggregate base, and (2) the replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement
for a minimum of two feet beyond the edges of the excavation in all
directions. A patch is considered full restoration only when the pavement is
included in the County's five-year project plan.
Scott County Ordinance No. 22
8
103.34 Pavement means any type of improved surface that is within the public rightof-
way and that is paved or otherwise constructed with bituminous, concrete,
aggregate, or gravel.
103.35 Permit means a permit to impact or perform work in a public right-of-way,
including permits for access, obstruction, excavation, grading, landscaping, and
service or utility service.
103.36 Permittee means any person to whom a permit to access, excavate/grade,
place a utility service, landscape or obstruct a right-of- way has been granted
by the County under this Ordinance.
103.37 Person means an individual or entity subject to the laws and rules of this
state, however organized, whether public or private, whether domestic of
foreign, whether for profit or nonprofit, and whether natural, corporate, or
political.
103.38 Public Right-of-Way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway,
highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane, public sidewalk or area in which the
County has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for
transportation purposes and utility easements of the County. A public right-ofway
does not include the airwaves above a right-of-way with regard to
cellular or other nonwire telecommunications or broadcast service. The lands
described by an easement, deed, dedication, title, law or occupation of a road,
highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane, or sidewalk are included as right-ofway.
103.39 Registrant means any person who (1) has or seeks to have its facilities
located in any right-of-way, or (2) in any way occupies or uses, or seeks to
occupy or use, the right-of-way or place its facilities in the right-of-way.
103.40 Residential/Agricultural Access means access requested for individual,
residential or agricultural purposes.
103.41 Restoration Cost means the amount of money paid to the County by a
permittee to achieve the level of restoration according to plates 1 to 13 of the
Minnesota Public Utilities Commission rules.
103.42 Restore or Restoration means the process by which an excavated public
right-of-way and surrounding area, including pavement foundation, is
returned to the same or similar condition that existed before excavation.
103.43 Right-of-Way Permit has the same meaning as “Permit,” defined above.
Scott County Ordinance No. 22
9
103.44 Right-of-Way User means (1) a telecommunications right-of-way user as
defined by Minn. Stat. § 237.162, subd. 4; or (2) a person owning or
controlling a facility in the right-of-way that is used or intended to be used for
providing utility service, and who has a right under law, franchise, or
ordinance to use the public right-of-way; or (3) any person or entity to whom
a permit to use the right-of-way has been issued by the County.
103.45 Service or Utility Service includes (1) those services provided by a public
utility as defined in Minn. Stat. § 216B.02, subds. 4 and 6; (2) services of a
telecommunications right-of-way user, including providing wireless service or
transporting of voice or data information; (3) services of a cable
communications system as defined in Minn. Stat. Chap. 238; (4) natural
gas or electric energy or telecommunications services provided by the city;
(5) services provided by a cooperative electric association organized under
Minn. Stat. Chap. 308A; (6) water, sewer, steam, cooling or heating
services; and (7) privately-owned utility services, including drain tiles.
103.46 Service or Utility Service Permit means a permit issued by Scott County
authorizing the permittee to place a service or utility service in County rightof-
way as specifically described in the permit.
103.47 Service or Utility Service Permit Fee means money paid to the County by an
applicant to cover the costs as provided in Sec. 113 and required to obtain a
permit.
103.48 Street Access means access requested for municipal street purposes.
103.49 Supplementary Application means an application made to excavate or
obstruct more of the right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend, a permit that
has already been issued.
103.50 Telecommunication Rights-of-Way User means a person owning or
controlling a facility in the right-of-way, or seeking to own or control a
facility in the right-of-way, that is used or is intended to be used for
providing wireless service or transporting telecommunication or other
voice or data information. For purposes of this Ordinance, a cable
communication system defined and regulated under Minn. Stat. Chap.
238, and telecommunication activities related to providing natural gas or
electric energy services whether provided by a public utility as defined in
Minn. Stat. § 216B.02, a municipality, a municipal gas or power agency
organized under Minn. Stat. Chaps. 453 and 453A, or a cooperative electric
association organized under Minn. Stat. Chap. 308A, are not
telecommunications right-of-way users.
Scott County Ordinance No. 22
10
103.51 Temporary Surface means the compaction of subbase and aggregate base
and replacement, in kind, of existing pavement only to the edges of the
excavation. It is temporary in nature except when the replacement is of
pavement included in the County’s two-year project plan, in which case it is
considered full restoration.
103.52 Trench means an excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a
length equal to or greater than the width of the pavement.
103.53 Two Year Project Plan shows road projects adopted by the County for
construction within the next two years.
Sec. 104 Administration
The director is the principal County official responsible for the administration of the
public/county rights-of-way, right-of-way permits, and the ordinances related thereto.
The director may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder.
Sec. 105 Registration and Right-of-Way Occupancy
105.1 Registration. Each person who occupies, uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the
public right-of-way or place any equipment or facilities in the right-of-way,
including persons with installation and maintenance responsibilities by lease,
sublease or assignment, must register with the County. Registration will
consist of providing application information and paying a registration fee.
Registration fees shall be set by the County Board at a public meeting and
may be amended by them at a public meeting.
105.2 Registration Prior to Work. No person may construct, install, repair,
remove, relocate, or perform any other work, including landscaping, on, or
use any facilities or any part thereof in any right-of-way without first being
registered with the County.
However, nothing herein relieves a person from complying with the
provisions of the Minn. Stat. Chap. 216D, "Gopher State One Call" Law.
Sec. 106 Registration Information
106.1 Information Required. The information provided to the director at the time
of registration shall be on the form approved by the County or this Ordinance and shall
include, but not be limited to:
Scott County Ordinance No. 22
11
a. Each registrant's name, Gopher State One-Call registration certificate number,
address, e-mail address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers.
b. The name, address, e-mail address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile
numbers of a local representative. The local representative or designee shall be
accessible for consultation at all times. Current information regarding how to
contact the local representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time of
registration.
106.2 Notice of Changes. The registrant shall keep all of the information listed
above current at all times by providing to the director information as to
changes within fifteen (15) days following the date on which the registrant has
knowledge of any change.
Sec. 107 Annual Reporting Obligations
107.1 Operations. Each registrant that provides utility service shall, at the time of
registration and by March 1 of each year, file a construction and major
maintenance plan for known underground facilities with the director. Such
plan shall be submitted using a format designated by the director and shall contain the
information determined by the director to be necessary to facilitate the coordination
and reduction in the frequency of excavations and obstructions of rights-of-way. The
utility facility plans shall be kept up-to-date by the registrant. Facility plans which a
utility identifies in writing to the County as being "trade secret information" will be
treated as general nonpublic data in accordance with Minn. Stat. § 13.37.
The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:
a. The locations and the estimated beginning and ending dates of all
projects to be commenced during the next calendar year (in this section, a
"Next-Year Project");
b. To the extent known, the tentative locations and estimated
beginning and ending dates for all projects contemplated for the five years
(5) following the next calendar year (in this section, a "five-year project").
It is the registrant’s responsibility to keep informed on available
construction and major maintenance plans filed by other registrants.
The term "project" in this section shall include both next-year projects and
five-year projects but does not include individual service line hookups and
minor maintenance unless they are part of an area wide program.
Scott County Ordinance No. 22
12
107.2 Additional Next-year Projects. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the director
shall not deny an application for a right-of-way permit for failure to include a
project in a plan submitted to the County if the registrant has used
commercially reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan for the project.
Sec. 108 Permit Requirement
108.1 Permit Required. Except as otherwise provided in this code, no person may
access, landscape, place a service utility, excavate/grade or obstruct any rightof-
way without first registering and having obtained the appropriate right-ofway
permit from the County to do so.
108.2 Permit Extensions. No person may access, landscape, place a service utility,
excavate/grade or obstruct the right-of-way beyond the date or dates specified
in the permit unless such person (1) makes a supplementary application for
another right-of-way permit before the expiration of the initial permit; and (2)
a new permit or permit extension is granted.
108.3 Routine Maintenance Activities. The director may approve a permit plan
which, among other conditions, allows for maintenance activities without
separate notice and separate compensation.
108.4 Permit Display. Permits issued under this Ordinance shall be conspicuously
displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated work site and
shall be available for inspection by the County.
Sec. 109 Permit Applications
Application for a permit is made to the director on the form provided by the County.
Right-of-way permit applications shall contain and will be considered complete, only
upon compliance with the requirements of the following provisions:
a. Registration with the County pursuant to this Ordinance;
b. Submission of a completed permit application form, including all required
attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the proposed
project and the location of all known existing and proposed facilities of the
permittee in the project area.
c. Payment of money due the County for:
(1) permit fees, estimated restoration costs and other management costs;
Scott County Ordinance No. 22
13
(2) prior unpaid right-of-way or obstruction permit fees;
(3) any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the County because
of applicant's prior excavations or obstructions of the right-of-way or any
emergency actions taken by the County;
(4) other charges, if applicable.
d. Payment of disputed amounts due the County by posting security or depositing
in an escrow account an amount equal to at least 100% of the amount owing.
Sec. 110 Insurance Required
110.1 Before any permit shall be issued allowing work in the public right-of-way, the
applicant or registrant shall provide a certificate of insurance or self insurance:
(1) Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the
applicant/registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in
the State of Minnesota, or a form of self insurance acceptable to the
director;
(2) Verifying that the applicant/registrant is insured against claims for bodily
injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising out
of the (1) use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the registrant, its
officers, agents, employees and permittees; and (2) placement and use of
facilities in the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents,
employees and permittees, including, but not limited to, protection against
liability arising from contracts, independent contractors, products and
completed operations, explosions, damage of underground facilities and
collapse of property;
(3) Naming the County, its officers, employees and agents, as an additional
insured as to whom the coverages required herein are in force and
applicable and for whom defense will be provided as to all such coverage;
(4) Requiring that the director be notified thirty (30) days in advance of
cancellation of the policy, non-renewal or material adverse modification
of a coverage term;
(5) Indicating commercial general liability coverage, business automobile
liability coverage, workers compensation and umbrella coverage
established by the director in amounts sufficient to protect the County and
the public and to carry out the purposes and policies of this Ordinance.
Scott County Ordinance No. 22
14
110.2 The County may require a copy of the actual insurance policies.
110.3 If the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate required to be filed
under Minn. Stat. § 300.06 as recorded and certified to by the Secretary of
State shall be filed with the County.
110.4 A copy of the person's order granting a certificate of authority from the
Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other applicable state or federal
agency, where the person is lawfully required to have such certificate from
said Commission or other state or federal agency.
Sec. 111 Construction Performance Bonds
111.1 Requirement. At the director’s discretion, a construction performance bond
may be required from either the applicant or registrant for any work in the
public right-of-way which requires a permit pursuant to this Ordinance.
111.2 Amount of Bond. The director shall determine the construction performance
bond amount based on estimated costs to restore the right-of-way if the
applicant/registrant is non-compliant with conditions of Sec. 114 right-of-way
patching and restoration.
Sec. 112 Issuance of Permit; Conditions
112.1 Permit Issuance. If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of this
Ordinance, the County shall issue a permit.
112.2 Conditions. The director may impose reasonable conditions upon the
issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to
protect the health, safety and welfare or, when necessary, to protect the rightof-
way and its current and future use.
Sec. 113 Permit Fees
113.1 Right-of-Way Permit Fee. The County shall establish right-of-way permit
fees in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs.
a. The County right-of-way management costs;
b. Degradation costs, if applicable; and
c. Other costs and fees allowed by statute.
Permit fees shall be established by the County Board and may be amended at
Scott County Ordinance No. 22
15
any public meeting.
113.2 Conditions. The Director may impose conditions upon the issuance of permits
and the performance of the applicant thereunder to protect the public’s
health, safety and welfare, or when necessary, to protect the public right-ofway
and its current use, including but not limited to the recovery of any
unusual management costs not recovered through the standard permit fee,
including but not limited to the cost of assigning a police officer to provide
traffic management or the cost of assigning a field observer.
113.3 Payment of Permit Fees. A right-of-way or obstruction permit shall not be
issued without payment of right-of-way or obstruction permit fees unless the
County allows applicants to pay such fees within thirty (30) days of billing.
113.4 Non refundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the director has
revoked for a breach as described in Sec. 123 are not refundable.
Sec. 114 Right-of-Way Patching and Restoration
114.1 Timing. The work to be done under the right-of-way permit, and the patching
and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be completed
within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days as work
could not be done because of extraordinary circumstances beyond the control
of the permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonable or
unreasonable under Sec. 116.
114.2 Temporary Surfacing, Patch and Restoration. Permittee shall patch its
own work.
a. County Restoration. If the County restores any part of the right-of-way,
the permittee shall pay the costs thereof within thirty (30) days of billing.
If the County restores only the surface of the right-of-way and during the
twenty-four (24) months following such restoration, the pavement settles,
the permittee shall pay to the County, within thirty (30) days of billing, all
costs related to restoring the right-of-way or associated with having to
correct the defective work of permittee, which may include removal and
replacement of any or all work done by the permittee. These costs shall
include administrative, overhead mobilization, material, labor, and
equipment.
b. Permittee Restoration. If the permittee restores the right-of-way itself, it
shall at the time of application for a right-of-way permit, post a
construction performance bond in an amount determined by the director to
be sufficient to cover the cost of restoration. If, within twenty-four (24)
months after completion of the restoration of the right-of-way, the director
determines that the right-of-way has been properly restored, the surety on
the construction performance bond shall be released.
Scott County Ordinance No. 22
16
114.3 Standards. To the maximum extent possible, restoration must return the rightof-
way to the same condition that existed before excavation as determined by
the County Engineer. Subject to this standard, plates 1 to 13 shown in Minn.
Rules pts. 7819.9900 to 7819.9950, indicate the maximum limits of
restoration methods and area requirements the County may impose when a
right-of-way user excavates in the public right-of-way. The Director and the
right-of-way user may agree to a lesser requirement. All levels of restoration
include compaction of the materials placed in the excavation of the subgrade
and aggregate base, plus pavement replacement in kind. If required by the
Director, all work must be performed according to the County’s standards and
specifications and drawing.
114.4 Guarantees. The permittee guarantees its work and shall maintain it for
twenty-four (24) months following its completion. The obligation is limited
to one (1) year for plantings and turf establishment. During this 24-month
period the permittee shall, upon notification from the director, correct all
restoration work to the extent necessary, using the method required by the
director. Said work shall be completed within five (5) working days after
receipt of the notice from the director, taking into consideration days during
which work cannot be done because of circumstances constituting force
majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonable or unreasonable
under Sec. 117.
114.4(a). Duty to Correct Defects. The permittee shall correct defects in patching, or
restoration performed by permittee or its agents. The permittee, upon
notification from the County, shall correct all restoration work to the extent
necessary, using the method required by the County. Said work shall be
completed within five (5) working days of the receipt of the notice from the
County, not including days during which work cannot be done because of
circumstances constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as
unseasonal or unreasonable under Sec. 117.
114.5 Failure to Restore. If the permittee fails to restore the public right-of-way in
the manner and to the condition required by the director, or fails to
satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the director, the
director shall notify the permittee in writing of the specific alleged failure or
failures and shall allow the permittee at least five (5) working days from
receipt of the notice to cure the failure or failures, or to respond with a plan to
cure. In the event the permittee fails to cure or fails to respond to the notice,
the County may, at its option, perform the necessary work and the permittee
shall pay to the County, within thirty (30) days of billing, the cost of restoring
the right-of-way. If permittee fails to pay as required, the County may
exercise its rights under the construction performance bond. Nothing in this
section shall prevent the County from determining that an emergency situation
arises and to take prompt action to protect the health and safety of the public.
Scott County Ordinance No. 22
17
Sec. 115 Joint Applications
115.1 Joint Application. Registrants may be required to jointly apply for permits
to access, excavate/grade, place a utility service, landscape or obstruct the
right-of-way at the same place and time.
115.2 Shared Fees. Registrants who apply for permits for the same obstruction or
right-of-way permit action, which the director does not perform, may share in
the payment of the obstruction or right-of-way permit fee. Registrants must
agree among themselves as to the portion each will pay and indicate the same
on their applications.
115.3 With County Construction Projects. Registrants who join in a scheduled
obstruction or right-of-way permit action coordinated with a County
construction project by the director, whether or not it is a joint application by
two or more registrants or a single application, are not required to pay any
fees, but a permit is still required.
Sec. 116 Supplementary Applications
116.1 Limitation on Area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area of the
right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work outside
the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any permittee
which determines that an area greater than that specified in the permit must be
obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater area (1) make
application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees required
thereby, and (2) be granted a new permit or permit extension. The Director
may orally waive the requirement for a permit extension or the payment of an
additional fee. County shall maintain a written record of any waivers granted.
116.2 Limitation on dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates
specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the permit
start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the end date.
If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it must apply
for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the new permit
or an extension of the old permit before working after the end date of the
previous permit. This supplementary application must be done before the
permit end date. The Director or the Director’s Designee may orally waive
the requirement for a permit extension or the payment of an additional fee.
County shall maintain a written record of any waivers granted.
Sec. 117 Other Obligations
117.1 Compliance with Other Laws. Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not
relieve permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses, and
authority and to pay all fees required by the County or other appropriate
jurisdiction or other applicable rule, law or regulation. Permittee shall comply
Scott County Ordinance No. 22
18
with other local codes and with road load restrictions. A permittee shall
comply with all requirements of local, state and federal laws, including Minn.
Stat. 216D.01-.09 ("Gopher State One Call Excavation Notice System").
A permittee shall perform all work in conformance with all applicable codes
and established rules and regulations, and is responsible for all work done in
the right-of-way pursuant to its permit, regardless of who does the work.
117.2 Prohibited Work. Except in an emergency or with the approval of the
Director, no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be done when
seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work.
117.3 Interference with Right-of-Way. A permittee shall not so obstruct a right-ofway
that the natural free and clear passage of water through gutters, culverts,
ditches tiles or other waterways shall be interfered. Private vehicles of those
doing work in the right-of-way may not be parked within or next to a permit
area, unless parked in conformance with County or applicable township and
city parking regulations. The loading or unloading of trucks must be done
solely within the defined permit area unless specifically authorized by the
permit.
Traffic control shall conform to the Minnesota Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices (MMUTCD) and its field manual and any written directions
of the director.
Sec. 118 Denial of Permit
The County may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and conditions of this
Ordinance or if the County determines that the denial is necessary to protect the health,
safety, and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current and future
use. The County may deny a permit if the utility has failed to comply with previous permit
conditions. The County may withhold issuance of a permit until conditions of previous
permit are complied with.
Sec. 119 Installation Requirements
The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other work performed in the
right-of-way shall be done in conformance with Minnesota Rules 7819.1100, 7819.5000
and 7819.5100 and shall conform to MnDOT standard specifications and other applicable
local requirements, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the Minn. Stat. §§ 237.162
and 237.163.
Sec. 120 Inspection
120.1 Notice of Completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is
completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in accordance
with Minnesota Rule 7819.1300.
Scott County Ordinance No. 22
19
120.2 Site Inspection. Permittee shall make the work-site available to the County,
or its agents and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all
reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the work.
120.3 Authority of County.
a. At the time of inspection the director may order the immediate cessation
and correction of any work which poses a serious threat to the life, health,
safety or well being of the public.
b. The director may issue an order to the permittee for any work which does
not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable standards, rules,
laws, conditions, or codes so long as the nonconformance constitutes a
“substantial breach” as set forth in Minn. Stat. § 237.163, subd. 4(c)(1)-
(5). The order shall state that failure to correct the violation will be cause
for revocation of the permit. Within a reasonable time after issuance of
the order, the permittee shall present proof to the director that the violation
has been or will be corrected within a time period set forth by the director
in the order. If such proof has not been presented within the required
time, the director may revoke the permit pursuant to Sec. 123.
c. The cost of any action required by the County shall be paid by the
permittee.
Sec. 121 Emergency Situations
Each registrant shall immediately notify the director of any event regarding its facilities
that it considers to be an emergency. The registrant will proceed to take whatever actions
are necessary to respond to the emergency or as directed by the director. Within two
business days after the occurrence of the emergency the registrant shall apply for the
necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith and fulfill the rest of the
requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this Ordinance for the actions
it took in response to the emergency. The permittee requirements shall not apply if the
repair is caused by another permittee’s work in the right-of-way.
If the County becomes aware of an emergency regarding a registrant's facilities, the
County will attempt to contact the local representative of each registrant affected, or
potentially affected, by the emergency. In any event, the County may take whatever
action it deems appropriate to the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the
registrant whose facilities occasioned the emergency.
Sec. 122 Work Done Without a Permit
Except in an emergency, any person who, without first having obtained the necessary
permit, obstructs or excavates a right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit, deposit
with the County the fees necessary to correct any damage to the right-of-way and comply
with all of the requirements of this Ordinance.
Scott County Ordinance No. 22
20
Sec. 123 Supplementary Notification
If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends sooner than the
date given on the permit, permittee shall notify the County of the accurate information as
soon as this information is known.
Sec. 124 Revocation of Permits
124.1 Substantial Breach. The County reserves its right, as provided herein, to
revoke any right-of-way permit, without a fee refund, if there is a substantial
breach of the terms and conditions of any relevant statute, ordinance, rule or
regulation, or any material condition of the permit including a threat to the
safety of workers, or the right-of-way user or the utility users. A substantial
breach by permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
a. The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit;
b. An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-ofway
permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or
deceit upon the County or its citizens;
c. Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a right-ofway
Permit;
d. The failure to complete the work in a timely manner; unless a permit
extension is obtained, or unless the failure to complete work is due to
reasons beyond the permittee's control, or failure to relocate existing
facilities as specified in Sec. 125; or
e. The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not conform
to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to Sec. 120.
f. Failure of the utility to pay any required costs, fees, or charges billed by
the County.
124.2 Written Notice of Breach. If the County determines that the permittee has
committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute,
ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the permit the County shall
make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. The
demand shall state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of
the permit. A substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the County, at its
discretion, to place additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate
and remedy the breach.
Scott County Ordinance No. 22
21
124.3 Response to Notice of Breach. Within five (5) working days of receiving a
written notification of breach from the County, permittee shall provide the
county with a plan acceptable to the director that will cure the breach.
Permittee's failure to so contact the County, or the permittee's failure to
submit an acceptable plan, or permittee's failure to reasonably implement the
approved plan, shall be cause for immediate revocation of the permit.
124.4 Reimbursement of County Costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall
also reimburse the County for the County’s reasonable costs, including restoration
costs.
124.5 Revoked Permit. If the County revokes a permittee’s permit for breach of this
Ordinance, the permittee will not be allowed to obstruct or excavate within the
County right-of-way until the breach situation is corrected to the satisfaction of the
director and the permit is reissued.
Sec. 125 Mapping Data
125.1 Information Required. Each registrant and permittee shall provide project
data necessary to allow the County to develop a right-of-way mapping system
in accordance with Minn. Stat. § 237.162, subd. 8 (6) 1998).
125.2 Application Required. County requires a permit for excavation in or
obstruction of its public right-of-way. A person wishing to undertake a
project within the public right-of-way shall submit a right-of-way permit
application, which will require the filing of mapping information pursuant to
subdivision 3.
125.3 Mapping Information. Scott County requires as part of its permit the filing
of all of the following information for placement of utilities:
a. Location and elevation of applicant’s mains, cables, conduits, switches,
and related equipment and facilities, with the location based on one of the
following methods:
(1) The preferred method is: X, Y, and Z coordinates in NAD 83 1996
Adjustment (also known as HARN Adjustment) horizontal datum
and NGVD 88 vertical datum. This information is to be supplied in
an electronic format in an ASCII comma-delimited file including:
Point Number, Northing, Easting, Elevation and Description. The
alignment position shall be collected at a minimum interval of two
hundred feet or as required by changes in direction of the utility
being located to define the horizontal alignment. Elevation “as built”
depth locations shall be collected at a minimum of 10 per mile. The
horizontal and vertical accuracy requirements for all collected
positions shall be within 0.5 feet of their reported position as
evidenced by the certification of a licensed Land Surveyor or
Scott County Ordinance No. 22
22
Engineer registered in the State of Minnesota.
(2) Offsets from property lines, distances from the centerline of the
public right-of-way, and curb lines as determined by the County.
(3) Any other system agreed upon by the right-of-way user and the
County.
b. the type and size of the utility facility;
c. a description of above-ground appurtenances;
d. any facilities to be abandoned, if applicable, in conformance with Minn.
Stat. § 216D.04, subd. 3.
125.4 Changes and Corrections. The application must provide that the applicant
agrees to submit “as built” data, reflecting any changes and variations from
the information provided under subdivision 2, items A to D.
125.5 Additional Construction Information. In addition, the right-of-way user
shall submit to County at the time the project is completed a completion
certificate.
125.6 Manner of Conveying Permit Data. A right-of-way user is not required to
provide or convey mapping information or data in a format or manner that is
different from what is currently utilized and maintained by that user.
A permit application fee may include the cost to convert the data furnished
by the right-of-way user to a format currently in use by the local unit
of government. These data conversion costs, unlike other costs that make
up permit fees, may be included in the permit fee after the permit
application process.
125.7 Data on Existing Facilities. At the request of Scott County, a right-of-way
user shall provide existing data on its existing facilities within the public rightof-
way in the form maintained by the user at the time the request was made, if
available.
Sec. 126 Location and Relocation of Facilities
126.1 Placement, Location, and Relocation. Placement, location, and relocation
of facilities must comply with the Act, with other applicable law, and
with Minnesota Rules 7819.3100, 7819.5000, and 7819.5100, to the
extent the rules do not limit authority otherwise available to cities and
counties.
126.2 Corridors. The County may assign specific corridors within the rightof-
way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, as a
best management practice for each type of facility or equipment that
Scott County Ordinance No. 22
23
is, or, pursuant to current technology, the County expects will someday be,
located within the right-of-way. All right-of-way, obstruction, or other
permits issued by the County involving the installation or replacement of
facilities shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue. A
typical cross section of the location for utilities may be on file at the director’s
office. This section is not intended to establish “high density corridors.”
Any registrant who has facilities in the right-of-way in a position at
variance with the corridors established by the County shall, no later
than at the time of the next reconstruction or excavation of the area
where the facilities are located, move the facilities to the assigned position
within the right-of-way, to prevent interference with planned local
government use of the right-of-way unless this requirement is waived by
the County for good cause shown, upon consideration of such factors
as the remaining economic life of the facilities, public safety, customer
service needs and hardship to the registrant.
126.3 Limitation of Space. To protect health, safety, and welfare or
when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use, the County
shall have the power to use best management practices to prohibit or
limit the placement and location of new or additional facilities within the
right-of-way. In making such decisions, the County shall strive to the
extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the rightof-
way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public interest,
the public's need for the particular utility service, the condition of the right-ofway,
the time of year with respect to essential utilities, the protection of
existing facilities in the right-of-way, and future County plans for
public improvements and development projects which have been
determined to be in the public interest.
126.4 Relocation of Facilities. A right-of-way user shall promptly and at its own
expense, with due regard for seasonal working conditions, permanently
remove and relocate its facilities in the right-of-way when it is necessary to
prevent interference, and not merely for convenience of the local government
unit, in connection with: (1) a present or future local government use of the
right-of-way for a public project; (2) the public health or safety; or (3) the
safety and convenience of travel over the right-of-way.
A right-of-way user is not required to remove or relocate its facilities from a
right-of-way that has been vacated in favor of a nongovernmental entity
unless and until the reasonable costs to do so are first paid to the right-of-way
user.
Sec. 127 Location of Facilities During Design Process
In addition to complying with the requirements of Minn. Stat. 216D.01-.09 ("One Call
Excavation Notice System"), each registrant who has facilities or equipment in the
project area shall provide location information to the County of all said facilities.
Scott County Ordinance No. 22
24
Sec. 128 Damage to Other Facilities
The provisions of Minn. Stat. Ch.. 216D, as amended, shall apply to all situations
involving damages to facilities during excavation operations.
Sec. 129 Right-of-Way Vacation
Reservation of Right. If the County vacates a right-of-way that contains the facilities of
a registrant, the registrant’s rights in the vacated right-of-way are governed by Minnesota
Rule 7819.3200 and other applicable laws.
Sec. 130 Indemnification and Liability
Limitation of Liability: By registering with the County, or by accepting a permit under
this Ordinance, a registrant or permittee agrees to defend and indemnify the County for
any liability for (1) for injuries to persons, damage to property or loss of service claims
by parties other than the registrant or the County, or (2) for claims or penalties of any sort
resulting from the installation, presence, maintenance or operation of equipment or
facilities by registrants or permittees or activities of registrants or permittees.
Indemnification: To the fullest extent permitted by law, a registrant or permittee shall
indemnify, keep and hold the County, its officials, employees and agents, free and
harmless from any and all costs, specifically including attorney fees and other costs and
expenses of defense, liabilities, and claims for damages of any kind arising out of the
construction, presence, installation, maintenance, repair or operation of its equipment and
facilities, or out of any activity undertaken in or near a public right-of-way, whether or
not any act or omission complaint of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by a public
right-of-way permit. The foregoing does not indemnify the County for its own
negligence except for claims arising out of or alleging the County’s negligence in issuing
the permit or failing to properly or adequately inspect or enforce compliance with a term,
condition or purpose of a permit. This section is not, as to third parties, a waiver of any
defense or immunity otherwise available to the registrant, permittee or the County, and
the registrant or permittee, in defending any action on behalf of the County, shall be
entitled to assert in any action every defense or immunity that the County could assert in
its own behalf. In defending the County, any registrant or permittee shall obtain the
consent of the County Board before any settlement shall be enforced.
All permits are granted subject to the ownership rights the County may have in the
property involved and to the extent that state, federal local laws, rules and regulations
allow and said permit is subject to all such laws and rules.
Sec. 131 Abandoned or Unusable Facilities
131.1 Discontinued Operations. A registrant who has determined to discontinue
all or a portion of its operations in the County must provide information
satisfactory to the County that the registrant’s obligations for its facilities in
Scott County Ordinance No. 22
25
the right-of-way under this Ordinance have been lawfully assumed by another
registrant.
131.2 Removal. Any registrant who has abandoned or unusable facilities in any
right-of-way shall remove it from that right-of-way if required in conjunction
with other right-of-way repair, excavation, or construction, unless the County
waives this requirement.
Sec. 132 Appeal
A right-of-way user that: (1) has been denied registration; (2) has been denied a permit;
(3) has had permit revoked; or (4) believes that the fees imposed are invalid, may have
the denial, revocation, or fee imposition reviewed, upon written request by the County
Board. The County Board shall act on a timely written request. A decision by the
County Board affirming the denial, revocation, or fee imposition will be in writing and
supported by written findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision.
Sec. 133 Reservation of Regulatory and Police Powers
A permittee's or registrant's rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the
County to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety
and welfare of the public.
Sec. 134 Severability
If any portion of this Ordinance is for any reason held invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision
and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. Nothing
in this Ordinance precludes the County from requiring a franchise agreement with the
applicant, as allowed by law, in addition to requirements set forth herein.
Sec. 135 Permit Fee Schedule
The County Board shall periodically review and approve the fee schedule for permits
issued under this Ordinance.
ORDINANCE NO. 23
COUNTY OF SCOTT, MINNESOTA
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING THE SCOTT WATERSHED MANAGEMENT
ORGANIZATION TAX DISTRICT
The Board of Commissioners of Scott County, Minnesota, hereby ordains as follows:
Section 1. Pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 103B.231, subd. 3(b), wherein Scott County is
obligated to prepare, adopt and implement the watershed plan for the Scott Watershed
Management Organization located within the jurisdictional boundaries of Scott County, and
pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 103B.211 to 103B.255, wherein Scott County has planning, review,
permitting, and financing authority in the watershed management organization, and pursuant to
Minn. Stat. § 103B.245, subd. 1, wherein Scott County may establish a Watershed Management
Tax District for the purpose of paying the costs of the planning required by law, there is hereby
established a special tax district to be known as the Scott Watershed Management Organization
Tax District.
Section 2. The territory of the Scott Watershed Management Organization Tax District is
comprised of all the lands delineated on the attached map.
Section 3. From and after the effective date of this ordinance, Scott County may annually
levy a tax on all taxable property in the Scott Watershed Management Organization Tax District
for the purposes for which this tax district is established. The proceeds of the tax shall be paid
into a fund reserved for these purposes.
Passed and duly adopted by the Board of Commissioners of Scott County this 22nd day of
July, 2003.
SCOTT COUNTY, MINNESOTA
By:
Jon Ulrich, Chair
Scott County Board of Commissioners
Attest:
David J. Unmacht
Scott County Administrator





Scott County Ordinance No. 25
CLEANUP OF CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB SITES ORDINANCE
1
CLEANUP OF CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB SITES
ORDINANCE
Scott County Ordinance No. 25
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS ......................................................................................2
SECTION 1.10 Title and Statutory Authority ..........................................................................2
SECTION 1.20 Purpose............................................................................................................2
SECTION 1.30 Jurisdiction ......................................................................................................3
SECTION 1.40 Interpretation and Application ........................................................................3
SECTION 1.50 Disclaimer of Liability ....................................................................................3
SECTION 1.60 Fees .................................................................................................................3
SECTION 1.70 Definitions, Rules, and Word Usage...............................................................3
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION .............................................................................................4
SECTION 2.00 Declaration of Site as a Chemical Investigation Site Public Health
Nuisance.....................................................................................................................................4
SECTION 2.10 Medical guidelines for assessing health status of exposed persons ................5
SECTION 2.20 Law Enforcement notice to affected public, public health, and child
protection authorities .................................................................................................................5
SECTION 2.30 Notice of Chemical Investigation Site Public Health Nuisance to Owner(s)
and Occupant(s) .........................................................................................................................6
SECTION 2.40 Notice Filed with Property Record and/or Motor Vehicle Record .................7
SECTION 2.50 Property Owner’s and Occupant’s Responsibility to Act ...............................7
SECTION 2.60 Property Owner’s Responsibility for Costs and Opportunity for Recovery ...8
SECTION 2.70 Special Assessment to Recover Public Costs .................................................9
SECTION 2.80 Authority to Modify or Remove Declaration of Chemical Investigation Site
Public Health Nuisance............................................................................................................10
SECTION 2.90 Waste Generated From Cleaning Up a Clandestine Drug Lab .....................10
ARTICLE III. EXCEPTIONS, APPEALS, AND PENALTIES................................................10
SECTION 3.10 Exceptions, Appeals, and Penalties...............................................................10
SECTION 3.20 Severability And Savings Clause..................................................................11
ARTICLE IV. EFFECTIVE DATE............................................................................................11
2
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 1.10 Title and Statutory Authority
1.11 This ordinance shall be known and referenced as the “Cleanup of
Clandestine Drug Lab Sites Ordinance.”
1.12 This ordinance is enacted pursuant to the powers specified in Minnesota
Statutes Chapter 145A and Minn Stat. §152.0275.
SECTION 1.20 Purpose
1.21 Professional reports, based on assessments, testing, and investigations, show
that chemicals used in the production of illicit drugs can condense, penetrate, and
contaminate the land, surfaces, furnishings, and equipment in or near structures
where clandestine drug labs are located.
1.22 These conditions present health and safety risks to occupants and visitors of
such structures and land through fire, explosion, skin and respiratory exposure to
chemicals.
1.23 This ordinance establishes responsibilities and guidelines for involved
parties to ensure that:
a) people are not unnecessarily exposed to the dangers of these contaminated
structures or land; and
b) proper steps are taken to remove contaminants and assure appropriate tests
are completed to verify that affected structures and land are sufficiently
cleaned for human contact.
1.24 This ordinance assists and guides appropriate public authorities, property
owners, and occupants to prevent injury and illness to members of the public,
particularly children.
1.25 This ordinance is intended to reduce exposure to chemicals used in
clandestine drug lab operations in structure, including dwellings, buildings, motor
vehicles, trailers, appliances, or the land where they are located.
1.26 This ordinance is intended to minimize the cost to Scott County for clean up
of clandestine drug lab sites.
3
SECTION 1.30 Jurisdiction
1.31 This ordinance shall apply to all incorporated and unincorporated
municipalities and land (city or township) within the boundaries of Scott County.
1.32 Where a municipality has lawfully passed an ordinance to regulate and
enforce the cleanup of clandestine drug labs that is more restrictive, the County
shall coordinate regulation and enforcement with that municipality.
SECTION 1.40 Interpretation and Application
The provisions of this ordinance shall be interpreted and applied as the minimum
requirements necessary to protect public health, safety, and welfare.
SECTION 1.50 Disclaimer of Liability
Liability on the part of, or a cause of action against, Scott County or any
employee or agent thereof for any damages that may result from reliance on this
ordinance shall be eliminated or limited as provided by Minn. Stat. § 466.02 and
Scott County Hazardous Waste Ordinance, No. 12.
SECTION 1.60 Fees
Fees for the administration of this ordinance may be established and amended
periodically by resolution of the Scott County Board of Commissioners.
SECTION 1.70 Definitions, Rules, and Word Usage
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms or words shall be
interpreted as follows:
1.71 Abatement/abated means that a chemical drug lab site has been cleaned or
secured in such a manner as to no longer be a risk to the public safety.
1.72 Child means any person less than eighteen (18) years of age.
1.73 Chemical investigation site means a clandestine drug lab site that is under
notice and order for cleanup and/or remediation as a public health nuisance, as
authorized by Minnesota Statute Chapter 145A, Minnesota Statute § 152.0275,
and/or this ordinance.
1.74 Clandestine drug lab operation means the unlawful manufacture or attempt
to manufacture a controlled substance within any area of a structure such as a
dwelling, building, motor vehicle, trailer, boat, or other structure or appliance, as
determined by a licensed law enforcement officer.
4
1.75 Clandestine drug lab site means any structure or parts of a structure such as
a dwelling, building, or any conveyance such as a motor vehicle, trailer, or
outdoor location occupied or affected by conditions and/or chemicals, typically
associated with the manufacturing of methamphetamine, including waste
materials.
1.76 Cleanup means proper removal and/or containment of substances hazardous
to humans and/or the environment at a chemical investigation site. Cleanup is a
part of remediation.
1.77 Controlled substance means a drug, substance or immediate precursor in
Schedules I through V of Minnesota Statute § 152.02, as amended in the future.
The term shall not include distilled spirits, wine, malt beverages, intoxicating
liquors, or tobacco.
1.78 Owner means any person, firm, or corporation who owns, in whole or in
part, the land and/or structures such as buildings, motor vehicle, trailer, boat or
other appliance at a clandestine drug lab site.
1.79 Public Health Nuisance shall have the meaning attributed to it in Minnesota
Statute § 145A.02, subd. 17.
1.80 Public Health Authority means the Public Health Agent, or designee, within
the Environmental Health Department, and/or the Public Health Director, or
designee, within the Public Health Department, who are authorized to act as
agents of the Scott County Board of Commissioners, in their role as the
Community Health Board, pursuant to the Local Public Health Act, Minnesota
Statutes §§ 145A.09 to 145A.13.
1.81 Remediation means methods such as assessment, evaluation, testing,
venting, detergent scrubbing, enclosure, encapsulation, demolition, and/or
removal of contaminated materials from a chemical investigation site.
Contamination of ground and surface water is included.
1.82 Structure means a dwelling, building, motor vehicle, trailer, boat, or any
other area or location, either fixed or temporary, indoors or outdoors.
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 2.00 Declaration of Site as a Chemical Investigation Site Public Health
Nuisance
Clandestine drug lab sites, as defined herein, are declared by this ordinance to be
“chemical investigation site public health nuisances” unless and until abatement
has been accomplished.
5
SECTION 2.10 Medical guidelines for assessing health status of exposed persons
Medical guidelines for assessing the health status and determining medical care
needs of persons – particularly children and vulnerable adults – that are found or
known to be occupants or frequent visitors at a clandestine drug lab site, may be
established and updated as necessary by the Public Health Director of the Scott
County Public Health Department.
SECTION 2.20 Law Enforcement notice to affected public, public health, and child
protection authorities
2.21 Law enforcement authorities who identify a clandestine drug lab site or
clandestine drug lab operation shall notify the county and/or city departments
responsible for public health and the County department responsible for child and
vulnerable adult protection within one (1) working day of identifying the lab site.
The obligation to promptly notify may be delayed to accomplish appropriate law
enforcement objectives, but only to the extent that public health and child
protection responsibilities are not unnecessarily compromised. The notice shall
include sufficient information to inform the recipients of the following:
a) property location by street address and other identifiable location;
b) identities of the property owner(s) and occupant(s) – especially the
identities of any children and women of child-bearing age found or known
to be associated with the site;
c) chemicals found and indications of chemical residues;
d) presumed duration of the lab;
e) equipment in a dwelling or structure that is typically associated with the
manufacture of a controlled substance; and
f) conditions typically associated with a clandestine drug lab site or operation
including weapons, illicit drugs, filth, fire, or electrical shock and other
harmful conditions as determined by Minnesota law.
2.22 Upon identification of the clandestine drug lab site or operation, law
enforcement agencies may treat, store, transport or dispose of all hazardous waste
found at the site in a manner consistent with Minnesota Department of Health,
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, and Scott County rules and regulations,
including but not limited to Scott County Ordinance 12, Hazardous Waste
Management. The law enforcement agency shall install locks on all entry doors
of the affected area of a structure (s) after all occupants and animals have vacated
the site.
2.23 When a law enforcement agency completes its work under 2.22 and is
prepared to leave such sites, the agency shall affix a warning sign to all the
entrances of the affected part of the structure or in a conspicuous place(s) on bare
land. The warning sign shall be those that have been prepared in advance for such
situations through the collaboration of County Law Enforcement, Public Health,
and city officials, if applicable. The warning sign shall be of a size and contain
information sufficient to alert visitors or returning occupants that the site is a
6
Chemical Investigation Site Public Health Nuisance, may be dangerous to enter,
and must not be entered except by authorization of the Public Health Authority
and/or Law Enforcement agency identified on the sign.
2.24 It is unlawful for any person, except authorized county personnel, to remove
a Chemical Investigation Site Public Health Nuisance warning sign from the
posted property.
SECTION 2.30 Notice of Chemical Investigation Site Public Health Nuisance to
Owner(s) and Occupant(s)
2.31 After the Public Health Authority receives notice from a law enforcement
agency that a clandestine drug lab site has been identified and posted with the
appropriate Chemical Investigation Site Public Health Nuisance warning sign, the
Public Health Authority shall serve the known lawful occupant(s) and owner(s) of
the site, pursuant to Minnesota Statute § 145A.04, subd. 8(b) with notice of their
responsibilities relative to the chemical investigation site public health nuisance.
2.32 The public health authority shall notify and order the property owner(s) of
record and known occupant(s) or agent(s) to have the chemical investigation site
removed or abated within ten (10) days, as provided in Minnesota Statute §
145A.04 and this ordinance. The public health notice and order shall include the
following:
a) A replica of the Chemical Investigation Site Public Health Nuisance
Declaration that is posted at the site’s entrance(s).
b) Information about the potentially hazardous condition of the chemical
investigation site.
c) A summary of the responsibilities of the property owner(s) and occupant(s)
under this ordinance.
d) Information on locating professional services necessary to remove and
abate the chemical investigation site or public health nuisance status as
provided in this ordinance and Minnesota Statutes §§ 145A.04 and
152.0275.
2.33 The public health authority shall endeavor to provide information in writing
regarding the Chemical Investigation Site Public Health Nuisance declaration and
potential hazard(s) to the following additional concerned parties:
a) Neighbors within close proximity that reasonably can be affected by the
conditions found;
b) The local municipal clerk;
c) Local law enforcement;
d) Other state and local authorities, such as the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency and Minnesota Department of Health that may have public and
environmental protection responsibilities at the site.
7
2.34 When the site is real property and the owner(s) or the address of the
owner(s) is unknown, the owner(s) and owner’s address is deemed to be that of
the property’s taxpayer’s name(s) and address as that information is maintained
by the County Finance Department. When the site is a vehicle, boat, or trailer and
the owner(s) or the address of the owner(s) of the site is unknown, the owner(s)
and the owner’s address is deemed to be that of the person(s) on file as the
owner(s) on the current or most recent title to the vehicle, boat, or trailer.
SECTION 2.40 Notice Filed with Property Record and/or Motor Vehicle Record
2.41 If after ten (10) business days notice and order, Public Health is unable to
obtain any reasonable assurance or plan from the property owner(s) or
occupant(s) that the dwelling or structure is being properly vacated, cleaned,
remediated, and tested, Public Health may provide a copy of the Chemical
Investigation Site Public Health Nuisance notice and order to the County
Recorder and to the lien and mortgage holders of the affected dwelling or
structure and/or properties. The County Recorder is authorized to file that
information with the property record, to notify other persons with an interest in
the property regarding the property’s Chemical Investigation Site Public Health
Nuisance status.
2.42 If the chemical investigation site is abated, but not properly cleaned,
remediated and tested, and remains contaminated, the property or portion of the
property may not be occupied or used until it has been properly cleaned,
remediate and tested as provided in the Department of Health’s Clandestine Drug
Lab General Cleanup Guidelines. The health authority shall record the
information required by Minnesota Statute § 152.0275, subd.2(h) with the County
Recorder.
2.42 When the affected property is a motor vehicle, boat, or trailer, Public Health
shall notify the appropriate State and local agency that maintains motor vehicle,
boat, or trailer records, and the holders of liens or security interests against the
vehicle or trailer, in accordance with Minnesota Statute § 152.0275, subd. 2(g).
SECTION 2.50 Property Owner’s and Occupant’s Responsibility to Act
2.51 Property owner(s) and occupant(s) provided with notice, which also
includes the posted warning sign informing them of the chemical investigation
site public health nuisance, shall promptly act to vacate occupants and animals
from those parts of a structure that are a chemical investigation site public health
nuisance. This includes dwellings, buildings, motor vehicles, trailers, boat,
appliances or any other affected area or location.
2.52 Within ten (10) business days of receiving the Public Health notice and
order to cleanup the Chemical Investigation Site Public Health Nuisance, the
property owner(s) and/or occupant(s) shall take the following actions:
8
a) Notify Scott County Public Health Authority that the affected parts of the
dwellings, buildings, motor vehicles, boats, and/or land have been and will
remain vacated and secured until the Public Health Authority provides
notice that the chemical contamination has been abated and a public health
nuisance no longer exists.
b) Contract with one or more acceptable environmental hazard testing and
cleaning firms (acceptable firms are those that have provided assurance of
appropriate equipment, procedures, and personnel, as determined by the
Minnesota and/or Scott County Departments of Health) to accomplish the
following:
c) Provide Scott County Public Health Authority with the selected contractor’s
plan and schedule for remediation that will abate the Chemical Investigation
Site Public Health Nuisance declaration.
d) The property owner(s) or occupant(s) may request an extension of time to
consider options for arranging cleanup or removal of the affected parts of
the structure(s). The owner(s) or occupant(s) must show good cause for any
such extension. Any such extension shall be dependant on the assurances of
the owner(s) that the affected parts of the structure(s) will not be occupied
pending appropriate cleanup or demolition.
SECTION 2.60 Property Owner’s Responsibility for Costs and Opportunity for
Recovery
2.61 Consistent with Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 145A, and Minnesota Statute §
152.0275 as applicable the property owner(s) shall be responsible for:
a) private contractor’s fees, cleanup, remediation, and testing of chemical
investigation site public health nuisance conditions; and
b) Scott County’s fees and costs of administering notices and enforcing,
vacating, cleanup, remediation, and testing of affected parts of the property.
2.62 Nothing in this ordinance is intended to limit the rights of the property
owner(s), agent(s), occupant(s), or the County to recover costs or damages from
persons contributing to the chemical investigation site such as the operators of the
clandestine drug lab site and/or other lawful sources.
2.63 The County’s administrative and enforcement services, referenced in
subsection 2.61, include but are not limited to, the following:
a) Posting warning notices or signs at the site,
b) Notification of affected parties,
c) Securing the site, providing limited access to the site, and prosecution of
unauthorized persons found at the site;
d) Expenses related to the recovery of costs, including the assessment process;
e) Laboratory fees;
9
f) Clean-up services;
g) Administrative fees; and
h) Other associated costs.
SECTION 2.70 Special Assessment to Recover Public Costs
2.71 The County is authorized under Minnesota Statute § 145A.04, subd. 8(c) to
proceed within ten (10) business days of service of a notice for abatement or
removal of the Public Health Nuisance to initiate the site assessment and cleanup
when a) the property owner is not located, or b) the property owner(s) is located,
but the Public Health Authority determines that the owner(s) refuses to, or cannot
pay the costs, or arrange a timely assessment and cleanup that is acceptable to the
Public Health Authority.
2.72 The County Administrator (or the Administrator’s formally identified
designee) shall be fully authorized to act, consistent with Minnesota Law, on
behalf of the County to direct funds to assure prompt remediation of chemical
investigation site public health nuisances.
2.73 When the estimated cost of testing, cleanup, and remediation exceeds
seventy-five (75%) percent of the Scott County Assessor’s market value of the
structure and land, the County Administrator (or the Administrator’s formally
identified designee) is authorized to notify the property owner(s) of the county’s
intent to remove and dispose of the affected real property instead of proceeding
with cleaning and remediation.
2.74 The property owner(s) has five (5) business days to notify the County
Administrator (or the Administrator’s formally identified designee) of an appeal
of the decision to remove and dispose of the property. If appealed, the property
owner(s) shall be given an opportunity to show cause as to why such removal and
disposal should not occur. The appeal shall also provide the owner(s) with an
opportunity to assume responsibility and provide acceptable plans, contract, and
schedule in compliance with section 2.52.
2.75 The property owner(s) shall be responsible for all costs, including those of
the County, incurred to abate the public health nuisance, including contractor’s
fees and public costs for services that were performed in association with a
clandestine drug lab site or chemical dump site clean-up. The County’s costs may
also include, but shall not be limited to those set forth in Section 2.63. Fees and
costs specified above that are not paid for in any other way may be collected
through a special assessment on the property as allowed by Minnesota Statute §
145A.08, or by any other applicable Federal, State, and County Laws,
Ordinances, and/or applicable Scott County Board Resolution.
10
2.76 Payment on the special assessment shall be at the annual rate of at least One
Thousand Dollars ($1,000) or more as needed to assure full payment to the
County within ten (10) years. This amount shall be collected at the time(s) real
estate taxes are due. The amount due and/or payment rate may be adjusted by
action of the Scott County Board of Commissioners.
2.77 The County may also seek recovery of costs through other methods allowed
by Federal or State law.
SECTION 2.80 Authority to Modify or Remove Declaration of Chemical
Investigation Site Public Health Nuisance
2.81 The designated Public Health Authority may modify conditions of the
declaration and order removal of the Declaration of Chemical Investigation Site
Public Health Nuisance.
2.82 Such modification or removal shall occur only after the Public Health
Authority has determined that levels of contamination are sufficiently reduced or
abated through remediation to warrant modification or removal of the
Declaration. The Public Health Authority may rely on information from
competent sources, including those supplied by the property owner(s) and/or
others, such as state and local health, safety, law enforcement and pollution
control authorities, to reach such decisions.
2.83 When the Declaration is modified or removed, the Public Health Authority
shall forward that information to the Scott County Recorder for addition to the
property record, in accordance with Minnesota Statute § 152.0275, subd. 2(h). if
notice of the Chemical Investigation Site Public Health Nuisance Declaration was
previously filed with the Recorder as described above. Similarly, notice shall be
provided to the motor vehicle or other license records agencies and lien holders if
a notice had previously been provided to them. Scott County maintains a
Household Hazardous Waste Facility.
SECTION 2.90 Waste Generated From Cleaning Up a Clandestine Drug Lab
Waste generated from chemical investigation site public health nuisances shall be
treated, stored, transported, and disposed in accordance with applicable Minnesota
Department of Health, Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, and Scott County
rules and regulations for solid, hazardous household and other hazardous wastes.
ARTICLE III. EXCEPTIONS, APPEALS, AND PENALTIES
SECTION 3.10 Exceptions, Appeals, and Penalties
Administration of this ordinance, including guidance for, challenges to, and
penalties shall be according to the authorities provided in Minnesota Statute
Chapter 145A, Minnesota Statute § 152.0275 and other applicable Minnesota law,
11
the Scott County Hazardous Waste Regulation Ordinance and the Scott County
Solid Waste Management Ordinance.
SECTION 3.20 Severability And Savings Clause
If any section or portion of this ordinance shall be found unconstitutional or
otherwise invalid or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, that
finding shall not serve as an invalidation of, or affect the validity or enforceability
of any other section or provision of this ordinance.
ARTICLE IV. EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon adoption pursuant to
Minnesota law.
Dated this ____ day of ________, 2005.
SCOTT COUNTY BOARD OF
COMMISSIONERS
__________________________________________
ATTEST:
___________________________________
SCOTT COUNTY ORDINANCE NO. 26
AUTHORIZATION OF ON-SALE WINE/3.2 INTOXICATING MALT
LIQUOR LICENSEES TO SELL INTOXICATING MALT LIQUOR
1. Purpose
Minnesota Statutes, Section 340A.404, subd. 5 authorizes counties to issue to
holders of on-sale wine license, who is also licensed for on-sale 3.2 percent malt liquors,
and whose gross receipts are at least sixty (60%) percent attributable to the sale of food,
to sell intoxicating malt liquors at on-sale without an additional license. There are a
growing number of restaurants in the townships of Scott County offering wine and 3.2
beer who qualify to also sell “strong” beer. Pursuant to the authority granted it by the
Minnesota Liquor Act, Minnesota Statutes Chapter 340A, and the Twenty-first
Amendment to the United States Constitution, the Board of Commissioners of Scott
County prescribes the following licensing procedures and regulations governing the
licensing of the sale of intoxicating malt liquor for those holding on-sale wine and 3.2
percent male liquors
2. Permit to Licensed On-Sale Establishments
An on-sale wine and 3.2 percent malt liquor permit holder may sell intoxicating
malt liquors, providing that the licensed premises’ gross receipts are at least sixty (60%)
percent attributable to the sale of food on the premises.
3. General License Restrictions
a. A license issued under this ordinance is only effective for the compact and
contiguous space specified in the approved license applications governing the
wine and 3.2 percent malt liquors submitted by the permit holder.
b. A licensee under this ordinance shall be responsible for the conduct of the
business being operated and shall maintain conditions of sobriety and order.
c. A licensee under this ordinance must comply with all of the requirements of
Minnesota Chapter 340A pertaining to retail liquor licenses.
4. Definitions
For purposes of this ordinance, the terms uses above will have the meanings given
to them in Minnesota Statute Section 340A.101(2003) and as amended.
1
SCOTT COUNTY ORDINANCE NO. 27
DANGEROUS DOGS
1. Purpose
Minnesota Statutes Section 347.50, subdivision 8 and Minnesota Statutes Section 347.53
authorizes counties to establish a procedure by which a dog may be declared dangerous
or potentially dangerous, including the right to appeal that designation. Pursuant to the
authority granted it by Minnesota Statutes, the Board of Commissioners of Scott County
prescribes the following procedures and enforcement regulations governing dangerous
dog declarations.
2. Scope
a. The provisions of this section apply to the unincorporated areas of Scott
County.
3. Definitions
a. Dangerous Dog. “Dangerous dog” means any dog that has:
(1) without provocation, inflicted substantial harm on a human
being on public or private property;
(2) killed a domestic animal without provocation while off the owner’s
property; or
(3) been found to be potentially dangerous, and after the owner has
notice that the dog is potentially dangerous, the dog aggressively
bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or domestic
animals.
b. Potentially Dangerous Dog. “Potentially dangerous dog” means any dog
that:
(1) when unprovoked, inflicts bites on a human or domestic animal on
public or private property;
(2) when unprovoked, chases or approaches a person, including a
person on a bicycle, upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public or
private property, other than the dog owner’s property, in an
apparent attitude of attack; or
(3) has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack
unprovoked, causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety of
humans or domestic animals.
c. Unprovoked. “Unprovoked” means the condition in which the dog is not
purposely excited, stimulated, agitated or disturbed. It is a rebuttable
presumption that any attack on a child fourteen years of age or younger for
which a reasonable person connotes an intent to inflict bodily harm will be
2
considered to be unprovoked unless the child is engaged in the
commission of a crime or illegal activity, including activities classified
under Minnesota Statute 343 as cruelty to animals.
d. Proper Enclosure. “Proper enclosure” means securely confined indoors or
in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure suitable to prevent the
dog from escaping and providing protection from the elements for the dog.
A proper enclosure does not include a porch, patio, or any part of a house,
garage, or other structure that would allow the dog to exit of its own
volition, or any house or structure in which windows are open or in which
door or window screens are the only obstacles that prevent the dog from
exiting.
e. Owner. “Owner” means any person, firm, corporation, organization, or
department possessing, harboring, keeping, having an interest in, or
having care, custody, or control of a dog.
f. Substantial Bodily Harm. “Substantial bodily harm” has the meaning
given it under Minnesota Statute Section 609.02, subdivision 7a.
g. Great Bodily Harm. “Great bodily harm” has the meaning given it under
Minnesota Statute Section 609.02, subdivision 8.
h. Animal Control Officer. “Animal Control Officer” means the agency or
person under contract with Scott County to provide animal control
services.
4. Designation of a Potentially Dangerous Dog
a. The Animal Control Officer shall designate any dog as a potentially
dangerous dog upon receiving evidence that the dog, when unprovoked,
has bitten, attacked, or threatened the safety of a person or a domestic
animal as stated in 3(b) above.
b. The Animal Control Officer will cause one owner of the potentially
dangerous dog to be notified in writing that the dog is potentially
dangerous. The written notice will include dates, times and places of
parties bitten or chased in an attitude of attack.
c. The Animal Control Officer may impound any dog determined to pose a
threat to public safety pending a final dangerous dog designation.
d. The Animal Control Officer shall quarantine any dog without proof of
current rabies vaccination upon receiving evidence that the dog has bitten
any person or domestic animal.
3
e. The owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall have a microchip
implanted in the dog for identification. The owner shall provide the name
of the microchip manufacturer and identification number of the microchip
to the Animal Control Officer within fourteen (14) days of the designation.
f. If the owner of a potentially dangerous dog fails to implant a microchip in
the dog within fourteen (14) days, the Animal Control Officer may
implant the microchip and asses all related costs to the dog’s owner.
5. Appeal of a Potentially Dangerous Dog Designation
a. Within five (5) business days after receiving notice of a potentially
dangerous dog designation by the Animal Control Officer, the owner or
custodian of the dog may request a review of the designation by requesting
review in writing on a form provided by the Animal Control Officer and
submitting written evidence that disputes the declaration to the Animal
Control Officer. The Animal Control Officer shall make a final decision
within seven (7) days following the receipt of the written request, based
upon the written submissions only.
b. After a dog is finally declared potentially dangerous, the owner or
custodian of the dog may request that the Animal Control Officer review
the designation annually. An administrative hearing fee of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) shall be required prior to such a review. At the review,
the owner or custodian must provide evidence that the dog’s behavior has
changed. If the Animal Control Officer finds sufficient evidence that the
dog’s behavior has changed, the Animal Control Officer may rescind the
potentially dangerous dog designation.
6. Designation of a Dangerous Dog
a. The Animal Control Officer shall designate any dog a dangerous dog upon
receiving evidence that the dog has, when unprovoked, inflicted
substantial harm on a person or killed a domestic animal as stated in 3(a)
above.
b. The Animal Control Officer shall designate any dog a dangerous dog upon
receiving evidence that a dog, which has previously been declared a
potentially dangerous dog, has again bitten, attacked or threatened the
safety of a person or domestic animal as stated in 3(a) above.
c. The Animal Control Officer may impound any dog determined to pose a
threat to public safety pending a final dangerous dog designation order.
4
d. The Animal Control Officer shall quarantine any dog without proof of
current rabies vaccination upon receiving evidence that the dog has bitten
any person or domestic animal.
e. The Animal Control Officer will cause one owner of the dog to be notified
in writing that the dog is dangerous. The written notice will include dates,
times and places of parties bitten.
f. The Animal Control Officer will also provide one owner of the dog with a
Dangerous Dog Registration form.
g. Within fourteen (14) days of a declaration that a dog has been deemed a
dangerous dog, the owner or custodian of the dog shall complete the
Dangerous Dog Registration form and file it with the Scott County
Auditor with evidence showing that:
(1) a proper enclosure exists for the dangerous dog and the premises
are posted with a clearly visible warning sign, including a warning
symbol to inform children, that there is a dangerous dog on the
property;
(2) a surety bond has been issued by a surety company authorized to
conduct business in this state in the sum of at least $300,000,
payable to any person injured by the dangerous dog, or a policy of
liability insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to
conduct business in this state in the amount of at least $300,000,
insuring the owner for any personal injuries inflicted by the
dangerous dog and payable to the injured person(s);
(3) the owner has paid an annual fee of $105, in addition to any
regular dog licensing fees, to obtain a certificate of registration;
(4) the dog has had a microchip identification implanted;
(5) the dog has an easily identifiable tag with the uniform dangerous
animal symbol affixed to its collar at all times; and
(6) the dog is current in all vaccinations.
7. Appeal of Dangerous Dog Designation
a. Within five (5) business days after a dangerous dog designation is made
by the Animal Control Officer, the owner or custodian of the dog may
request a hearing to contest the designation. The request for a hearing
shall be made in writing on a form provided by the Animal Control
Officer.
b. The hearing shall be held before the Scott County Administrator or by an
independent hearing examiner selected by the Scott County Administrator,
not more than fifteen (15) days after receipt of the request for hearing.
The hearing officer will make findings of fact and will either affirm or
5
reject the Animal Control Officer’s dangerous dog designation or may
impose other sanctions as warranted. The hearing officer shall make a
final decision within seven (7) days of the hearing.
c. If the hearing officer confirms the dangerous dog designation, the owner
or custodian of the dog shall complete the Dangerous Dog Registration
form and file it with the Scott County Auditor with evidence as set forth in
Section 6(g) above within fourteen (14) days of final decision.
d. After a dog is finally declared dangerous, the owner or custodian of the
dog may request that the Animal Control Officer review the designation
annually. An administrative hearing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00)
shall be required prior to such a review. At the review, the owner or
custodian must provide evidence that the dog’s behavior has changed. If
the Animal Control Officer finds sufficient evidence that the dog’s
behavior has changed, the Animal Control Officer may rescind the
dangerous dog designation.
8. Destruction of Dog
a. If no appeal is filed, the dangerous dog designation will stand and the
Animal Control Officer may order the animal destroyed.
9. Violation of Dangerous Dog Registration
a. The Animal Control Officer shall immediately seize a dangerous dog if:
(1) the dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure;
(2) the dog is outside the proper enclosure and not under the physical
restraint of a responsible person;
(3) the dog is not validly registered within 14 days after the owner has
notice that the dog is dangerous; or
(4) the owner does not secure the proper liability insurance or surety
coverage within 14 days after the owner has notice that the dog is
dangerous.
b. The owner or custodian may reclaim the dog upon payment of
impounding and boarding fees, and presenting proof to the Animal
Control Officer that the requirements of Minnesota Statute Sections
347.51 and 347.52 have been met.
c. A dangerous dog not reclaimed under this section within fourteen (14)
days may be disposed of as provided by law and the owner is liable to the
Animal Control Authority for costs incurred in confining and disposing of
the dog.
6
10. Exemptions
a. The provisions of this section do not apply to police K-9 dogs used by law
enforcement officials for police work.
b. Dogs may not be declared dangerous if the threat, injury, or damage was
sustained by a person:
(1) who was committing, at the time, a willful trespass or other tort
upon the premises occupied by the owner of the dog;
(2) who was provoking, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or
who can be shown to have repeatedly, in the past, provoked,
tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog; or
(3) who was committing or attempting to commit a crime.
11. Criminal Penalty
a. The owner of a dog declared dangerous or potentially dangerous who fails
to comply with the requirements of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, with penalties as provided under Minnesota law.
12. Rabies Quarantine
a. Whenever any dog without proof of current rabies vaccination has bitten
any person or domestic animal, the owner or custodian of the dog, upon
being notified by the Animal Control Officer or local law enforcement,
will immediately cause the dog to be quarantined with the Animal Control
Authority or by a veterinarian licensed to practice in the State of
Minnesota, for a period of ten (10) days after the person has been bitten.
Within 24 hours of impoundment, a veterinarian will observe the animal
and examine the animal if necessary to ascertain whether symptoms of
rabies exist. If at the end of ten days the veterinarian diagnoses the dog to
be free of the signs of rabies, the dog will be released from quarantine. If
the dog dies, it head will be sent to the State Department of Health for
examination for rabies. The owner of the dog is responsible for the cost of
quarantine and examination by the veterinarian.
c. Whenever any dog with proof of current rabies vaccination has bitten any
person or domestic animal, the owner or custodian of the dog, upon being
notified by the Animal Control Officer or local law enforcement, will
immediately cause the dog to be quarantined in their home for a period of
ten (10) days after the person has been bitten. If at the end of ten days, the
dog appears to be free of rabies, the home quarantine shall end. If the dog
becomes ill or dies during the period of home quarantine, the owner shall
immediately notify the Animal Control Officer for examination.
SCOTT COUNTY ORDINANCE NO. 28
SOCIAL HOST ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 28
SOCIAL HOST ORDINANCE
Section 1. Title and Authority. The Scott County Board of Commissioners desires to
protect the health, safety and welfare of all persons living in and visiting the County. The
use of alcohol by persons under the age of twenty-one (21) is prohibited by State
statute. This ordinance prohibits, and establishes penalties for any person hosting an
event or gathering where alcohol is present and being possessed or consumed by
persons under twenty-one (21) years of age. This ordinance is enacted pursuant to
Minn. Stat. §145A.05, subdivision 1.
Section. 2. Purpose and Findings. The Board of Commissioners of Scott County
intends to discourage underage possession and consumption of alcohol, even if done
within the confines of a private residence, and intends to hold persons criminally
responsible who host events or gatherings where persons under 21 years of age
possess or consume alcohol regardless of whether the person hosting the event or
gathering supplied the alcohol. The Board of Commissioners of Scott County finds that:
(a) Events and gatherings held on private or public property where alcohol is
possessed or consumed by persons under the age of twenty-one are harmful
to those persons and constitute a potential threat to public health requiring
prevention or abatement.
(b) Prohibiting underage consumption acts to protect underage persons, as
well as the general public, from injuries related to alcohol consumption, such
as alcohol overdose or alcohol-related traffic collisions.
(c) Alcohol is an addictive drug which, if used irresponsibly, could have
drastic effects on those who use it as well as those who are affected by the
actions of an irresponsible user.
(d) Often, events or gatherings involving underage possession and
consumption occur outside the presence of parents. However, there are
times when the parent(s) is/are present and, condone the activity, and in
some circumstances provide the alcohol.
(e) Even though giving or furnishing alcohol to an underage person is a
crime, it is difficult to prove, and an ordinance is necessary to help further
combat underage consumption.
(f) A deterrent effect will be created by holding a person criminally
responsible for hosting an event or gathering where underage possession or
consumption occurs.
Section. 3. Definitions. For purposes of this ordinance, the following terms have the
following meanings:
(a) Alcohol. “Alcohol” means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits
of wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits including
dilutions and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process
produced.
(b) Alcoholic beverage. “Alcoholic beverage” means alcohol, spirits, liquor,
wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer,
and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and
which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or
combined with other substances.
(c) Event or gathering. “Event or gathering” means any group of three or
more persons who have assembled or gathered together for a social
occasion or other activity.
(d) Host. “Host” means to aid, conduct, allow, entertain, organize, supervise,
control, or permit a gathering or event, whether that host is present of not.
(e) Parent. “Parent” means any person having legal custody of a juvenile:
(1) As natural, adoptive parent, or step-parent;
(2) As a legal guardian; or
(3) As a person to whom legal custody has been given by
order of the court.
(f) Person. “Person” means any individual, partnership, co-partnership,
corporation, or any association of one or more individuals.
(g) Residence or Premises. “Residence” or “Premises” means any home,
land, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or
a hall or meeting room, or any other place of assembly, public or private,
whether occupied as a dwelling or for any social function, and whether
owned, leased, or rented.
(h) Underage Person. “Underage person” is any individual under twenty-one
(21) years of age.
Section. 4. Prohibited Acts.
(a) It is unlawful for any person(s) to;
(1) host or allow an event or gathering;
(2) at any residence, premises, or on any other private or public property;
(3) where alcohol or alcoholic beverages are present;
(4) when the person knows or reasonably should know that an underage
person will or does
(i) consume any alcohol or alcoholic beverage; or
(ii) possess any alcohol or alcoholic beverage with the intent to
consume it; and
(5) the person fails to take reasonable steps to prevent possession or
consumption by the underage person(s).
(b) A person is criminally responsible for violating Section 4 of this ordinance if
the person intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels, or conspires with or
otherwise procures another to commit the prohibited act.
Section 5. Exceptions.
(a) This ordinance does not apply to conduct solely between an underage person
and his or her parents while present in the parent’s household.
(b) This ordinance does not apply to legally protected religious observances.
(c) This ordinance does not apply to retail intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt
liquor licensees, municipal liquor stores, or bottle club permit holders who are
regulated by Minn. Stat. § 340A.503, subd.1(a)(1).
(d) This ordinance does not apply to situations where underage persons are
lawfully in possession of alcohol or alcoholic beverages during the course and
scope of employment.
Section. 6. Enforcement. This ordinance can be enforced by any police officer,
sheriff’s deputy, or certified peace officer in the county.
Section 7. Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, word, or
other portion of this ordinance is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional or invalid, in
whole, or in part, by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed
severable, and such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this law, which remaining portions shall continue in full force and
effect.
Section 8. Penalty. Violation of Section 4 of this ordinance is a misdemeanor.
Section 9. Effective Date. This ordinance shall take effect thirty (30) days following its
final passage and adoption.
Dated this _2nd__ of __June__, 2009
Scott County Board of Commissioners
___________________________
Jon Ulrich, Chair
Attest:
_________________________
Patrick J. Ciliberto
Scott County Attorney
Scott County Park Ordinance Page 1
SCOTT COUNTY
PARK ORDINANCE NO. 29
Adopted by Scott County Board of Commissioners May 26, 2009
Revised by the Scott County Board of Commissioners August 19, 2014
Scott County Park Ordinance Page 2
Table of Contents
CHAPTER 1: PURPOSE/AUTHORITY/DEFINITIONS ......................................................................... 4
Section 1 - Purpose ............................................................................................................................ 4
Section 2 - Authority ........................................................................................................................... 4
Section 3 - Definitions ........................................................................................................................ 4
Section 4 - Specification of Offenses .................................................................................................. 8
CHAPTER 2: REGULATION OF PUBLIC USE .................................................................................... 9
Section 1 - Park Hours ....................................................................................................................... 9
Section 2 - Permits ............................................................................................................................. 9
Section 3 - Failure to Pay Use Fee/Display Permit ............................................................................. 9
CHAPTER 3: REGULATION OF GENERAL CONDUCT/PERSONAL BEHAVIOR ............................. 9
Section 1 - Drug and Alcohol Use....................................................................................................... 9
Section 2 - Smoking and Tobacco Use ............................................................................................ 10
Section 4 - Public Nuisance/Personal Conduct ................................................................................. 10
Section 5 - Child Safety .................................................................................................................... 10
Section 6 - Property of Others .......................................................................................................... 10
Section 7 - Littering/Dumping ........................................................................................................... 11
Section 8 - Possession/Use of Firearms/Dangerous Weapons/Fireworks/Hunting ........................... 11
Section 9 - Interference with Employee Performance of Duty ........................................................... 11
CHAPTER 4: REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO GENERAL PARKLAND OPERATION .................. 11
Section 1 - Commercial Use/Solicitation/Advertising/Photography ................................................... 11
Section 2 - Pets in Parks .................................................................................................................. 12
Section 3 – Noise/Amplification of Sound ......................................................................................... 12
Section 4 - Fires ............................................................................................................................... 13
Section 5 - Aviation .......................................................................................................................... 13
Section 6 - Assembly, Meetings, Speeches, Demonstrations, Religious Services, Parades ............. 13
Section 7 - Amusement Devices....................................................................................................... 13
Section 8 - Engine-Powered Models and Toys ................................................................................. 13
Section 9 - Unlawful Occupancy ....................................................................................................... 13
CHAPTER 5: PROTECTION OF PROPERTY, STRUCTURES, & NATURAL RESOURCES ............ 14
Section 1 - Disturbance of Natural Features ..................................................................................... 14
Section 2 - Disturbance of Wildlife .................................................................................................... 14
Section 3 - Destruction/Defacement of Park Property/Signs ............................................................. 14
Section 4 - Release of Harmful or Foreign Substances .................................................................... 14
Section 5 - Interference of Park Property .......................................................................................... 15
Scott County Park Ordinance Page 3
CHAPTER 6: REGULATION OF RECREATIONAL ACTIVITY .......................................................... 15
Section 1 - Camping ......................................................................................................................... 15
Section 2 - Picnicking ....................................................................................................................... 15
Section 3 - Swimming/Beaches ........................................................................................................ 16
Section 4 - Scuba Diving and Snorkeling .......................................................................................... 16
Section 5 - Boating ........................................................................................................................... 16
Section 6 - Fishing ........................................................................................................................... 17
Section 7 - Horseback Riding ........................................................................................................... 17
Section 8 - Bicycling ......................................................................................................................... 17
Section 9 - Snowmobiling ................................................................................................................. 17
Section 10 - Cross-Country Skiing .................................................................................................... 18
Section 11 - Other Winter Activities .................................................................................................. 18
Section 12 - Other Special Activity Use ............................................................................................ 18
Section 13 - Roller Skating/In-Line Skating ...................................................................................... 18
Section 14 - Geocaching .................................................................................................................. 18
Section 15 - Disc Golfing .................................................................................................................. 18
Section 16 - Hiking ........................................................................................................................... 19
CHAPTER 7: REGULATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES, TRAFFIC, & PARKING ................................ 19
Section 1 - Motorized Recreational Vehicles .................................................................................... 19
Section 2 - Vehicle Operation ........................................................................................................... 19
Section 3 - Parking Vehicles ............................................................................................................. 19
Section 4 – Maintenance of Personal Vehicles ................................................................................. 20
CHAPTER 8: ENFORCEMENT .......................................................................................................... 20
Section 1 – Park Patrol Authority/Peace Officer Authority ................................................................ 20
Section 2 – Fines and Penalties ....................................................................................................... 20
Section 3 – Additional Rules and Regulations .................................................................................. 20
Section 4 – Impoundment of Pets ..................................................................................................... 20
Section 5 – Permit Revocation ......................................................................................................... 21
Section 6 – Employee Performance of Duty ..................................................................................... 21
CHAPTER 9: MISCELLANEOUS ....................................................................................................... 21
Section 1 – Conflict .......................................................................................................................... 21
Section 2 – Enactment ..................................................................................................................... 21
Section 3 – Exemptions .................................................................................................................... 21
Section 4 - Captions and Headings .................................................................................................. 21
CHAPTER 10: EFFECTIVE DATE ..................................................................................................... 22
Scott County Park Ordinance Page 4
CHAPTER 1: PURPOSE/AUTHORITY/DEFINITIONS
Section 1 - Purpose
The Scott County Board of Commissioners deem it reasonable, necessary, and desirable to provide an
Ordinance specifying rules and regulations in order to contribute to safe, healthy and livable
communities and peaceful public use of Scott County Park areas and facilities; for the educational and
recreational benefit and enjoyment of the public; for the protection and preservation of the property,
facilities, and natural resources of Scott County Parks; and for the safety and general welfare of the
public.
Section 2 - Authority
The Scott County Board of Commissioners, under Minnesota State Statutes, Chapter 398.31 –
398.37, in performing its primary duty of the acquisition, development, operations, and maintenance of
Scott County parks, trails, wildlife sanctuaries, forests, and other reservations-related facilities and
providing the means for public access to historic sites, lakes, rivers, streams, and other natural
features; is granted full power and authority to acquire and establish the above facilities and to
operate, maintain, protect, and improve a park system and implement a recreational program. As aid
to the accomplishment of these duties, the Scott County Board of Commissioners is granted the
authority to enact Ordinances and to declare that the violation thereof shall be a petty misdemeanor or
misdemeanor.
Section 3 - Definitions
The following words or terms, whenever they occur in this Ordinance, are defined as follows:
Alcoholic Beverage - includes any intoxicating beverage as defined by Minnesota law and includes
beer, flavored alcoholic beverages, and wine as further defined in this Ordinance.
Amusement Devices - means any contrivance, device, gadget, machine, or structure designed to test
the skill or strength of the user or to provide the user with any sort of ride, lift, swing, or fall experience
including, but not limited to, ball-throwing contest devices, electronic videos, animal ride devices, dunk
tanks, ball and hammer devices, trampoline devices, and the like.
Area or Areas - means a specified place within a park.
Barrels - means any various units of volume or capacity, as a liquid measure of 31 to 42 gallons.
Beach - means that part of a body of water and shore designated for swimming.
Beer - is any beverage made from malt by fermentation and containing not less than one-half of one
percent alcohol by volume.
Board - means the elected members of the Scott County Board of Commissioners.
Controlled substance - means any drug, substance, or immediate precursor in Schedules 1 through 5
of Minnesota Statutes Section 152.02.
County Employee or Staff - means any full or part-time regular, temporary, authorized volunteer,
seasonal worker, or agent in the employ of Scott County or Three Rivers Park District.
Scott County Park Ordinance Page 5
County Park - means those parks, park reserves, trails and other areas within the County of Scott under
the control of the Board of Commissioners and designated by them as being part of the Scott County
Park System.
Disc Golf - means a game played much like traditional golf. Instead of using a ball and clubs, players
use a flying disc, or Frisbee from a tee area to an elevated target basket.
Flavored Alcoholic Beverage - means any beverage containing distilled alcohol and added ingredients
such as fruit juices or other flavorings and containing not more than 14% alcohol by volume.
Geocaching - means an outdoor recreational activity that involves the use of a Global Positioning
System (GPS) receiver to find an object or geocache placed at a predetermined location. The internet
is often used to provide the directions and coordinates.
Glue - means any substance that releases vapors and which is used by a person for the purpose of
inducing symptoms of intoxication, elation, excitement, confusion, dizziness, paralysis, irrational
behavior, or in any manner changing, distorting, or disturbing the balance or coordination of a person’s
audio, visual, or mental processes.
Hiking - means traveling on foot, i.e., walking, running, or with an assistive mobility device.
Horse - includes a horse, mule, donkey, llama, alpaca or other ungulate or ruminant that is used to
transport people, equipment, or materials.
Indoor Area - means all space between a floor and a ceiling that is bounded by walls, doorways, or
windows, whether open or closed, covering more than 50 percent of the combined surface area of the
vertical planes (wall space) constituting the perimeter of the area, whether temporary or permanent.
A (standard) window screen or like building component is not considered a wall.
Keg - means a small cask or barrel containing more than 288 ounces of an alcoholic beverage.
Law Enforcement Officer - means any "Peace Officer" licensed by the Board of Peace Officers
Standards and Training and meeting the definition assigned to it in Minnesota Statutes, Section 626.84,
subdivision 1, clause (c).
Malt liquor - Any beer, ale, or other beverage made from malt by fermentation and containing not less
than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume.
Metal detecting - To use an electronic or mechanical device to locate metals or other artifacts that are
underground or under water.
Motorized Recreation Vehicle - means any self-propelled, off the road or all-terrain vehicle including,
but not limited to, snowmobile, mini-bike, amphibious vehicle, motorcycle, go-cart, trail bike, dune
buggy, motorized skateboard or all-terrain vehicle.
Motor vehicle - means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a roadway except devices moved by human power or used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks.
Natural Resources - means all flora and fauna within parks and the physical factors upon which they
depend, including air, water, soil, and minerals.
Scott County Park Ordinance Page 6
Park - means any land or water area and all facilities thereon, and all trails under the jurisdiction,
control or ownership of Scott County and designated by the Board as a unit of the Scott County Parks
System.
Park District - means Three Rivers Park District, established pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Chapter
398.
Park Service Officer/Liaison - means any regular, seasonal, or intermittent employee vested with the
legal authority to enforce the Park Ordinances.
Permit - means the written permission that must be obtained from the Board or its designee to carry out
a given activity.
Pet - means a domestic dog or cat that is accompanied by a competent person in the immediate vicinity
of the animal and who is responsible for the animal.
Pest - means any plant, animal or microorganism that is determined to be undesirable because it
conflicts with park management objectives, creates an annoyance to park guests, or has the potential
to create a health hazard.
Person or persons - means individuals, firms, corporations, societies, or any group or gathering
whatsoever.
Pesticide - means a chemical or biological substance intended to prevent or destroy a pest, and/or a
substance to be used as a plant regulator, defoliant, or desiccant. Repellants are not considered
pesticides.
Pollutant - means any substance, solid, liquid, or gas which could cause contamination of air, land, or
water so as to create or cause a nuisance or render it unclean or noxious or impure, so as to be
actually or potentially harmful or detrimental or injurious to public health, safety or welfare, or that of
wildlife or vegetation.
Possession - Physical Possession: Having a controlled substance on one’s person with knowledge of
the nature of the substance; or Constructive Possession: Having once possessed a controlled
substance, continuing to exercise dominion and control over the substance up to the time of arrest, or
aiding and abetting another in possessing a controlled substance.
Property - means any land, waters, trails, facilities or possessions of Scott County designated by the
Board as a component of the Scott County Parks System.
Responsible person - means the parent, guardian or person having lawful custody and control of a
juvenile.
Roller Skater or Roller Skating - is any person riding or propelling oneself by human power or gravity on
wheeled devices that are worn on a person’s feet or stood upon by a person. Such devices specifically
include, but are not limited to, roller skates, in-line skates, roller skis, skateboards, and scooters.
Smoking - means inhaling or exhaling smoke from any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any
other lighted tobacco or plant product, inhaling or exhaling vapor from any electronic delivery device.
Smoking shall include carrying a lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any other lighted or heated
tobacco or plant product intended for inhalation.
Special Use – means any entertainment, tournament, exhibition, race, practice, or any other organized
activity which can reasonably be expected to have 12 or more persons involved or potentially have a
detrimental effect on park property or other park users.
Scott County Park Ordinance Page 7
Theft - Whoever does any of the following commits theft: intentionally and without claim of right takes,
uses, transfers, conceals or retains possession of movable property of another without the other’s
consent and with intent to deprive the owner permanently of possession of the property.
Tobacco Product - means any product containing, made, or derived from tobacco that is intended for
human consumption, whether chewed, smoked, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or
ingested by any other means, or any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product, including but
not limited to, cigarettes; cigars; little cigars; cheroots; stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut,
ready rubbed, and other smoking tobacco; snuff; snuff flour; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine-cut
and other chewing tobacco; shorts; refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco, and
other kinds and forms of tobacco. Tobacco products exclude any tobacco product that has been
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for use as a tobacco cessation product, a tobacco
dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for such an
approved purpose.
Tobacco Use - means the act of smoking any cigarette, pipe, cigar, cigarillo, electronic cigarette,
hookah, or other smoking equipment, the use of smokeless tobacco, and the use of any other tobacco
product in any form.
Vehicle - means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or
drawn upon a roadway except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary
rails or tracks.
Watercraft - means any contrivance used or designed for navigation on water.
Weapon - means any device including, but not limited to, firearms, bows, paint-ball guns, electronic
weapons, slings, and pellet or B-B guns from which a shot or projectile of any type is discharged or
propelled by means of an explosive, gas, elastic, compressed air or other means. An electronic
weapon means a portable device which is designed, used, or intended to be used, offensively or
defensively, to immobilize or incapacitate persons by the use of an electric current.
Wildlife - means any living creature, not human, wild by nature, endowed with sensation, power of
voluntary motion, including, but not limited to, mammals, birds, fish, amphibians, insects, reptiles,
crustaceans, and mollusks.
Wine - means a vinous beverage containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume.
Scott County Park Ordinance Page 8
Section 4 - Specification of Offenses
a. Administrative Offenses
Administrative offenses are actions or inactions prohibited by this Ordinance which have a
monetary penalty for violations.
b. Petty Misdemeanors
Petty misdemeanor offenses are actions or inactions prohibited by state statute and carry the
designated penalties set forth by the respective County Court System. The following violations of
the Ordinance, if not cited as an administrative offense, shall be deemed petty misdemeanors.
Chapter 2 Section 1 - Park Hours
Chapter 2 Section 2 - Permits
Chapter 2 Section 3 - Failure to Pay Use Fee/Display Permit
Chapter 3 Section 1 - Drug and Alcohol
Chapter 3 Section 2 - Smoking and Tobacco Use
Chapter 4 Section 1 - Commercial Use/Solicitation/Advertising/Photography
Chapter 4 Section 2 - Pets in Parks
Chapter 4 Section 3 - Noise/Amplification of Sound
Chapter 4 Section 4 - Fires
Chapter 4 Section 5 - Aviation
Chapter 4 Section 6 - Assembly, Meetings, Speeches, Demonstrations, Religious
Services, Parades
Chapter 4 Section 7 - Amusement Devices
Chapter 4 Section 8 - Engine-Powered Toys
Chapter 5 Section 1 - Disturbance of Natural Features
Chapter 6 Section 1 - Camping
Chapter 6 Section 2 - Picnicking
Chapter 6 Section 3 - Swimming/Beaches
Chapter 6 Section 4 - Scuba Diving and Snorkeling
Chapter 6 Section 5 - Boating
Chapter 6 Section 6 - Fishing
Chapter 6 Section 7 - Horseback Riding
Chapter 6 Section 8 - Bicycling
Chapter 6 Section 10 - Cross-Country Skiing
Chapter 6 Section 11 - Other Winter Activities
Chapter 6 Section 12 - Other Special Activity Use
Chapter 6 Section 13 - Roller-Skating/In-line Skating
Chapter 6 Section 14 - Geocaching
Chapter 6 Section 15 - Disc Golfing
Chapter 6 Section 16 - Hiking
Chapter 7 Section 3 - Parking Vehicles
Chapter 7 Section 4 - Maintenance of Personal Vehicles
c. Misdemeanors
All remaining violations of the Ordinance, if not cited as an administrative offense, shall be
deemed misdemeanor offenses unless circumstances warrant a more serious offense.
Scott County Park Ordinance Page 9
CHAPTER 2: REGULATION OF PUBLIC USE
Section 1 - Park Hours
a. Parks shall be open to the public daily from 5 a.m. until 10 p.m. It shall be unlawful for any person
to enter or remain in a park at any other time without a permit or except when the park area or
facility is otherwise designated by the Scott County Board or its designee.
b. The Scott County Board or designee is authorized to close any park or portion thereof at any time
for the protection of park property or for the health, safety or welfare of the public.
c. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly, or through negligent supervision, permit a juvenile
to be in any park or park facility 30 minutes or more after the facility is closed.
Section 2 - Permits
a. Permits shall be required for the exclusive or special use of all or portions of park areas, buildings
or trails or for use of park areas and facilities when they are closed to the public. Permit applications
must be received at least 48 hours in advance of date of activity.
b. It shall be unlawful for a person to violate any provisions of a permit.
c. Permits shall be required for any entertainment, tournament, exhibition or special use, or potentially
have a detrimental effect on park property or other park users.
Section 3 - Failure to Pay Use Fee/Display Permit
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or park in those areas where a permit is required without
paying for and/or appropriately displaying a valid permit.
CHAPTER 3: REGULATION OF GENERAL CONDUCT/PERSONAL BEHAVIOR
Section 1 - Drug and Alcohol Use
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
a. Serve, possess or consume any alcoholic beverage, except beer, flavored alcoholic beverages and
wine, within a park, unless in an area designated by the Board or designee, or authorized by permit.
b. Sell, buy, give, receive, or consume any beer, flavored alcoholic beverages, or wine on Scott
County Park properties set aside or designated by the Board or designee as a parking area, park
road, or trail.
c. Consume or display any alcoholic beverage at sites where Scott County or its agent is a licensed
vendor of alcoholic beverages, unless purchased at that site, or authorized by permit.
d. Possess or bring beer, flavored alcoholic beverages, or wine into a park in kegs, barrels or other
bulk tap quantities without a permit.
e. Inhale, breathe, or drink or be or become intoxicated by reason of inhaling, breathing or drinking
any substance defined as glue.
Scott County Park Ordinance Page 10
Section 2 - Smoking and Tobacco Use
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
a. Use any tobacco products in County park property and recreational facilities except in parking lots,
on roadways, individually rented campsites in County owned or operated campgrounds, and use of
tobacco as part of a traditional Native American spiritual or cultural ceremony.
b. Smoke or use any tobacco product in any other area prohibited by law or by County Ordinance
specific to smoking or tobacco use.
Section 3 - Public Nuisance/Personal Conduct
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
a. Engage in fighting or exhibit threatening, violent, disorderly, or indecent behavior.
b. Address abusive language tending to incite a breach of the peace or to be inimical to peace and
good order to any person present.
c. Otherwise create a hazardous or physically offensive condition to any person present.
d. Engage in any course of conduct, or participate in any activity in any park, after he or she is advised
by a Law Enforcement Officer, Park Service Officer or park employee or agent having authority to
regulate or manage the area, that such conduct or participation is unreasonable and unnecessarily
hazardous to the personal safety of said person or another person, or impairs or limits the lawful
use and enjoyment of the facility or area by other persons.
f. Throw items from, jump from, hang from, climb upon, or engage in any other unsafe or
disruptive behavior on any bridge within the county park and trail system.
h. Knowingly or intentionally urinate or defecate in a public place or setting.
Section 4 - Child Safety
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
a. Permit a child age 10 or under to be in a creative play area unless under the supervision of a
responsible person.
b. Permit a child age 10 or under to swim or wade at beaches within a park, unless under the
supervision of a responsible person. Swimming is not permitted in other areas.
c. Permit a child age 10 or under to be in a winter recreation area unless under the supervision of a
responsible person.
d. Permit a child age 10 or under to be in park areas, buildings or trails unless under the supervision
of a responsible person.
Section 5 - Property of Others
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
a. Intentionally disturb, harass or interfere with a park visitor's property; or
b. Leave or store personal property in any park outside of park hours without a permit.
Scott County Park Ordinance Page 11
Section 6 - Littering/Dumping
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
a. Deposit, scatter, dispose or abandon in a park: bottles, cans, broken glass, hot coals, ashes,
sewage, waste or other material, except in receptacles provided for such purposes.
b. Dispose of any household or yard waste or commercial waste generated outside Scott
County park property into garbage receptacles provided by Scott County in a park, except at Scott
County designated compost sites, in accordance with compost site rules and regulations.
Section 7 - Possession/Use of Firearms/Dangerous Weapons/Fireworks/Hunting
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
a. Have in their possession, fire, discharge or cause to be fired or discharged across, in or into any
portion of a park, any gun or firearm, spear, bow and arrow, crossbow, sling shot, air or gas
weapon, or any other dangerous weapon or projectile, except in areas and at times designated by
the Board or designee for such use, or with a permit. Persons who possess a valid Minnesota
permit or a valid permit from another state which is recognized in Minnesota; may carry, hold, keep,
store, or possess a pistol within the Scott County park lands, facilities, and buildings to the extent
permitted by Minnesota law. Employees or volunteers, when acting in the course and scope of their
employment or duties, are prohibited from carrying, holding, keeping, storing, or possessing a pistol
within Scott County park lands, facilities, and buildings. Licensed Peace Officers are exempt from
the provisions of this subdivision.
b. Possess, set off or attempt to set off or ignite any firecracker, fireworks, smoke bombs, rockets,
black powder guns or other pyrotechnics without authorization from the Board or designee.
Section 8 - Interference with Employee Performance of Duty
It shall be unlawful for any person to impersonate any employee of Scott County or the Park District
or interfere with, harass or hinder any employee, contractor, or agent in the lawful discharge of their
duties.
CHAPTER 4: REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO GENERAL PARKLAND
OPERATION
Section 1 - Commercial Use/Solicitation/Advertising/Photography
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
a. Solicit, sell or otherwise peddle any goods, wares, merchandise, services, liquids or edibles in a
park except by authorized concession or written permission granted by permit from the Board, or
designee.
b. Operate a still, motion picture, video or other camera for commercial purposes in a park without
permission granted by the Board, or designee.
c. Expose, distribute or place any sign, advertisement, notice, poster or display in a park without
authorization from the Board or designee.
Scott County Park Ordinance Page 12
Section 2 - Pets in Parks
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
a. Permit a pet, except service dogs trained and certified to assist persons with disabilities, to enter or
be in a park except in areas that may be designated by the Board or designee, including
campgrounds, approved trails, dog parks, and exercise areas.
b. Bring a pet into a park, unless in a designated area and controlled on a leash, not to exceed
6 feet, or unless in a dog park established for off-leash uses.
c. Permit a pet to disturb, harass or interfere with any park visitor or a park visitor's property, property
of a park employee, contractor of Scott County, or park wildlife.
d. Tether any animal to a tree, plant, building or park equipment.
e. Have custody or control of any dog or domestic pet in a park without possessing an appropriate
device for cleaning up pet feces and disposing of the feces in a sanitary manner.
f. Operate a dog sled, skijoring device or any other sled/ski equipment pulled by a pet or other animal
except on designated trails for dog sleds at dates and times designated by permit.
g. Use dog off-leash areas without having a valid permit in their possession and without having
appropriately displayed a valid permit on their vehicle if parked in designated dog off-leash area
parking lot.
h. For any person to intentionally abandon or release any animal, living or deceased, within the
boundaries of Scott County Parks.
i. For any person to intentionally leave any animal in circumstances likely to endanger the health and
safety of the animal or to disturb, anger, alarm or annoy other park users.
Section 3 – Noise/Amplification of Sound
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
Install, use or operate or permit the use or operation within park boundaries of any of the following
devices:
a. Loudspeaker or sound amplifying equipment without authorization by permit.
b. Radios, compact disc players, audio or video devices, tape players, phonographs, television sets,
musical instruments or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound in such
a manner as to be disturbing or a nuisance to reasonable persons of normal sensitivity within the
area of audibility without authorization by permit.
c. Willfully make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary or unusual
noise which disturbs the peace and quiet within any park or which causes discomfort or annoyance
to any reasonable park visitor of normal sensitivity.
The standards that shall be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this
section exists shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. Level of the noise.
2. The intensity of the noise.
3. Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual.
4. The level and intensity of the background noise, if any.
5. The type of area within which the noise emanates.
6. The intensity of human use of the area during the time at which the noise emanates.
7. The time of the day or night the noise occurs.
8. The duration of the noise.
9. Interpretation of this criteria by assigned Park staff shall allow, deny, or control level of sound
amplifying equipment by park users.
Scott County Park Ordinance Page 13
Section 4 - Fires
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
a. Start a fire in a park, except in a designated area, and then only in fire rings, portable stoves or
grills; or any other use exclusively allowed by permit.
b. Leave a fire unattended or fail to fully extinguish a fire.
c. Scatter or leave unattended lighted matches, ashes, burning tobacco, paper or other combustible
material.
Section 5 - Aviation
It shall be unlawful to use park property for a starting or landing field for aircraft, hot air balloons,
parachutes, hang gliders or other flying apparatus, unless otherwise authorized by permit.
Section 6 - Assembly, Meetings, Speeches, Demonstrations, Religious Services,
Parades
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct public meetings, assemblies, worship services,
entertainment, parades or demonstrations within a park without a permit that has been secured at
least 48 hours in advance of the date of activity.
b. Conduct public meetings, assemblies, worship services, entertainment, parades, or
demonstrations that unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of the park by other park users,
damage park property, block entrances or exits of structures, interfere with the safe use of park
facilities, tend to cause a disturbance, or fail to abide by other Ordinance regulations.
Section 7 - Amusement Devices
It shall be unlawful to bring in, set up, construct, manage or operate any amusement or
entertainment device or gadget without a permit.
Section 8 - Engine-Powered Models and Toys
It shall be unlawful for any person to start, fly or use any fuel-powered model aircraft, model
boat or model car or rocket or like-powered toy or model except at those areas or waters
designated by the Board or designee for such use, or with a permit.
Section 9 - Unlawful Occupancy
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
a. Enter any building, installation or area that may be under construction, locked or closed to public
use.
b. Enter or be upon any building, installation or area after the posted closing time, before the posted
opening time, or contrary to posted notice in any park without a permit.
c. Enter in any way any building, installation, or area after receiving a permit revocation or unlawful
occupancy notification during the time period specified.
Scott County Park Ordinance Page 14
CHAPTER 5: PROTECTION OF PROPERTY, STRUCTURES, & NATURAL
RESOURCES
Section 1 - Disturbance of Natural Features
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
a. Intentionally remove, alter, injure, eat, or destroy any tree, plant, rock, soil or mineral without a
permit.
b. Dig trenches, holes or other excavations in a park without a permit.
c. Introduce any plant or other agent within a park without a permit.
d. Cut or gather wood without a permit.
e. Engage in metal detecting without a permit.
f. Transport, possess, or burn firewood in Scott County parks unless the firewood is purchased from
the parks operations, or Minnesota Department of Natural Resources-approved firewood vender
within 100 miles of the Park facility.
Section 2 - Disturbance of Wildlife
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
a. Kill, trap, hunt, remove, harass, annoy, pursue or in any manner disturb or cause to be disturbed,
any species of wildlife, except as permitted in designated areas or by permit.
b. Release or abandon any animal within a park without a permit.
c. Feed any wildlife in a park without permission of the Board or designee.
d. Remove any animal, living or dead, from a park without a permit.
Section 3 - Destruction/Defacement of Park Property/Signs
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
a. Intentionally deface, vandalize or otherwise cause destruction to park property.
b. Intentionally deface, destroy, cover, damage or remove any placard, notice or sign, or parts thereof,
whether permanent or temporary, posted or exhibited by the Parks Department.
c. Have in their possession any aerosol paint can without a permit.
d. Remove any cultural artifacts from any park by any means, except by permit.
Section 4 - Release of Harmful or Foreign Substances
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
a. Place any debris, illegal substance, or pollutant in or upon any lands or body of water in or adjacent
to a park or any tributary, stream, and storm sewer or drain flowing into such waters.
b. Release any pesticide in or upon any park land except as permitted by the Board or designee.
c. Discharge waste water or any other wastes in a park, except into designated containers, drain or
dumping stations.
Scott County Park Ordinance Page 15
Section 5 - Interference of Park Property
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit physical encroachment upon park property
including, but not limited to actions such as mowing of grasses, and/or placement of personal
property, debris, materials, buildings, sheds, other structures, or signs on park lands.
CHAPTER 6: REGULATION OF RECREATIONAL ACTIVITY
Section 1 - Camping
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
a. Camp in a park except in areas provided and designated for that purpose.
b. Camp without a permit.
c. Occupy camp sites in a park contrary to a permit or otherwise violate provisions of a permit.
d. Operate any vehicle within a campsite unless authorized by the Board or designee.
e. Camp overnight in a park, if under 18 years of age, unless accompanied by parent or legal
guardian, or possess written authorization from a parent or guardian, or authorized by permit issued
by the Board or designee.
Section 2 - Picnicking
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
a. Assume use of a picnic shelter if the area is reserved by a permitted group.
b. Conduct picnic activities at reservation picnic sites contrary to a permit or otherwise violate
provisions of a permit.
c. Grill or have open fire intended for cooking except in areas provided and designated for that
purpose.
d. Set up shelters, tents, tarps, canopies larger than 10’ x 10’ and other such devices without
authorization by permit, except temporary personal shade providers and insect structures.
e. Destroy or remove a permit posted at a park facility.
f. Operate any vehicle within a picnic area unless authorized by the Board or designee.
Scott County Park Ordinance Page 16
Section 3 - Swimming/Beaches
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
a. Fail to obey posted safety rules established by the Board or designee at any swimming area/beach.
b. Wade or swim within a park except in such areas specifically designated by signs and buoys for
such use; and only between dates and hours posted.
c. Intentionally expose his or her own genitals, pubic area, buttocks or female breast below the top of
the areola, with less than a fully opaque covering while wading, swimming, or using any beach in a
park, if 10 years of age or older.
d. Take glass containers, or glass of any kind, except eye glasses, into designated swimming areas or
beach without approval by the Board or designee.
e. Use within a designated swimming beach area, any inner tube, life raft or other inflatable or buoyant
object or flotation device intended to support a person — except a United States Coast Guardapproved
Type I, II, III, or V personal floatation device, which may be used when it is properly
secured, of the proper size, and undamaged. Persons with disabilities who require use of a flotation
device in order to participate in swimming may be exempted from Section 3, paragraph e., by
special permission from the Board or park staff.
f. Throw sand, mud, rocks, or any other dangerous objects on the beach or in the water which could
cause injury to others.
g. Fish in an area designated for swimming.
Section 4 - Scuba Diving and Snorkeling
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
a. Scuba dive or snorkel in a designated swimming area unless authorized by permit.
b. Scuba dive or snorkel within 100 feet of a watercraft access point.
c. Conduct scuba diving instruction from a park without a permit.
Section 5 - Boating
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
a. Launch or land any watercraft upon any waters within a park except at designated locations and
times or by permit.
b. Leave any watercraft unattended except in designated areas.
c. Operate any watercraft in a designated swimming area or other prohibited area.
d. Tow a person on water skis, inner tube or any other device; or use a surfboard, kneeboard, or other
water recreation device in a designated swimming area, boat launching area or other unauthorized
area.
e. Operate a watercraft in such a manner that its wash or wake will endanger, harass or interfere with
any person or property.
f. Leave a boat or trailer parked beyond the posted time limit.
g. Park a vehicle with a boat trailer except in designated boat trailer parking areas.
Scott County Park Ordinance Page 17
Section 6 - Fishing
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
a. Fish in a prohibited area.
b. Leave any structure, shelter or ice house upon a frozen body of water in a park after 10:00 p.m. except
in such areas and times as may be designated by the Board or designee.
c. Clean fish and dispose of the remains except at a facility provided by the Board or designee.
Section 7 - Horseback Riding
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
a. Ride, lead or allow a horse within a park except in designated areas or trails at designated hours,
and without payment of required fee or permit.
b. Ride, lead or allow a horse on any hard surface, roadway or trail except at designated trail
crossings.
c. Ride a horse in a reckless manner so as to create a nuisance or endanger the safety or property of
any person.
d. Tether a horse to a tree, other plant, building or park equipment in situations likely to endanger
natural habitat.
e. Allow a horse to graze on growing grasses or browse on seedlings, trees, shrubs or bushes,
except at designated horse camp areas or as authorized by a permit.
Section 8 - Bicycling
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
a. Operate any type of bicycle including mountain bicycle, except on paved trails, roadways, and
designated mountain-bike trails at dates and times authorized by the Board or designee.
b. Operate any type of bicycle except as close to the right-hand side of the authorized tail or roadway
as conditions permit, or to cross to the left of a solid yellow center line.
c. Ride or operate a bicycle except in a prudent and careful manner or at a speed faster than is
reasonable and safe with regard to the safety of the operator and other persons on a trail, or in the
immediate area.
d. Park or leave a bicycle on any beach, play area, in any Scott County building, or in any picnic
shelter, or in any other area where likely to endanger the health and safety of the public.
Section 9 - Snowmobiling
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
a. Operate a snowmobile in a park except on designated trails and then only on the right-hand side of
the trail; or violate any posted trail sign.
b. Operate a snowmobile in a park in excess of posted speed limits, at a rate of speed greater than
reasonable or proper under current condition, or in a careless, reckless, or negligent manner so as
to endanger the person or property of another or to cause injury or damage thereto.
c. Tow another person or thing except through the use of a rigid tow bar attached to the rear of the
snowmobile, except in emergencies.
Scott County Park Ordinance Page 18
Section 10 - Cross-Country Skiing
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
a. Conduct a race, meet, ski team practice or event with more than 12 participants on park crosscountry
ski trails without a permit.
b. Use a designated cross-country ski trail for any purpose other than cross-country skiing except by
permit or on those trails and times so designated by the Board or designee.
c. Cross-country ski on park trails contrary to rules and regulations issued by the Board or in violation
of any posted trail sign.
d. Cross-country ski in any designated cross-country ski area without appropriately displaying a valid
park ski pass unless exempted by the Board or by permit.
Section 11 - Other Winter Activities
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter an area marked by signs indicating thin ice.
Section 12 - Other Special Activity Use
It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in or conduct any activity, except those uses for
which a park area or facility has been planned or promoted by the Board or designee without a
permit.
Section 13 - Roller Skating/In-Line Skating
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
a. Roller skate in a park, including the activities of skateboarding and in-line skating except on paved
bike/walking trails unless posted otherwise.
b. Roller skate/in-line skate or skateboard in a park except in a prudent and careful manner and at a
speed that is reasonable and safe with regard to the safety of the operator and other persons in the
immediate area.
c. Roller skate/in-line skate or skateboard except as close to the right-hand side of the authorized trail
as conditions permit or cross to the left of a center line.
d. Intentionally cause damage to any park facility in the act of roller skating/in-line skating or
skateboarding.
e. Roller skate, including activities of skateboarding, in-line skating, and roller-skiing, in a park
building, stairway, railing, picnic table, or other park structure.
Section 14 - Geocaching
It shall be unlawful for any person to geocache in a park except in areas and at times designated by
the Board or designee.
Section 15 - Disc Golfing
It shall be unlawful for any person to play disc golf in a park except in areas and at times designated
by the Board or designee.
Scott County Park Ordinance Page 19
Section 16 - Hiking
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
a. Hike in a park except in recreation and nature center use areas, and on designated trails and
roadways, unless authorized by permit.
b. Hike on designated packed or groomed cross-country ski trails.
CHAPTER 7: REGULATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES, TRAFFIC, & PARKING
Section 1 - Motorized Recreational Vehicles
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a self-propelled vehicle, including, but not limited to,
motor vehicles as defined in Minnesota Statutes Chapter 169, other self-propelled vehicles,
motorized skateboards and scooters, go-carts, golf carts, snowmobiles and all-terrain vehicles
(ATVs), or travel within Scott County parks, except on established roadways, trails or other areas
designated for such purpose within said parks except by permit from the Board or designee. These
regulations do not apply to people with disabilities.
Section 2 - Vehicle Operation
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
a. Operate a vehicle within a park in violation of posted regulations.
b. Operate any vehicle within a park except upon roadways, parking areas or other designated
locations.
c. Operate any vehicle within a park in violation of orders or directions of traffic officers or park
employees authorized to direct traffic.
d. Operate a vehicle on any lake designated by the Board or designee as a non-motorized lake.
Section 3 - Parking Vehicles
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
a. Park or leave a vehicle standing except in a designated area and then only in a manner so as not to
restrict normal traffic flow, unless authorized by the Board or designee.
b. Leave a vehicle standing after posted closing hours without a valid camping permit or other permit,
except at a boat launch for the purpose of nighttime angling and only at those areas and times as
so designated by the Board or designee.
c. Park in a space designated for handicapped parking only, except with handicapped license or
permit.
d. Park or leave a vehicle without a boat trailer in a boat trailer parking space, unless authorized by
the Board or designee.
e. Park a vehicle with a trailer except in designated trailer parking areas; or as permitted in
campgrounds.
f. Park or leave a vehicle in an area designated for drop off only.
g. Park a boat trailer in a boat trailer parking space without a vehicle.
h. Launch more than one personal watercraft per boat trailer parking space occupied or designated.
i. Leave a vehicle unattended with keys in the ignition.
j. Park on the grass or sides of any park roads. Vehicles within the park must be parked in designated
parking areas.
Scott County Park Ordinance Page 20
Section 4 – Maintenance of Personal Vehicles
It shall be unlawful for any person to wash, polish, grease, change oil or perform other maintenance
on any vehicle on park property except in emergencies or when authorized by the Board or
designee.
CHAPTER 8: ENFORCEMENT
Section 1 – Park Patrol Authority/Peace Officer Authority
a. Scott County Park employees and their designees may enforce the provisions of this Ordinance
and eject from Scott County Parks any persons acting in violation of this Ordinance.
b. Scott County Sheriff, local police, and other peace officers shall have the authority to patrol and
enforce the provisions of this Ordinance, and any violation of state law or local laws which shall
occur on Scott County Park property.
c. Three Rivers Park Service Officers shall, in connection with their duties as prescribed by the Park
District and Scott County Board, diligently enforce the provisions of the Ordinance and issue
citations and warnings to persons acting in violation of the Ordinance.
Section 2 – Fines and Penalties
a. Any person designated by the Board with authority to enforce this Ordinance shall, upon
determining that there has been a violation of the Ordinance, notify the violator or person
responsible for the violation, or in the case of a vehicular violation by attaching to said vehicle notice
of the violation, said notice setting forth the nature, date, time of violation, the name of the official
issuing the notice and the amount of the scheduled penalty.
b. Once such notice is given, the person responsible for the violation shall, within 14 days of the time
of issuance of the notice, pay in full satisfaction the amount of the specified penalty. Penalties shall
be imposed for violation of the scheduled administrative offense established by the Board. Petty
misdemeanors shall have a fine of $65; misdemeanors shall have a fine of $95. The penalty may be
paid in person, by phone, or by mail and payment shall be admission of the violation.
c. If a violator fails to pay the penalty imposed by this article within the established payment period,
the matter may be processed as an Ordinance violation through the County Court System via the
issuance of the appropriate citation. Violations of this Ordinance shall be subject to State Statute
penalty.
d. A person guilty of violating any provision of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor or
misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine and/or by imprisonment as set forth in Minnesota
Statutes 609.02, sub 3, as amended.
e. All fines collected under this Ordinance shall be deposited in the Scott County Park Improvement
Fund to the extent authorized by the State of Minnesota or other legally designated authority.
Convictions may be appealed pursuant to the Minnesota Rules of Criminal Procedure.
Section 3 – Additional Rules and Regulations
The Scott County Board or designee shall have the right to issue rules and regulations relative to
this Ordinance.
Section 4 – Impoundment of Pets
Scott County Park Ordinance Page 21
The Scott County Board shall have the authority to impound pets found running at large and shall
collect an impoundment fee plus the per diem fee specified in the contract for impounding of
animals which may be in force between Scott County and the animal control facility.
Section 5 – Permit Revocation
The Board or designee shall have the authority to revoke for good cause any permit. Any permit or
reservation may be revoked upon violation by the permit holder of any Ordinance, rule or regulation
of Scott County.
Section 6 – Employee Performance of Duty
Nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent employees or agents of Scott County from performing their
assigned duties.
CHAPTER 9: MISCELLANEOUS
Section 1 – Conflict
Existing Park Ordinance and any rules and regulations in conflict with this Ordinance, or any parts
thereof, are hereby repealed.
Section 2 – Enactment
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage approval and publication
by the Scott County Board of Commissioners.
Section 3 – Exemptions
All Scott County employees, contractors, emergency and enforcement personnel while acting in the
performance of their assigned duties are exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 4 - Captions and Headings
The captions and headings used herein are for convenience of reference only and do not define or
limit the contents of each paragraph.
Scott County Park Ordinance Page 22
CHAPTER 10: EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall be in full force and in effect upon passage by the Scott County Board of
Commissioners.
Passed by the Board of Commissioners of Scott County, Minnesota, the 26th day of May 2009 and
revised the 19th day of August, 2014..
SIGNED:
By: _______________________________________ Chair of the Scott County Board
ATTEST:
By: ________________________________________ Scott County Administrator
By: ________________________________________ Scott County Attorney
State of Minnesota
County Scott
ORDINANCE page 1 of 2
CHAPTER 30: WATER SURFACE USE
30.1 PURPOSE
As authorized by Minnesota Statutes 86B.201, 86B.205, and 459.20, AND Minnesota Rules 6110.3000 –
6110.3800 as now is effect and as hereafter amended, this Ordinance is enacted for the purpose and with
the intent to control and regulate the use of the waters of McMahon Lake, also known as Carl’s Lake
(State Inventory Number 70005000) in Scott County, Minnesota, said body of water being located
entirely within the boundaries of Scott County, to promote its fullest use and enjoyment by the public in
general and the citizens of Scott County in particular, to insure safety for persons and property in
connection with the use of said waters; harmonize and integrate the varying uses of said waters; and to
promote the general health, safety and welfare on McMahon Lake.
30.2 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the definitions set out in Minnesota Statue Section 86B.005 are
incorporated herein and made part of this Ordinance. Terms not defined by said Statute shall have the
following meanings:
High Water. An elevation of 965.2 feet NVGD 29 measured at the gauge located approximately
100 feet south of the Public Boat Launch on County Road 81.
Shore. The line separating land and water which shifts as lake levels increase and decrease.
The following terms are also defined in Minnesota Statute Section 86B.005. For current definitions see
Minnesota Statute Section 86B.005, as amended:
Slow No-Wake. The operation of a watercraft at the slowest possible speed necessary to maintain
steerage, but in no case greater than five (5) miles per hour.
Watercraft. Any contrivance used or designed for navigation on water, except: (1) a waterfowl
boat during the waterfowl hunting seasons; (2) a rice boat during the harvest season; or (3) a
seaplane.
30.3 WATERCRAFT SPEED LIMITATIONS
No person shall operate a watercraft at greater than a slow no-wake speed 24 hours per day within 150
feet of the shore when the lake level equals or exceeds the High Water level (965.2 feet NVGD 29) as
measured at the gauge located approximately 100 feet south of the Public Boat launch on County Road
81. Such restrictions shall become effective upon publication in a local daily newspaper as a news item
or on a specified date, whichever is later. All public watercraft accesses shall be posted prior to and
during the time restrictions are in place. In addition, notice of said restriction shall also be posted at the
County Government Center.
When the high water level has subsided and has remained below an elevation of 965.2 feet NVGD 29 for
three (3) consecutive days, said restrictions shall be promptly removed.
ORDINANCE page 2 of 2
30.4 ENFORCEMENT
The primary responsibility for enforcement of this ordinance shall rest with the Scott County Sheriff’s
Office. Other licensed peace officers, including conservation officers of the Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources, are also authorized to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance.
30. 5 EXCEPTIONS
All authorized Resource Management, Emergency and Enforcement Personnel, while acting in the
performance of their assigned duties are exempt from the foregoing restrictions.
30.6 NOTIFICATION
It shall be the responsibility of Scott County to provide for adequate notification of the public, which shall
include placement of a sign at each public watercraft access outlining essential elements of the ordinance,
as well as the placement of necessary buoys and signs.
30.7 PENALTIES
Any person who violates any provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
Passed by the Scott County Board of Commissioners June 3, 2014