
North Mankato, MN Code of Ordinances


NORTH MANKATO, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES




2019 S-11 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 112, 4th Series, passed 1-22-2019










Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com




TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS




      Chapter





         10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





         11.   PRECINCT BOUNDARIES




CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Rules of interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Severability



   10.07   Reference to other sections



   10.08   Reference to offices



   10.09   Errors and omissions



   10.10   Official time



   10.11   Reasonable time



   10.12   Ordinances repealed



   10.13   Ordinances unaffected



   10.14   Effective date of ordinances



   10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities



   10.18   Copies of code



   10.19   Adoption of statutes and rules by reference



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city,
as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and designated as the
"city code" or "North Mankato Code" for which designation "code of
ordinances," "codified ordinances" or "code" may be substituted.  Code
title, chapter, and section headings do not constitute any part of the law as
contained in the code.



   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to
the components of the code unless otherwise specified.  Any component code
may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the "Traffic Code." 
Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation "§" followed by the
number, such as "§ 10.01."  Headings and captions used in this code other
than the title, chapter, and section numbers are employed for reference
purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.02  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   Generally.  Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or
implication required, the same rules of construction, definition, and
application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing
the interpretation of state law.



   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation.  The construction of all
ordinances of this city shall be by the following rules, unless that
construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of
the context of the same ordinance:



      (1)   AND or OR.  Either conjunction shall include the other
as if written "and/or," whenever the context requires.



      (2)   Acts by assistants.  When a statute, code provisions or
ordinance requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as
well may do as the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the
performance of the act by an authorized agent or deputy.



      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.  Words denoting
the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter
genders; words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the
plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense
shall include the future, if applicable.



      (4)   General term.  A general term following specific
enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless
expressly so limited.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule.  Words and phrases shall be taken in their
plain, or ordinary and usual sense.  However, technical words and phrases
having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood
according to their technical import.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CITY.  The City of North Mankato, Minnesota. The area within the
corporate boundaries of the city as presently established or as amended by
ordinance, annexation or other legal actions at a future time. The term CITY
when used in this code may also be used to refer to the City Council and its
authorized representatives.



      CITY ADMINISTRATOR.  The person duly appointed by the Council
and acting in the capacity of City Administrator.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



      CITY CLERK.  The person duly appointed by the Council and acting
in the capacity of City Clerk.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



      COUNCIL or CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of North
Mankato, Minnesota.



      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This city code as
modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or
sections.



      COUNTY.  Nicollet County, Minnesota.



      FINANCE DIRECTOR/CITY TREASURER. The person duly appointed and
acting in the capacity of Finance Director and City Treasurer.



      MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



      MONTH.  A calendar month.



      OATH.  An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words
SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.  All
terms shall mean a pledge taken by the person and administered by an
individual authorized by state law.



      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT.  An
officer, office, employee, commission, or department of this city unless the
context clearly requires otherwise.



      PERSON.  Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons,
firm, corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver.  Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or
WHOEVER as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or
members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents
thereof.



      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before or next after, respectively.



      SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person
cannot write.



      STATE.  The State of Minnesota.



      SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by
a heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of
the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter
of the heading.  Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.



      WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters, or figures,
whether by printing or otherwise.



      YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



§ 10.06  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 10.07  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in 1 section reference is made to another section hereof, that
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.09  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published.  No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.10  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all city
business.



§ 10.11  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last.  If the last day is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.12  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.14  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless
otherwise expressly provided.



§ 10.15  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is
required to give effect to it, unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



§ 10.16  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter
or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this
indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or
title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.



§ 10.17  PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.



   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date
of this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those
laws.  This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued,
penalties incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this
code.  The liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued; punishments,
penalties, or forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had
not been enacted.  In particular, any agreement granting permission to
utilize highway right-of-ways, contracts entered into or franchises granted,
the acceptance, establishment or vacation of any highway, and the election of
corporate officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had
not been enacted.



§ 10.18  COPIES OF CODE.



   The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City
Clerk for public inspection.  The Clerk shall provide a copy for sale for a
reasonable charge.



§ 10.19  ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES BY REFERENCE.



   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this Code,
all future amendments to any state or federal rules and statutes adopted by
reference in this code or referenced in this code are hereby adopted by
reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this
code was adopted, unless there is clear intention expressed in the code to
the contrary.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of
this code for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor.  The penalty which may be imposed
for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more
than 90 days or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference,
which is designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be
guilty of a petty misdemeanor.  The penalty which may be imposed for any
petty offense which is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of
not more than $300.



   (C)   In either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor,
the costs of prosecution may be added.  A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.



   (D)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform
any official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or
employee to the penalty imposed for a violation.



CHAPTER 11:  PRECINCT BOUNDARIES



Section



   11.01   Precinct boundaries



§ 11.01  PRECINCT BOUNDARIES.



   Precinct boundaries are as shown on the “City of North Mankato
Redistricting Plan 3” map to include Precincts 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7.



(Am. Ord. 48, 4th Series, passed 1-22-2013)







 



[To view a PDF of the Boundary Map, click here.]



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION




      Chapter





         30.   CITY GOVERNMENT





         31.   CITY OFFICERS





         32.   DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS





         33.   CITY POLICIES





         34.   TAXATION




CHAPTER 30:  CITY GOVERNMENT



Section



   30.01   Authority and purpose



   30.02   Council meetings



   30.03   Notice of special meetings



   30.04   Council procedure at regular meetings



   30.05   Execution of contracts and city seal



   30.06   Right to administrative appeal



   30.07   Rules of procedure for appeals and other hearings



   30.08   Disbursement of funds and allowance of accounts



   30.09   Facsimile signatures



   30.10   Interim emergency succession



   30.11   Compensation of Mayor and Council members



§ 30.01  AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE.



   Pursuant to the authority granted by statute, this chapter of the City
Code is enacted so as to set down for enforcement the government and good
order of the city by and through the Council.



(1975 Code, § 2.01)



§ 30.02  COUNCIL MEETINGS.



   Regular meetings of the Council shall be held in the Council chambers
on the first and third Mondays of each month at 7:00 p.m. unless a federal
holiday falls on the first or third Monday of the month, the Council shall
meet on Tuesday at 7:00 p.m. of that week.



(1975 Code, § 2.02)



§ 30.03  NOTICE OF SPECIAL MEETINGS.



   (A)   Mailed notice. Special meetings set by motion of the City
Council at a regular or special meeting of the Council may be called by the
Mayor or by any 2 members of the Council by writing filed with the City
Administrator, who shall then mail a notice to all members of the time, place
and purpose of meeting at least 1 day before the meeting.



   (B)   Posted notice. In addition to mailing, the City Administrator
shall also post a notice of a special meeting in the City Hall where other
notices are generally posted.



   (C)   Emergency. Notice of a special meeting may be dispensed with
in a situation which requires immediate emergency action. In determining what
constitutes such an emergency, the Council should be guided by considerations
of whether the situation calls for immediate action involving the protection
of the public health or safety.



(1975 Code, § 2.03)



Statutory reference:



   Notice of special meetings, see M.S. § 13D.04



§ 30.04  COUNCIL PROCEDURE AT REGULAR MEETINGS.



   (A)   (1)   The order of business at regular meetings shall be
determined by the Council. Matters inappropriate for consideration at a
meeting shall not be considered except:



         (a)   With the majority consent of the Members of the
Council; or



         (b)   Scheduled public hearings or bid lettings at the
time stated in the notice.



      (2)   Robert's Rules of Order (Revised) shall govern all
Council meetings as to procedural matters not set forth in City Code except
as amended in specific instances by unanimous vote of the Council Members
present.



   (B)   For regular meetings the City Administrator shall prepare the
following items:



      (1)   An agenda for the forthcoming meeting;



      (2)   A compiled list of all claimants who have filed verified
accounts claiming payment for goods or services rendered to the city during
the preceding month; and



      (3)   A copy of all minutes to be considered.



   (C)   The City Administrator shall forthwith cause to be mailed or
delivered to each member of the Council copies of all said documents.



   (D)   Unless otherwise determined by the City Council in division
(A) above, the agenda for regular business meetings will be prepared in the
following manner:



      (1)   Call to order;



      (2)   The Pledge of Allegiance;



      (3)   Roll call;



      (4)   Approval of the agenda;



      (5)   Approval of the minutes;



      (6)   Consent agenda;



      (7)   Public comments;



      (8)   Business items;



      (9)   City Administrator and staff comments;



      (10)   Mayor and Council comments;



      (11)   Public comments;



      (12)   Adjourn.



   (E)   All claims for payment must be filed at or before 5:00 p.m. on
the Monday preceding the regular Council meeting at which it is to be
considered.



(1975 Code, § 2.04) (Am. Ord. 50, 4th Series, passed 6-3-2013)



§ 30.05  EXECUTION OF CONTRACTS AND CITY SEAL.



   All contracts to which the city is a party, in addition to being signed
by the Mayor and City Clerk, shall be sealed with the City Seal. The seal
shall be kept in the custody of the City Clerk and affixed by him or her. The
official City Seal shall be a circular disc having engraved thereupon "CITY
OF NORTH MANKATO" and such other words, figures or emblems as the Council
may, by resolution, designate.



(1975 Code, § 2.07)



§ 30.06  RIGHT TO ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL.



   If any person shall be aggrieved by any administrative decision of the
City Administrator, or any Board or Commission not having within its
structure an appellate procedure, such aggrieved person is entitled to a
hearing before the Council upon serving a written request therefor upon the
Mayor and City Administrator at least 5 days prior to any regular Council
meeting. Such request shall contain a general statement setting forth the
administrative decision to be challenged by the appellant. At such hearing
the appellant may present any evidence he or she deems pertinent to the
appeal, but the city shall not be required to keep a verbatim record of the
proceedings. The Mayor, or other officer presiding at the hearing, may, in
the interest of justice or to comply with time requirements and on his or her
own motion or the motion of the appellant, the City Administrator, or a
member of the Council, adjourn the hearing to a more convenient time or
place, but such time or place shall be fixed and determined before
adjournment so as to avoid the necessity for formal notice of reconvening.



(1975 Code, § 2.08)



§ 30.07  RULES OF PROCEDURE FOR APPEALS AND OTHER HEARINGS.



   The Council may adopt by resolution certain written rules of procedure
to be followed in all administrative appeals and other hearings to be held
before the Council or other bodies authorized to hold hearings and determine
questions therein presented. Such rules of procedure shall be effective 30
days after adoption and shall be for the purpose of establishing and
maintaining order and decorum in the proceedings.



(1975 Code, § 2.09)



§ 30.08  DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS AND ALLOWANCE OF ACCOUNTS.



   All disbursements shall be made by order signed by the Mayor, Finance
Director/City Treasurer, City Clerk and 1 other member of the Council, duly
authorized by the Council, and every such order shall specify the purpose for
which the disbursement is made and indicate that it is to be paid out of the
proper fund. But no such order shall be paid until there is money to the
credit of the fund out of which it is to be paid sufficient to pay the same,
together with all then outstanding encumbrances upon such fund. No claim
against the city shall be allowed, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter, unless accompanied by an itemized account and voucher, payroll or
time sheet signed by a responsible officer who has personal knowledge of the
facts in the case and certifies to the correctness and reasonableness of the
claim, and that it is a proper claim against the city; provided, however,
that the Council may provide for a regular payment without specific
individual authorization or filing of an itemized account and voucher,
payroll or time sheet of the salaries and wages of regular employees or
laborers, and any other fixed charges which have been previously duly and
regularly authorized. Filing of a separate account verification may be
dispensed with by the Council if appropriately similar wording is printed
near the endorsement space on the order for payment form.



(1975 Code, § 2.10)  (Am. Ord. 63, 4th Series, passed 1-5-2015)



§ 30.09  FACSIMILE SIGNATURES.



   The Mayor and Finance Director/City Treasurer are authorized to request
a depository of city funds to honor an order for payment when such instrument
bears the facsimile of his or her signature and to charge the same to the
account designated thereon or upon which it is drawn, as effectively as
though it were his or her manually written signature. Such authority is
granted only for the purpose of permitting such officers an economy of time
and effort.



(1975 Code, § 2.11)  (Am. Ord. 15, passed 8-17-1981)



§ 30.10  INTERIM EMERGENCY SUCCESSION.



   (A)   Purpose. Due to the existing possibility of an attack or a
natural disaster requiring a declaration of a state of emergency, it is found
urgent and necessary to insure the continuity of duly elected and lawful
leadership of the city to provide for the continuity of the government and
the emergency interim succession of key governmental officials by providing a
method for temporary emergency appointments to their offices.



   (B)   Succession to local offices. In the event of an attack upon
the United States or a natural disaster affecting the vicinity of the city,
the Mayor, Council and City Administrator shall be forthwith notified by any
one of said persons and by any means available to gather at the City Hall. In
the event that safety or convenience dictate, an alternative place of meeting
may be designated. Those gathered shall proceed as follows:



      (1)   By majority vote of those persons present, regardless of
number, they shall elect a Chairperson and Secretary to preside and keep
minutes, respectively;



      (2)   They shall review and record the specific facts relating
to the attack or natural disaster and injuries to persons or damage to
property already done, or the imminence thereof;



      (3)   They may, based on such facts, declare a state of
emergency;



      (4)   By majority vote of those persons present, regardless of
number, they shall fill all positions on the Council (including the office of
Mayor) of those persons upon whom notice could not be served or who are
unable to be present;



      (5)   Such interim successors shall serve until such time as
the duly elected official is again available and returns to his or her
position, or the state of emergency has passed and a successor is designated
and qualifies as required by law, whichever shall occur first.



   (C)   Duties of the Interim Emergency Council.  The Interim
Emergency Council shall exercise the powers and duties of their offices and
appoint other key government officials to serve during the emergency.



(1975 Code, § 2.12)



§ 30.11  COMPENSATION OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS.



   The compensation of the Mayor and the compensation of each Council
member shall be established from time to time by City Council ordinance
pursuant to M.S. § 415.11, as it may be amended from time to time.



CHAPTER 31:  CITY OFFICERS



Section



   31.01   City Administrator



   31.02   Finance Director/City Treasurer; City Clerk



§ 31.01  CITY ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   Position established. The position of City Administrator is
created and established.



   (B)   Term. The City Administrator shall be appointed at the first
meeting in January of each even-numbered year for a 2-year term by a majority
vote of the Council. If removal of the City Administrator be requested by the
Council, the Council shall grant him or her a public hearing within 30 days
following notice of removal. During the interim, the Council may suspend the
City Administrator from duty, but shall continue his or her salary.



   (C)   Qualifications. The City Administrator shall be selected
solely on the basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications
with special reference to his or her experience in or his or her knowledge of
accepted practice in respect to the duties of his or her office hereinafter
set forth.



   (D)   Power and duties. The City Administrator shall be the chief
administrative officer of the city and he or she shall be responsible to the
Council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city and to that
end shall have the power and shall be required to:



      (1)   Supervise and exercise control over the administration
of all departments, offices and divisions of the city and carry out any other
responsibilities placed under his or her jurisdiction by this chapter or
subsequent Council action. He or she shall appoint, suspend or remove all
officers and employees of the city except as otherwise provided by provisions
of the City Code, resolutions or other law;



      (2)   Develop and issue all administrative rules, regulations
and procedures necessary to insure the proper functioning of all departments
and offices under his or her jurisdiction;



      (3)   Prepare and submit an annual budget to the Council and
keep the Council advised of the financial condition of the city and make such
recommendations as he or she may from time to time determine desirable and
necessary;



      (4)   Attend and take part in discussion at all meetings of
the Council and other official bodies as directed by the Council. The City
Administrator shall also represent the city at all official or semi-official
functions as may be directed by the Council. He or she shall be entitled to
notice of all regular and special meetings of the Council;



      (5)   See that all laws and code provisions are duly enforced;



      (6)   Make or let purchases and contracts when the amount
thereof does not exceed $10,000 and to receive estimates, quotations, sealed
bids, purchases or contracts in excess of  $10,000 and present them to the
Council for official action;



      (7)   Recommend from time to time the adoption of such
measures as he or she may deem necessary or expedient for the health, safety
and welfare of the community or for the improvement of administration;



      (8)   Perform such other duties as may be required by the
Council and consistent with Minnesota Statutes and provisions of the City
Code.



   (E)   Bond required. The City Administrator shall furnish a surety
bond to be approved by the Council, said bond to be conditioned on the
faithful performance of his or her duties. The premium of the bond shall be
paid by the city.



   (F)   Compensation. The City Administrator shall receive such
compensation as the Council shall fix from time to time by ordinance,
resolution or employment contract.



(1975 Code, § 2.05)  (Ord. 470, passed 6-16-1969; Am. Ord. 559, passed
3-3-1973)



§ 31.02  FINANCE DIRECTOR/CITY TREASURER; CITY CLERK.



   (A)   Finance Director/City Treasurer.



      (1)   Position established.  The position of Finance Director
is created and established.



      (2)   Powers and duties.  The Finance Director shall be
responsible directly to the City Council for planning, organizing and
directing the financial activities of the city and shall have all the duties
and privileges of a department head of the city and shall perform all the
duties required by the Minnesota Statutes, City Code, and City Council of the
office of City Treasurer.



   (B)   City Clerk.



      (1)   Position established.  The position of City Clerk is
created and established.



      (2)   Powers and duties.  The City Clerk shall be responsible
for all duties required by Minnesota Statutes, City Code, and the City
Council for the position of City Clerk and shall be responsible directly to
the City Administrator.



(1975 Code, § 2.06) (Am. Ord. 11, passed 5-4-1981; Am. Ord.15, passed
8-17-1981; Am. Ord. 132, passed 9-20-1993)



CHAPTER 32:  DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



Section



Departments



   32.01   Control; appointment; compensation



   32.02   Police Department



   32.03   Fire Department



   32.04   Legal Department



   32.05   Community Development Department



   32.06   Street Department



   32.07   Water Department



   32.08   Park Department



   32.09   Public Works Department



Boards and Commissions



   32.25   Generally



   32.26   Board of Building Appeals



   32.27   Board of Zoning Adjustment



   32.28   Planning Commission



   32.29   Board of Appeal and Equalization



   32.30   Port Authority Commission



DEPARTMENTS



§ 32.01  CONTROL; APPOINTMENT; COMPENSATION.



   (A)   Control. Except as noted herein, all departments of the city
are under the overall control of the City Administrator. Except as noted
herein, heads of all departments are responsible to the City Administrator
and subject to his or her supervision and direction.



   (B)   Appointment. Except as provided herein, all department heads
and employees shall be appointed by the City Administrator. All appointments
shall be for an indeterminate term.



   (C)   Compensation. All wage and salary scales shall be fixed and
determined by the Council.



   (D)   Employment background checks.



      (1)   Purpose and intent.  The purpose and intent of this
division is to establish regulations that will allow law enforcement access
to Minnesota's Computerized Criminal History information for specified
non-criminal purposes of employment background checks for the positions
described in division (2).



      (2)   Criminal history employment background investigations. 
The Police Department is hereby required, as the exclusive entity within the
city, to do a criminal history background investigation on the applications
for the following positions within the city, unless the city's hiring
authority concludes that a background investigation is not needed.



         (a)   Employment positions.  All regular part-time or
full-time employees of the city, and other positions that require work with
children or vulnerable adults.



         (b)   Investigative procedures.  In conducting the
criminal history background investigation in order to screen employment
applicants, the Police Department is authorized to access data maintained in
the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehensions Computerized Criminal History
information system in accordance with BCA policy. Any data that is accessed
and acquired shall be maintained at the Police Department under the care and
custody of the chief law enforcement official or his or her designee. A
summary of the results of the computerized criminal history data may be
released by the Police Department to the city staff involved in the hiring
process.



         (c)   Applicant’s consent to investigation.  Before
the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize the Police
Department by written consent to undertake the investigation. The written
consent must fully comply with the provisions of M.S. Ch. 13 regarding the
collection, maintenance and use of information.



         (d)   Rejection of an applicant. 



            1.   Except for the positions set forth in M.S.§
364.09, the city will not reject an applicant for employment on the basis of
the applicant's prior conviction, unless the crime is directly related to the
position of employment sought, and the conviction is for a felony, gross
misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail sentence.



            2.   If the city rejects the applicant's request
on this basis, the city shall notify the applicant in writing of the
following:



               a.   The grounds and reasons for the denial.



               b.   The applicant complaint and grievance
procedure set forth in M.S.§ 364.06.



               c.   The earliest date the applicant may
reapply for employment.



               d.   That all competent evidence of
rehabilitation will be considered upon reapplication.



(1975 Code, § 2.20)  (Am. Ord. 132, passed 9-20-1993; Am. Ord. 34, 4th
Series, passed 1-18-11)



§ 32.02  POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   Permanent police force. A Police Department is established.
The head of this department shall be known as the Chief of Police, and the
number of additional members and employees of the Police Department shall be
determined by the Council, by resolution, which may be changed from time to
time. The City Administrator shall have, without the approval of the Council,
authority to appoint additional members of the Police Department for
temporary duty when in his or her judgment an emergency exists for the
preservation of life or property. The Chief of Police and all members of the
Police Department shall have the duties, powers and authority of police
officers generally and shall perform such duties as are required of them by
the City Administrator or by law. The Chief of Police shall have general
superintendence of the Police Department and custody of all property used and
maintained for the purposes of the Department. It is the duty of the Chief of
Police to file with the City Administrator a report as to all activities of
his or her Department during the previous year. The Chief of Police shall
make and file such other reports as may be required by the City
Administrator. Employment of all police officers, except the Chief of Police,
shall be in accordance with Minnesota Statutes governing the same.



   (B)   Special police officers. A voluntary group of special police
officers is established. The number  and qualifications of the members of
the Special Police Group shall be determined by the Council with the advice
and consent of the Chief of Police and the City Administrator and kept on
file in the office of the City Administrator, which qualifications may, from
time to time, be altered and revised by the Council.



(1975 Code, § 2.21)



§ 32.03  FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   A Fire Department is established. The size and composition (including,
but not limited to, a determination as to permanent and volunteer members),
shall be established by the City Administrator, which may be changed from
time to time. The City Administrator shall establish, and from time to time
revise and amend, written rules and regulations of the Department, including,
but not limited to, its internal structural organization and compensation, a
copy of which shall be distributed to each of its members whenever
established, revised or amended. The Chief of the Fire Department shall have
general supervision of the Fire Department and the custody of all property
used and maintained for the purposes of the Department. He or she shall see
that the same are kept in proper order and that all rules and regulations and
all provisions of the laws of the state and ordinances of the city relative
to a Fire Department and to prevention and extinguishment of fires are duly
observed. He or she shall supervise the preservation of all property
endangered by fire and shall control and direct all persons engaged in
preserving such property. In case of the absence or disability of the Chief
for any cause, the Assistant  Chief shall exercise all powers, perform all
the duties and be subject to all the responsibilities of the Chief. It is the
duty of the Chief of the Fire Department on or before the second regular
meeting in January, to file with the City Administrator a report as to all
fires occurring during the previous year stating the probable cause thereof
and estimated damages; such reports shall also state the other activities of
the Department. The Chief of the Fire Department shall also make and file
such other reports as may be requested by the City Administrator.



(1975 Code, § 2.22)



§ 32.04  LEGAL DEPARTMENT.



   A Legal Department is established. The Council shall appoint a City
Attorney, who shall be head of the Legal Department, together with such
assistants as may be necessary. The City Attorney shall perform such duties
as are required of him or her or her by law or referred to him or her or her
by the Council. It shall be the official duty of the City Attorney to act as
"Revisor of Ordinances."



(1975 Code, § 2.23)



§ 32.05  COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT.



   The City Administrator may, in his or her discretion, create a
Community Development Department. The head of this Department shall be the
Community Development Director who shall be the City Administrator or such
other person as may be designated by him or her or her. The functions of the
Building Inspector (whose title in various codes shall include
"Administrative Authority" and "Building  Official") shall be under this
Department. The duties of the Building Inspector shall be to carry out the
provisions of the State Building Code and the City Code relating to
construction. The other functions of this Department shall be such as are
assigned to it by the City Administrator, including planning,  zoning,
platting, all other inspection and code enforcement services, together with
such other activities as the City Administrator may determine.



(1975 Code, § 2.24)



§ 32.06  STREET DEPARTMENT.



   A Street Department under the control of the City Administrator is
established. The head of this Department shall be known as the Street
Superintendent, to be designated by the City Administrator. Streets, storm
sewers and garbage and trash collection shall be under the direct supervision
of the Street Superintendent. He or she shall have supervision of all labor
and custody of all property used and maintained for the purposes of such
Department. It is the duty of the Street Superintendent to file with the City
Administrator a report as to his or her recommendation as to repair or
improvements of the conditions of the streets, storm sewers and sidewalks
within his or her supervision, together with a report of the activities of
his or her Department during the preceding year. The Street Superintendent
shall also make and file such other reports as may be required by the Council.



(1975 Code, § 2.25)



§ 32.07  WATER DEPARTMENT.



   A Water Department under the control of the City Administrator is
hereby established. The head of this Department shall be known as the Water
Superintendent, to be designated by the City Administrator. The Water
Superintendent shall have, under the general management and control of the
City Administrator, the supervision of the operation and maintenance of all
water facilities and of all skilled and unskilled labor required for such
Department, and he or she shall be responsible for and have custody of all
property of such Department, including water plant and water lines and
equipment and crews for the maintenance and operation thereof. It is the duty
of the Water Superintendent to file with the City Administrator a report as
to all activities of his or her Department during the preceding year,
together with any recommendations as to repairs or improvements he or she
deems advisable. The Water Superintendent shall also make and file such other
reports as may be required by the Council.



(1975 Code, § 2.26)



§ 32.08  PARK DEPARTMENT.



   A Park Department under the control of the City Administrator is
established. The head of this Department shall be known as the Park
Superintendent, to be designated by the City Administrator. He or she shall
have supervision of all labor and custody of all property used and maintained
for the purposes of such Department. It is the duty of the Park
Superintendent to file a detailed inventory with the City Administrator of
all property used and maintained for said Department, together with its
projected needs for the ensuing fiscal year. The Park Superintendent shall
also make and file such reports as may be required by the Council.



(1975 Code, § 2.27)



§ 32.09  PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT.



   The City Administrator may, in his or her discretion, create a Public
Works Department. The head of this Department shall be the Public Works
Director who shall be the City Administrator or such other person as may be
designated by him or her or her. The activities of this Department shall be
such as are assigned to it by the City Administrator and may include streets,
parks, water, sanitation and engineering. In the event that Departments
existing under the City Code are consolidated into the Public Works
Department, such consolidation may take place without City Code amendment,
provided that the functions remain the same and only the structure and lines
of authority are changed.



(1975 Code, § 2.28)



BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



§ 32.25  GENERALLY.



   All board and commission appointments authorized by ordinance or
resolution shall be made by the Council, at the first meeting in January of
each year. The term of each appointee shall be established and stated at the
time of his or her appointment, and terms of present board and commission
members may be re-established and changed so as to give effect to this
section. New appointees shall assume office immediately. All vacancies shall
be filled in the same manner as for an expired term, but the appointment 
shall be only for the unexpired term. No appointed board or commission member
shall be an employee of the city. All appointed board and commission members
shall serve, without remuneration, but may be reimbursed for out-of-pocket
expenses incurred in performance of their duties when such expenses have been
authorized by the Council. The Chairperson and Secretary shall be chosen from
and by the board or commission membership at its first regular meeting each
year to serve for the ensuing year, provided that no Chairperson shall be
elected who has not completed at least 1 year as a member of the board or
commission. Any board or commission member may be removed by the Council for
misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance in office and his or her position
filled as any other vacancy. Each board and commission shall hold its regular
meeting at a time established and approved by the Council. Boards and
commissions created by resolution shall terminate when the purpose for which
they were created has been accomplished or upon the expiration of the terms
stated in the resolution. Except as otherwise provided, this section shall
apply to all boards and commissions. All appointees to boards and commissions
shall hold office until their successor is appointed and qualified.



(1975 Code, § 2.40)



§ 32.26 BOARD OF BUILDING APPEALS.



   The City Council shall serve as the Board of Building Appeals. The
Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector and Construction Inspector shall serve
as resources to the Board. The Board shall hear any appeals relating to
building construction and conduct such investigations as it deems appropriate
in the circumstance. The findings of the Board shall be reduced to writing
and given to the appellant and the Building Inspector.



§ 32.27  BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT.



   A Board of Zoning Adjustment is established as more specifically set
forth in the zoning chapter as to terms, duties and powers.



(1975 Code, § 2.43) 



§ 32.28  PLANNING COMMISSION.



   (A)   Establishment. A Planning Commission is hereby established.



   (B)   Composition. The Planning Commission shall consist of 7
members who shall be appointed by the Council and may be removed by a 4/5
vote of the Council. The City Administrator, or his or her designee, one
member of the Council, and the City Attorney shall be members ex officio who
shall serve in an advisory capacity only and without voting privileges. In
the absence of a regularly appointed City Attorney, the Council may appoint
an attorney as a member to the Commission who shall act as attorney for the
Commission and shall be entitled to compensation for services thus rendered.
Of the members of the Commission first appointed, 1 shall be appointed for
the term of 1 year, 2 for the term of 2 years, 2 for the term of 3 years, and
2 for the term of 4 years. Their successors shall be appointed for the term
of 4 years. Terms of such members shall commence and said appointments shall
be made at the first regular Council meeting in January of each year. The
terms of ex officio members shall correspond to their respective official
tenures. Nominations are to be made by the Mayor on advice and recommendation
of the Council and shall be appointed by majority vote of the Council. Every
appointed member shall, before entering upon the discharge of his or her
duties, take an oath that he or she will faithfully discharge the duties of
his or her office. All members shall serve without compensation with the
exception of an attorney who may be engaged as a member of the Commission.



   (C)   Organization, meetings, and the like. The Commission shall
elect a Chairperson from among the appointed members for a term of one year;
and the Commission may create and fill such other offices as it may
determine. The Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each month.
It shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record
of its resolutions, transactions, and findings, which record shall be a
public record. On or before January 1 of each year the Commission shall
submit to the Council a report of its work during the preceding year.
Expenditures of the Commission shall be within amounts appropriated for the
purpose by the Council.



   (D)   Preparation of comprehensive plan. It shall be the function
and duty of the Planning Commission to recommend a Comprehensive Plan for the
physical development of the city, including proposed public buildings, street
arrangements and improvements, public utility services, parks, playgrounds,
and other similar developments, the use of property, the density of
population, and other matters relating to the physical development of the
city. Such plan may be prepared in sections, each of which shall relate to a
major subject of the plan.



   (E)   Procedure for adoption of plan. Before adopting the
Comprehensive Plan or any section of it or any substantial amendment thereof,
the Commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon, notice of the
time and place of which shall be given by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation at least 10 days before the day of hearing. The adoption
of the Comprehensive Plan or of any section or amendment thereof shall be by
resolution of the Commission, approved by the affirmative votes of not less
than two-thirds of its total membership. The Commission may from time to time
amend or add to the Comprehensive Plan or section thereof whenever changed
conditions or further studies by the Commission indicate that such amendment
or addition is necessary.



   (F)   Means of executing plan. Upon the adoption of the
Comprehensive Plan or any section thereof, it shall be the duty of the
Planning Commission to recommend to the Council reasonable and practicable
means for putting into effect such Plan or section thereof in order that the
same will serve as a pattern and guide for the orderly physical development
of the city and as a basis for the efficient expenditure of the funds thereof
relating to the subjects of such Comprehensive Plan. Such means shall consist
of a zoning plan, the control of subdivision plats, a plan of future streets,
coordination of the normal public improvements of the city, a long term
program of capital expenditures and such other matters as will accomplish the
purposes of this division.



   (G)   Plats.



      (1)   Every proposed plat of land within the city or within 2
miles of the limits of the city and not within a town which itself requires
approval of plats shall be submitted to the Council before being filed, and
no plat of land shall be filed unless and until the same shall first have
been approved by the Council.



      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to violate this provision
or to sell land or offer land for sale or contract for the sale of land by
reference to or by other use of any plat before such plat has been approved
by the Planning Commission and the Council in accordance with the provisions
of this subsection.



      (3)   The Planning Commission shall act on such plat and shall
make its recommendations with respect thereto. Such recommendations may
consist of:



         (a)   Recommendation that the Council approve such plat;
or



         (b)   Recommendation that the Council disapprove such
plat, in which case such recommendation shall include a statement of the
specific reasons for such recommendation; or



         (c)   Recommendation that the Council approve such plat
after specified changes or revisions are made therein, which recommendations
may include the condition that a revised plat, containing such changes or
revisions, be submitted to the Planning Commission for its further
consideration and recommendations before action thereon by the Council.



(1975 Code, § 2.44)  (Ord. 139, passed 1-22-1960; Ord. 447, passed
2-19-1968)



§ 32.29  BOARD OF APPEAL AND EQUALIZATION.



   (A)   A Board of Appeal and Equalization is hereby established in
accordance with the provision of M.S. § 274.01, Subd. 2, as it may be
amended from time to time.



   (B)   The Board of Appeal and Equalization shall consist of 5
members, each of whom shall be a resident of the city. Members shall be
appointed for a term in accordance with the provisions of this section and
shall at all times include at least one member who is an appraiser, realtor
or other person who by virtue of qualifications or experience is familiar
with property values in the city.



   (C)   Terms shall be for a period of 3 years.



   (D)   Board members may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred
in a manner and in amounts to be determined by the City Council.



   (E)   The Board shall be governed by M.S. § 274.1, Subd. 1, as it
may be amended from time to time, and shall meet each year between April 1
and May 31, at the office of the City Clerk or designated location, to review
the assessment and classification of property in the city as determined by
the Nicollet County Assessor.



   (F)   The Board shall determine whether the taxable property in the
town or city has been properly placed on the list and properly valued by the
Assessor. If real or personal property has been omitted, the Board shall
place it on the list with its market value and correct the assessment so that
each tract or lot of real property and each article, parcel or class of
personal property is entered on the assessment list as its market value. No
assessment of the property of any person may be raised unless the person has
been duly notified of the intent of the Board to do so. On application of any
person feeling aggrieved, the Board shall review the assessment or
classification, or both, and correct it as appears just.



   (G)   The local Board of Appeal and Equalization may reduce
assessments upon petition of the taxpayer but the total reductions must not
reduce the aggregate assessment made by the County Assessor by more than 1%.
If the total reduction would lower the aggregate assessment made by the
County Assessor by more than 1%, none of the adjustments may be made. The
Assessor shall correct any clerical errors or double assessments discovered
by the Board of Appeal and Equalization without regard to the 1% limitation.



   (H)   A majority of the members may act at the meeting and adjourn
from day to day until they finish hearing the cases presented. The Assessor
shall attend, with the assessment books and papers, and take part in the
proceedings, but must not vote. The County Assessor, or an assistant
delegated by the County Assessor, shall attend the meetings. The Board shall
list separately, on a form appended to the assessment book, all omitted
property added to the list by the Board and all items of property increased
or decreased, with the market value of each item of property, added or
changed by the Board, placed opposite the item. The County Assessor shall
enter all changes made by the Board in the assessment book.



   (I)   If a person fails to appear in person, by counsel, or by
written communication before the Board after being duly notified of the
Board’s intent to raise the assessment of the property, or if a person
feeling aggrieved by an assessment or classification fails to apply for a
review of the assessment or classification, the person may not appear before
the County Board of Equalization for a review of the assessment or
classification. This paragraph does not apply if an assessment was made after
the Board meeting, as provided in M.S. § 274.01, as it may be amended from
time to time, or if the person can establish not having received notice of
market value at least 5 days before the local Board of Appeal and
Equalization meeting.



   (J)   The Board of Appeal and Equalization must complete its work
and adjourn within 20 days from the time of convening stated in the notice of
the Clerk, unless a longer period is approved by the Commissioner of Review.
No action taken after that date is valid. All complaints about an assessment
or classification made after the meeting of the Board must be heard and
determined by the County Board of Equalization. A nonresident may, at any
time, before the meeting of the Board of Appeal and Equalization, file
written objections to an assessment or classification with the County
Assessor. The objections must be presented to the Board of Appeal and
Equalization at its meeting by the County Assessor for its consideration.



   (K)   The Clerk shall give at least 10 days posted notice of the
time and place of the meeting of the Board of Appeal and Equalization.
Failure to give notice to hold the meetings does not vitiate any assessment,
except as to the excess over the market value of the property.



(Ord. 127, passed 3-15-1993)



§ 32.30 PORT AUTHORITY COMMISSION.



   (A)   Establishment. A Port Authority Commission is hereby
established.



   (B)   Membership. The Port Authority Commission shall consist of 7
members. Five members of the Commission shall be comprised of the Mayor and
City Council and 2 members shall be appointed by the Council and may be
removed by a 4/5 vote of the Council. The term of the appointment to the Port
Authority for both the Mayor and City Council Members shall be the term of
office they were elected to by the voters of North Mankato. Appointed members
of the Commission shall serve 6-year overlapping terms as defined by the
applicable Minnesota state statute. The Commission shall appoint an Executive
Vice President, a Secretary and an Assistant Treasurer and such other
positions as it may deem appropriate in the circumstance. The City Attorney
shall serve in an advisory capacity to the Commission without voting
privileges.



   (C)   Organization and meetings. The Commission shall elect a
President, Vice President and Treasurer from among its members for terms of 1
year or until their successors are elected and seated. The Commission shall
hold an annual meeting in July of each year and shall hold such other
meetings as it deems appropriate for the transaction of its business. The
Secretary of the Commission shall keep a record of its resolutions,
transactions and its minutes, which record shall be a public record.



   (D)   Powers of the Commission. The Commission shall serve as the
economic development arm of the City of North Mankato and shall have all the
powers of a Port Authority as established under applicable Minnesota statute
and may exercise the same powers as a Municipal Housing and Redevelopment
Authority established under M.S. § 462.425 or other law.



(Am. Ord. 54, 4th Series, passed 2-18-2014)



CHAPTER 33:  CITY POLICIES



Section



   33.01   Election date change



   33.02   Contingency Fund



   33.03   Park land and recreational area land acquisition



   33.04   Temporary funds



   33.05   Partial prepayment of special assessments



   33.06   Franchises



   33.07   Contracts with the city



§ 33.01  ELECTION DATE CHANGE.



   Pursuant to M.S. §§ 412.023 and 205.07, as they may be amended from
time to time, elections for municipal offices shall hereafter be held
biennially on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November in every
even-numbered year.



(1975 Code, § 2.61) (Ord. 551, passed 12-17-1973)



§ 33.02  CONTINGENCY FUND.



   (A)   In accordance with the authority granted in Chapter 274 of the
Laws of 1973, there is hereby established a Contingency Fund for the payment
of incidental and promotional expenses of the city incurred in the city’s
efforts to promote institutional, residential, commercial and industrial
development.



   (B)   Receipts and disbursements of such Fund shall be made in the
same manner as receipts and disbursements from the General Fund of the city.



(1975 Code, § 2.71)  (Ord. 549, passed 12-3-1973)



§ 33.03  PARK LAND AND RECREATIONAL AREA LAND ACQUISITION.



   (A)   Findings and policy declaration. It is necessary and
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan of the city and it is further in the
interest of the health, welfare and safety of the people of the city that the
city promulgate and establish a new Park Land and Recreational Area
Acquisition and Development Program; that it is equitable and consistent with
the benefits received that the owners of land upon which new residential
dwelling units are to be constructed be assessed and pay for a portion of the
cost of the acquisition and development of new park land and recreational
area.



   (B)   Terms of payment and consent assessment option.



      (1)   All such assessments shall be paid to the city prior to
the issuance of any building permit except that the record owner of the land
upon which the building permit is to be issued may, at his or her option,
elect and consent to have such assessment placed on the tax rolls against
such property for a period of 10 years as a special assessment to be
collected and paid in the same manner as provided in M.S. § 429.061, as it
may be amended from time to time, for the collection and payment of special
assessments for other improvements. Such an assessment shall be called a
"Consent Assessment." On or before November 15 of each year, the City
Building Inspector shall prepare and present to the Council a Consent
Assessment Roll containing all such consent assessments spread over 10 equal
annual installments, together with interest thereon at the same rate that
regular special assessments for other improvement projects are required to
bear in that year.



      (2)   Any owner electing such consent assessment shall execute
a consent assessment agreement in a form consistent with this section and
prepared and furnished by the City Finance Director. Upon the execution of
such agreement, the owner shall be conclusively deemed to have waived, on
behalf of himself or herself, his or her heirs, successors and assigns, any
and all right to hearings or notices of hearings on the consent assessment
and any and all right to contest the consent assessment in any way before the
Council or before any Court of competent jurisdiction. The owner shall
thereby further waive any objection to the consent assessment or to the use
of any funds derived thereby by reason of unequal apportionment of benefits
accruing to his or her land or the total absence thereof. All matters of
location, purchase, condemnation or improvement of any land for park land or
recreational areas shall remain the sole and exclusive prerogative of the
city and this section shall not require the city to acquire or develop lands
in any particular location for such purpose. In no event, however, shall any
owner waive any rights he or she may have with respect to the condemnation of
lands owned by him or her or her.



   (C)   Park Land Fund - restricted use. There is established the Park
Land Fund which shall consist of any and all assessments collected hereunder,
together with such amounts as may from time to time be placed in such Fund
upon act of the Council. Park land funds shall be used and disbursed solely
and exclusively for the acquisition, development and improvement of any park
land or recreational areas acquired by the city after the effective date of
this section.



   (D)   Comprehensive Park Plan. The Council, upon the recommendation
of the Planning Commission, may establish, adopt and from time to time update
a Comprehensive Park Plan for the city which shall locate and identify
proposed parks and recreational areas for neighborhood use and for city-wide
uses and benefits. Such plans shall take into account the residential growth
of each particular neighborhood area of the city as well as the recreational
needs of the city as a whole. Whenever the Comprehensive Park Plan shows the
proposed park or recreational area partially or completely within a proposed
subdivision, the preliminary and final plats of said subdivision shall show
the proposed site and the city shall have 1 year from the date of approval of
the final plat by the Council in which to purchase said land or to initiate
condemnation proceedings with respect thereto.



(1975 Code, § 2.72)  (Ord. 472, passed 7-7-1969; Am. Ord. 489, passed
4-20-1970)



§ 33.04  TEMPORARY FUNDS.



   The Council may, by resolution, create such additional temporary funds
as it, in its discretion, deems necessary or proper.



(1975 Code, § 2.73)



§ 33.05 PARTIAL PAYMENT OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.



   (A)   Partial prepayment of special assessments permitted. After the
adoption of an assessment roll pursuant to M.S. Ch. 429, as it may be amended
from time to time, and as therein authorized, prior to certification of the
assessment to the County Auditor, the City Clerk is authorized and directed
to accept partial prepayment of said assessment and reduce the amount
certified to the County Auditor accordingly.



   (B)   Scope. This section shall apply to all assessment rolls which
have been adopted by the Council but not yet certified to the County Auditor
on the effective date hereof and to all assessment rolls hereafter adopted by
the Council.



(1975 Code, § 2.74)



§ 33.06  FRANCHISES.



   (A)   Definition. The term FRANCHISE as used in this section shall
be construed to mean any special privileges granted to any person in, over,
upon, or under any of the streets or public places of the city, whether such
privilege has heretofore been granted by it or by the State of Minnesota or
shall hereafter be granted by the city or by the state.



   (B)   Franchise ordinances. The Council may grant franchises by
ordinance. Franchise rights shall always  be subject to the superior right
of the public to the use of streets and public places. All persons desiring
to make any burdensome use of the streets or public places, inconsistent with
the public’s right in such places, or desiring the privilege of placing in,
over, upon, or under any street or public place any permanent or
semi-permanent fixtures for the purpose of constructing or operating
railways, telegraphing, or transmitting electricity, or transporting by
pneumatic tubes, or for furnishing to the city or its inhabitants or any
portion thereof, transportation facilities, water, light, heat, power, gas,
or any other such utility, or for any other purpose, shall be required to
obtain a franchise before proceeding to make such use of the streets or
public places or before proceeding to place such fixtures in such places.



   (C)   Power of regulation reserved. The city shall have the right
and power to regulate and control the exercise by any person, of any
franchise however acquired, and whether such franchise has been heretofore
granted by it or by the state.



   (D)   Conditions in every franchise. All conditions specified in
this section shall be a part of every franchise even though they may not be
expressly contained in the franchise:



      (1)   That the grantee shall be subject to and will perform on
its part all the terms of this section and will comply with all pertinent
provisions of any City Charter and City Code, as the same may from time to
time be amended.



      (2)   That the grantee shall in no case claim or pretend to
exercise any power to fix fares, rates, and charges; but that such fares,
rates, and charges shall at all times be just, fair and reasonable for the
services rendered and shall in all cases be fixed and from time to time
changed, unless regulated by an agency of the State of Minnesota, in the
manner following:



         (a)   A reasonable rate shall be construed to be one
which will, with efficient management, normally yield above all operating
expenses and depreciation a fair return upon all money invested;



         (b)   If possible maximum rates and charges shall be
arrived at by direct negotiation with the Council;



         (c)   If direct negotiations fail to produce agreement,
the Council shall, not less than 30 days before the expiration of any
existing rate schedule or agreement, appoint an expert as its representative,
the franchisee shall likewise appoint an expert as its representative and the
2 of them shall appoint a third person, preferably an expert, and the 3 of
them shall constitute a Board of Arbitration. The Board shall report its
findings as soon as possible and the rates and charges it shall agree upon by
majority vote shall be legal and binding, subject only to review by a Court
of competent jurisdiction upon application of one of the parties.



      (3)   That the Council shall have the right to require
reasonable extensions of any public service system from time to time, and to
make such rules and regulations as may be required to secure adequate and
proper service and to provide sufficient accommodations for the public.



      (4)   That the grantee shall not issue any capital stock on
account of the franchise or the value thereof, and that the grantee shall
have no right to receive upon condemnation proceedings brought by the city to
acquire the public utility exercising such franchise, any return on account
of the franchise or its value.



      (5)   That no sale or lease of the franchise shall be
effective until the assignee or lessee shall have filed with the city an
instrument, duly executed, reciting the facts of such sale or lease,
accepting the terms of the franchise, and agreeing to perform all the
conditions required of the grantee thereunder.



      (6)   That every grant in said franchise contained of
permission for the erection of poles, masts, or other fixtures in the streets
and for the attachment of wires thereto, or for the laying of tracks in, or
of pipes or conduits under the streets or public places, or for the placing
in the streets or other public places of any permanent or semi-permanent
fixtures whatsoever, shall be subject to the conditions that the Council
shall have the power to require such alterations therein, or relocation or
re-routing thereof, as the Council may at any time deem necessary for the
safety, health, or convenience of the public, and particularly that it shall
have the power to require the removal of poles, masts, and other fixtures
bearing wires and the placing underground of all facilities for whatsoever
purpose used.



      (7)   Every franchise shall contain a provision granting the
city the right to acquire the same in accordance with statute.



      (8)   That the franchisee may be obligated by the city to pay
the city fees to raise revenue or defray increased costs accruing as a result
of utility operations, or both, including, but not limited to, a sum of money
based upon gross operating revenues or gross earnings from its operations in
the city.



   (E)   Further provisions of franchises. The enumeration and
specification of particular matters which must be included in every franchise
or renewal or extension thereof shall not be construed as impairing the right
of the city to insert in any such franchise or renewal or extension thereof
such other and further conditions and restrictions as the Council may deem
proper to protect the city’s interests, nor shall anything contained in
this section limit any right or power possessed by the city over existing
franchises.



   (F)   City franchises.



      (1)   Ordinance No. 16, Third Series.



         (a)   Definitions.



            For the purpose of the franchisee, the following
terms, phrases and words and their derivations shall have the meaning given
herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present
tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular
number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words
"shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined
shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.



            ADVISORY BOARD.  See division (f)(2).



            BASIC SERVICE.  All subscriber services provided by
franchisee including and delivery of broadcast signals, covered by the
regular monthly charge paid by all subscribers, excluding optional services
for which a separate charge is made. (See division (h)(1)).



            BOARD.  The Minnesota Cable-Communications Board.



            CITY.  The City of North Mankato, a municipal
corporation, in the State of Minnesota.



            CLASS IV CHANNEL.  A signaling path provided by a
cable communications system to transmit signals of any type from a subscriber
terminal to another point in the cable communications system.



            CONNECTION.  The attachment of the drop to the first
radio or television set of the subscriber.



            CONVERTER.  An electronic device, which converts
signals to a frequency not susceptible to interference within the television
receiver of a subscriber, and by an appropriate channel selector also
permitting a subscriber to view all basic subscriber signals included in the
basic service delivered at designated converter dial locations.



            COUNCIL.  The governing body of the City of North
Mankato.



            DAY.  Unless otherwise indicated all days shall be
calendar days.



            DROP.  The cable that connects the subscriber
terminal to the nearest feeder cable of the cable.



            FCC.  The Federal Communications Commission and any
legally appointed designated or elected agent or successor.



            FRANCHISEE.  American Television and Communications,
Inc. doing business as TV Signal, a wholly owned and subsidiary of Time, Inc.



            GROSS REVENUES.  All revenue derived directly or
indirectly by franchisee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parent and any person
in which franchisee has a financial interest of 5% or more from or in
connection with the operation of the system, including but not limited to,
basic subscriber service monthly fees, pay cable fees, leased channel fees,
converter rentals, studio rental, production equipment and personnel fees,
and advertising revenues. The term does not include any taxes on services
furnished by franchisee and imposed directly upon any subscriber or user by
the state, city or other governmental unit and collected by franchisee on
behalf of the governmental unit.



            INSTALLATION. The connection of the system from
feeder cable to the point of connection.



            LOCKOUT DEVICE.  An optional mechanical or
electrical accessory to a subscriber's terminal which inhibits the viewing of
a certain channel or channels provided by way of cable communications system.



            PAY LEVEL.  Additional tier level, above basic
service, shown for additional charge.



            PUBLIC PROPERTY.  Any real property owned by city
other than a street.



            SCRAMBLER/DE-SCRAMBLER.  Refers respectively to the
equipment installed to the cable communications system's headend equipment
and subscriber terminal used to isolate pay cable and other ancillary service
channels from basic service which is accomplished by electronically
distorting the signal prior to its transmission through the cable
communications system and re-constituting the signal at each authorized
location for subsequent display.



            SIDEWALK.  The portion of a street delineated for
pedestrian travel.



            STREET.  The surface of and the space above and
below any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, public way,
alley, court, sidewalk, boulevard, parkway, drive or any easement or
right-of-way now or hereafter held by city which shall, within its proper use
and meaning in the sole opinion of city, entitle grantee to the use thereof
for the purpose of installing or transmitting over poles, wires, cables,
conductors, ducts, conduits, valuts, manholes, amplifiers, appliances,
attachments and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent
to a system.



            SUBSCRIBER.  Any person or entity who subscribes to
a service provided by franchisee by means of or in connecting with the system
regardless of whether a fee is paid for such service.



            SYSTEM.  A SYSTEM of antennas, cables, wires, lines,
towers, waveguides or other conductors, converters, equipment or facilities,
designed and constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving,
transmitting, amplifying and distributing, audio, video and other forms of
electronic or electrical signals located in city. The definition shall not
include any system wholly internal to one or more multiple unit dwellings
under common ownership, control or management, and does not use city streets
or other public property. In any event, SYSTEM as defined herein shall not be
inconsistent with the definition as set out in the rules of the Board.



         (b)   Grant of authority.



            1.   The franchisor has, following reasonable
notice, conducted a full public hearing, affording all persons reasonable
opportunity to be heard, which proceeding was concerned with the analysis and
consideration of the technical ability, financial consideration, legal
qualification, areas to be served, channel capacity and general
characteristics of the franchisee.



            2.   The franchisor after such consideration,
analysis and deliberation, has approved and found sufficient, the technical
ability, financial condition, legal qualification, extent and nature of
service proposed and character of the franchisee.



            3.   The franchisor has at the above mentioned
public hearing considered and analyzed the plans of the franchisee for the
construction, operation, maintenance and expansion of the cable
communications system. and found the same to be adequate and feasible in view
of the needs and requirements of the city.



            4.   To the knowledge and belief of the
franchisor, this franchise and the procedure used in formulating the awarding
and same in all ways complies with the franchise standards of the Board.



            5.   The franchisee, its lessees, successors and
assigns is hereby granted the non-exclusive right and authority for the
period of 15 years, and subject hereto, to erect and construct utility poles
and operate and maintain a cable communications system, including all
necessary wires, amplifiers, cable and other equipment thereunto
appertaining, in, upon, over, across, and along the streets, alleys, bridges
and public places within the present and future corporate limits of the city
for the distribution and sale of television signals in and beyond the city.



         (c)   Franchisor rights.  This franchise conveys to the
city certain rights including, but not limited to the following:



            1.   Access to financial records.



               a.   Throughout the term of this franchise,
franchisee shall maintain books and records in accordance with normal and
accepted bookkeeping and accounting practices for the cable communications
industry, and allow for inspection and copying of them at reason-able times
at its designated office. The books and records to be maintained by
franchisee shall include the following:



                  i.   A record of all requests for
service;



                  ii.   A record of all subscriber or
other complaints, and the action taken as pertaining to division (f)(1)(m) of
this section;



                  iii.   A file of all subscriber
contracts;



                  iv.   Franchisee policies, procedures
and company rules; and



                  v.   Financial records.



               b.   The city shall give franchisee at least
48 hours notice before making inspections of any books or records in the
local office of the franchisee.



               c.   The city, its agents and
representatives, shall have authority to arrange for and conduct an audit of
and copy the books and records of franchisee. Franchisee shall first be given
15 days notice of the audit request, the description of and purpose for the
audit, and description, to the best of city's ability, of the books, records
and documents it wants to review.



            2.   Termination of franchise.



               a.   The city shall have the right to
terminate and cancel the franchise and all rights and privileges thereof in
the event of conditions and circumstances which include, but are not limited
to, the following:



                  i.   If the franchisee substantially
violates any provision of this section, or any rule, order, or determination
of the city made in accordance with this section.



                  ii.   If the franchisee practices
fraud or deceit upon the city.



                  iii.   If the franchisee attempts to
evade any of the provisions of this section.



                  iv.   If the franchisee should default
in the performance of any obligation under this franchise, and fail to act on
the default within 30 days after receiving written notice of the default.



                  v.   If a petition is filed by the
franchisee under the Bankruptcy Act, or any other insolvency or creditors'
rights law, state or federal, or the franchisee is adjudged a bankrupt or
insolvent under any insolvency or creditors' rights law, state or federal.



               b.   The city shall provide the franchisee
with a written notice of the cause for termination and its intention to
terminate the franchise and shall allow the franchisee a minimum of 30 days
subsequent to receipt of the notice in which to correct the violation. The
franchisee shall, be provided with an opportunity to be heard at a public
hearing before the City Council prior to the termination of the franchise. In
the event that the city determines to terminate the franchise, the franchisee
shall have a period of 30 days, beginning the day next following the date of
the conclusion of the public hearing at which the termination of the
franchise is considered, within which to appeal with the Board, pursuant to
M.S. § 238.14 (1976). During such 30 day period and until the Board
determines the appeal, if an appeal is taken, the franchise shall remain in
full force and effect, unless the term thereof sooner expires. If the Board
approves of the action of the city, the franchise shall terminate
immediately; if the Board disapproves of the action of the city, the
franchise shall remain in full force and effect during the term thereof
unless sooner terminated in accordance with law or this section. Any such
appeal to the Board is a contested case to which the Board is not a party.



               c.   Upon termination or forfeiture of the
franchise, the franchisee and the city shall work together to develop a
mutually agreeable solution to the discontinuance of cable service. If the
solution has not been reached within a reasonable period, the city may
require the franchisee to remove its cables, wires and appliances from the
streets, alleys and other public places within the city.



In the event the franchisee fails to remove its cable, wires and. appliances,
the city may undertake the removal and bill the franchisee for all costs
incurred.



            3.   Fines.  The city shall have the right to
levy fines on the franchisee as per section (e)(4)(c).



            4.   Special testing.  The city shall have the
right to require special testing to determine the source of technical
difficulties. If the testing reveals the franchisee to be responsible for the
difficulties, then the franchisee shall bear the costs of testing. If the
testing reveals the difficulties are beyond the. franchisee's control, the
testing costs shall be borne by the franchisor.



            5.   Right to purchase.



               a.   The city shall have the non-exclusive
right to purchase the franchisee's cable communications system in the event
of expiration of the franchise term, revocation of the franchise, other
termination of the franchise as provided for in this section, or receipt of
an application for approval of an assignment of the franchise.



               b.   If the city opts to purchase the
system, the city and the franchisee shall work together to determine a
mutually agreeable purchase value for the system.



         (d)   Responsibilities of franchisee.  This franchise
conveys certain obligations and responsibilities to the franchisee, including
but not limited to, the following:



            1.   Conformance with state and federal law. The
franchisee shall conform to all state and federal laws, rules and regulations
regarding cable communications not later than 1 year after their promulgation.



            2.   Operating standards.  The franchisee shall
operate a cable communications system that provides the following minimum
standards:



               a.   The system shall deliver to the
subscriber's terminal a signal that is capable of producing a black and white
or colored picture without visual material degradation in quality within the
limitations imposed by the technical state of the art of our system.



               b.   The system shall transmit or distribute
signals without causing objectionable cross-modulation in the cable or
interfacing with other electrical or electronic network or with the reception
of other television or radio receivers in the area not connected to the
network.



            3.   Technical standards. The franchise shall as a
minimum adhere to the technical standards promulgated by the FCC relating to
cable communications systems contained in subpart K of part 76 of the FCC's
rules and regulations relating to cable communications systems, as the same
now provided and may hereafter be amended or modified from time to time. The
results of any tests required by the FCC shall be filed within 10 days of the
conduct of such tests with the city and with the Board.



               a.   The system will produce a picture upon
each subscriber's television screen in black and white or color, depending
upon whether color is being telecast and provided the subscriber's television
set is capable of producing a color picture, that is undistorted and free
from ghost images, without material degradation of color fidelity. The system
shall produce a sound that is undistorted on any receiver of a subscriber
provided that the receiver is in good functioning condition. Franchisee, at
its expense, shall install and maintain the system so as not to interfere
with any subscriber's receipt of local broadcast stations.



               b.   The system shall transmit or distribute
signals to all television and radio receivers of all subscribers without
causing cross-modulation in the cables or interfering with other electrical
or electronic systems or the reception of other television or radio receivers.



               c.   Franchisee shall construct and maintain
a system that at least meets minimum technical standards now or hereafter
promulgated by the FCC relating to cable communications systems; provided,
however, that in no event shall the technical standards required to be met by
franchisee be less stringent than the FCC standards in effect at the time of
the adoption of the section, nor shall franchisee be required to meet minimum
FCC technical standards which apply solely to cable communications systems
for which franchises are granted subsequent to the acceptance of this
franchise.



               d.   The system shall be installed and
remain capable of using all band equipment and of passing the entire VHF
bands, mid-band, super-bands and FM band up to the current capacity of the
system.



               e.   The system shall be designed for and
operate on a 24 hour a day continuous operation basis.



               f.   Franchisee shall specify the procedure
for initially and subsequently testing the technical capacity of the system
and agrees to have city select a consultant to review and perform such
testing procedure. The results of any tests required by the FCC shall be
filed within 10 days of the conduct of such tests with the city and the
Board. Other representatives of city may be present during testing. The tests
may be done annually at such times as is determined by city, with notice to
franchisee. All expenses for all such tests shall be paid by franchisee.



            4.   Two-way capability. The franchisee shall
provide a cable communications system having the technical capacity for
non-voice return communications at such time as the city determines such
capacity is needed. The city shall make this determination after consultation
with the Region Nine Development Commission and the Board and after
conducting public hearings giving reasonable notice and a reasonable
opportunity to be heard. For the purposes of this paragraph, technical
capacity for non-voice return communications means the provision of
appropriate system design techniques with the installation of cable and
amplifiers suitable for the subsequent insertion of necessary non-voice
communications electronic modules.



            5.   Public disclosure. Franchisee shall file with
city, at the time of its annual payment of the franchise fee, as described in
this franchise, the following:



               a.   A financial statement prepared by an
independent certified public accountant showing, in such detail as acceptable
to city, the gross revenues of franchisee for the preceding fiscal year.



               b.   Current list of names and addresses of
each officer and director and other management personnel, and if a
corporation, each shareholder having stock ownership of 5% or more, and if a
partnership, all general partners, and if a general partner is a corporation,
the foregoing information shall be given as to the corporate general partner.



               c.   A copy of each document filed with all
federal, state and local agencies during the preceding fiscal year not
previously filed with the city (each of these filings shall be provided at
the time the filing is made).



               d.   A statement of its current billing
practices, if any changes were made during the past year.



               e.   A current copy of its rules, if any
changes were made during the past year.



               f.   A current copy of its subscriber
service contract, if any changes were made during the past year.



            6.   Abandonment.  Notwithstanding any provision
in this franchise, the franchisee may not abandon any cable communications
distribution system or any portion thereof without having given 3 months
written notice to the City Council and the Board. The franchisee may not
abandon any cable communications distribution system or any portion thereof
without compensating the city for damages resulting to it from such
abandonment.



         (e)   Indemnification, insurance, letter of credit and
bond.



            1.   General.



               a.   All rights of city pursuant to
indemnification, insurance, letter of credit or bond, as provided for by this
franchise, are in addition to all other rights the city may have under this
franchise or any other ordinance, rule, regulation or law.



               b.    The exercise or failure to exercise by
city of any rights pursuant to any section of this franchise shall not affect
in any way the right of city to subsequently exercise any such rights or any
other right of city under this franchise or any other ordinance, rule,
regulation or law.



            2.   Indemnification and insurance.



               a.   Franchisee shall fully indemnify,
defend and hold harmless, city, its officers, boards, commissions, elected
officials, agents and employees against any and all costs, damage, expense,
claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments for damages, including but
not limited to, expenses for legal fees, whether suit be brought or not, and
disbursements and liabilities incurred by city in connection with:



                  i.   Damage to persons or property, in
any way arising out of or through the acts or omissions of franchisee or
city, their respective servants, officials, agents or employees or to which
franchisee's or city's negligence or that of their respective servants,
agents, officials or employees shall in any way contribute;



                  ii.   Arising out of any claim for
invasion of the right of privacy, for defamation of any person, firm or
corporation, or the violation or infringement of any copyright, trademark,
trade name, service mark or patent, or of any other right of any person, firm
or corporation, except claims because of city's own programming;



                  iii.   Arising out of franchisee's
failure to comply with the provisions of this franchise, any federal, state
or local law, ordinance or regulation applicable to franchisee or the system;
and



                  iv.   Any and all claims which
franchisee may now or hereafter have or claim to have against city, its
servants, agents, employees or officials, due to or arising out of damage to
any of franchisee's property or equipment, including, without limitation,
resulting or consequential loss of income, injury or reputation, or any other
resulting or consequential damages of any kind, caused by or resulting from
acts or omissions of city or any of its servants, agents, employees or
officials.



               b.   If suit be brought or threatened
against city, either independently or jointly with franchisee, or with any
other person or municipality, franchisee, upon notice given by city, shall
defend city at the cost of franchisee, and if final judgment is obtained
against city, either independently or jointly with franchisee, or any other
defendants, franchisee shall indemnify city and pay such judgment with all
costs and satisfy and discharge the same.



               c.   City reserves the right to cooperate
with franchisee and participate in the defense of any litigation either
through intervention or otherwise. Franchisee shall pay upon receipt of
written demand from city, all expenses incurred by the city in defending
itself with regard to any matters in this section. These expenses shall
include, but not be limited to, attorney's fees, and the reasonable value of
services (as determined by city), rendered by city or any employees, agents
or representatives of city.



            3.   Insurance.



               a.   Franchisee shall maintain liability
insurance covering its obligations of indemnification provided for in or as a
result of the exercise of this franchise covering both the city and
franchisee and shall maintain the insurance during the entire term of this
franchise in the minimum amount of:



                  i.   $500,000 for property damage to
any one person;



                  ii.   $1,000,000 for property damage
in any one act or occurrence;



                  iii.   $500,000 for personal injury to
any one person; and



                  iv.   $1,000,000 for personal injury
in any one act or occurrence.



               b.    Such insurance shall be with a company
acceptable to city and shall otherwise be in form and substance acceptable to
city. Such insurance policy with written evidence of payment of required
premiums shall be filed and maintained with city during the term of the
franchise. The above minimum amounts shall be changed from time to time by
franchisee as requested by city. Franchisee shall immediately give notice to
city of any threatened or pending litigation affecting this insurance.



               c.   Neither the provisions of this section
nor any damages recovered by city shall be construed to, or shall, limit the
liability of franchisee.



               d.   No recovery by city of any sum by
reason of the letter of credit or bond required in this franchise shall be
any limitation upon the liability of franchisee to city under the terms of
this section, except that the sum so received by city from such letter of
credit or bond shall be deducted from a recovery under this section, if for
the same act or occurrence.



               e.   All insurance policies maintained
pursuant to this franchise shall contain the following endorsement:



            It is hereby understood and agreed that this
insurance policy may not be cancelled nor the intention not to renew be
stated until 60 days after receipt to city by registered mail, or written
notice of such intention to cancel or not to renew.



            4.   Letter of credit.



               a.   At the time of acceptance of this
franchise, franchisee shall deliver to the cities as one system an
irrevocable and unconditional letter of credit, in form and substance
acceptable to the cities, from a national or state bank approved by the
cities, in the amount of $50,000. This one letter of credit will be used for
draw downs and multiplier effect by any or all member cities. (Member city of
Advisory Board).



               b.   The letter of credit shall provide that
funds will be paid to city, upon written demand of city, and in an amount
solely determined by city in payment for penalties charged pursuant to
paragraph c of this section, in payment for any moneys owned by franchisee
pursuant to its obligations under this franchise, or in payment for any
damage incurred as a result of any acts or omissions by franchisee pursuant
to this franchise.



               c.   In addition to recovery of any moneys
owed by franchisee to city or damages to city as a result of any acts or
omissions by franchise pursuant to the franchise, city at its sole discretion
may charge to and collect from the letter of credit the following penalties:



                  i.   For failure to complete system
construction in accordance with grantee's initial service area plan, unless
city approves the delay, the penalty shall be $50.00 per day for each day, or
part thereof, such failure occurs or continues.



                  ii.   For failure to provide data,
documents, reports or information or to cooperate with city during an
application process or system review, the penalty shall be $50.00 per day for
each day, or part thereof, such failure occurs or continues.



                  iii.   For failure to comply with any
of the provisions of this franchise for which a penalty is not otherwise
specifically provided pursuant to this division (e)(4)(c), the penalty shall
be $50.00 per day for each day, or part thereof, such failure occurs or
continues.



                  iv.   For failure to test, analyze and
report on the performance of the system following a request by city, the
penalty shall be $50.00 per day for each day, or part thereof, such failure
occurs or continues.



                  v.   For failure by franchise to
initiate the modification of the system to provide additional services within
45 days after required by city following a periodic review or renegotiation
session, the penalty shall be $50.00 per day for each day, or part thereof,
such failure occurs or continues.



                  vi.   Forty-five days following notice
from city of a failure of franchisee to comply with construction, operation
or maintenance standards, the penalty shall be $50.00 per day for each day,
or part thereof, such failure occurs or continues.



                  vii.   For failure to provide the
services franchisee has proposed, including but not limited to the
implementation and the utilization of the access channels and the making
available for use of the equipment and other facilities to city, the penalty
shall be $50.00 per day for each day, or part thereof, such failure occurs or
continues.



                  viii.   Each violation of any
provision of this franchise shall be considered a separate violation for
which a separate penalty can be imposed.



               d.   Exclusive of the contractual penalties
set out above in this section, a violation of any provision of this franchise
is a misdemeanor.



               e.   Whenever city finds that franchisee has
violated one or more terms, conditions or provisions of this franchise, a
written notice shall be given to franchisee informing of such violation. At
any time after 3 days following notice, city may draw from the letter of
credit all penalties and other moneys due city.



               f.   Whenever a penalty has been assessed,
franchisee may, within 10 days of notice, notify city that there is a dispute
as to whether a violation or failure has, in fact, occurred. Such notice by
franchisee to city shall specify in detail the matters disputed by the
franchisee.



                  i.   City shall hear franchisee's
dispute at the next regularly scheduled Council meeting. City shall
supplement the Council decision with written findings of fact.



                  ii.   Upon a determination by city
that no violation has taken place, city shall refund to franchisee without
interest all moneys drawn down from the letter of credit by reason of the
alleged violation, less all costs and attorney's fees incurred by city as a
result of franchisee's appeal.



               g.   If the letter of credit or any
subsequent letter of credit delivered pursuant hereto expires prior to 15
months after the expiration of the term of this franchise, it shall be
renewed or replaced during the term of this franchise to provide that it will
not expire earlier than 15 months after the expiration of this franchise. The
renewed or replaced letter of credit shall be on the same form and with a
bank authorized herein and for the full amount stated in division (e)(4)(a)
above.



               h.   If city draws upon the letter of
credit, or any subsequent letter of credit delivered pursuant hereto, in
whole or in part, franchisee shall replace the same within three days and
shall deliver to city a like replacement letter of credit for the full amount
stated in division (e)(4)(a) above as a substitution of the previous letter
of credit.



               i.   If any letter of credit is not so
placed, city may draw on said letter of credit for the whole amount thereof
and hold the proceeds, without interest, and use the proceeds to pay costs
incurred by city in performing and paying for any or all of the obligations,
duties and responsibilities of franchisee under this franchise that are not
performed or paid for by the franchisee pursuant hereto, including attorneys'
fees incurred by the city in so performing and paying. The failure to so
replace any letter of credit may also, at the option of the city be deemed a
default by franchisee under this franchise. The drawing on the letter of
credit by city, and use of the money so obtained for payment or performance
of the obligations, duties and responsibilities of franchisee which are in
default, shall not be a waiver or release of such default.



               j.   The collection by city of any damages,
moneys or penalties from the letter of credit shall not affect any other
right or remedy available to city, nor shall any act, or failure to act, by
city pursuant to the letter of credit, be deemed a waiver of any right of
city pursuant to this franchise or otherwise.



               k.   Performance bond. At the time the
franchise becomes effective and at all times thereafter, until the franchisee
has liquidated all of its obligation with the city, the franchisee shall
furnish a bond to the city in such amount as the city deems necessary, in
such form and with sureties as shall be acceptable to the city conditioned
upon the faithful performance of the franchisee according to the terms of the
franchise and upon the further condition that in the event the franchisee
shall fail to comply with any law, ordinance, or regulation governing the
franchise, there shall be recoverable jointly and severally by the city as a
result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or
cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the franchisee, plus a
reasonable allowance for attorney and consultant fees and costs, up to the
full amount of the bond, and further guaranteeing payment by the franchisee
of claims, liens and taxes due the city which arise by reason of the
construction, operation, or maintenance of the cable communications system.
The rights reserved by the city with respect to the bond are in addition to
all other rights the city may have under the franchise or any other law. The
city may, from year to year, at its sole discretion, reduce the amount of the
bond, or determine which form the bond may take, which could be the same
letter of credit as stipulated in division (e)(4)(a) above or additional
performance bond, in any form, as deemed necessary.



         (f)   Franchise administration.



            1.   The office of the City Administrator shall be
responsible for the continuing administration of this franchise.



            2.   A Cable Communications Advisory Board is
hereby established to assist in the administration of this franchise and the
improvement of the local cable communications system. The duties and
responsibilities of the Advisory Board include the following:



               a.   Monitor the performance of the
franchisee in executing the provisions of the franchise.



               b.   Advise the City Council on the
regulation of subscriber charges pursuant to the requirements of this section.



               c.   Advise the City Council on matters
which might constitute violations of this franchise and recommend appropriate
action.



               d.   Make recommendations to the City
Council concerning rates and services to be offered.



               e.   Work with the franchisee and any
organization created pursuant to this section to operate community access
cablecasting to encourage the use of community access services and to explore
the feasibility of new services.



               f.   Conduct periodic evaluations of the
system and pursuant thereto, make recommendations to the City Council for
amendments to this section.



               g.   Prepare an annual report assessing the
franchisee's performance, utilization of access services and making
recommendations regarding the apparent or likely need for upgrading the
system to meet the current state of the art or the needs of the community.



               h.   Advise the Council concerning
renegotiations which may occur pursuant to this franchise.



               i.   Prepare and submit three months prior
to the expiration of the franchise and to the expiration of the certificate
of confirmation a report evaluating the performance of the franchisee
according to the requirements of the State Cable Communication Board's rules
and regulations.



            3.   The Cable Communications Advisory Board shall
be a joint undertaking of North Mankato/Mankato and open to other
municipalities served by this system. A combined Advisory Board shall be
created by joint resolution of the City Councils of the affected cities. This
resolution shall specify: The composition and size of the Board, a method for
appointing members, length of membership and a provision stating that the
Board is responsible for the duties specified in this division.



         (g)   Rights of individuals (subscriber privacy).



            1.   No signals, including signals of a Class IV
Channel, shall be transmitted from a subscriber terminal except as required
to provide a service authorized by this franchise and the subscriber.
Franchisee and any other person shall neither initiate nor use any procedure
or device for procuring or storing information or data from a subscriber's
terminals or terminal by any means, without the prior authorization of the
affected subscriber which shall not have been obtained from the subscriber as
a condition of service. The request for such authorization shall be contained
in a separate document and identify the purpose for which the data or
information is being gathered or stored. After the first year of the
authorization's initial signing, franchisee shall, for each year the
authorization is in effect without revocation, mail a notice to each
authorizing subscriber informing him or her of his right to revoke the
authorization. The authorization shall be revocable at any time by the
subscriber without penalty of any kind whatsoever. A separate authorization
shall be required for each type or classification of data or information
sought from a subscriber terminal.



            2.   Franchisee shall not, without the written
authorization of the affected subscriber, provide to anyone data identifying
or designating any subscriber. Any data authorized shall be made available
upon request by and without charge to the authorizing subscriber in
understandable fashion, including specification of the purpose for which the
information is being gathered and to whom and for what fee the information is
to be sold.



            3.   Franchisee shall not tap or monitor, arrange
for the tapping or monitoring, or permit any other person to tap or monitor,
any cable, line, signal input device, or subscriber outlet or receiver for
any purpose whatsoever, without the prior written authorization of the
affected subscriber as required by division (g)(1).



            4.   Nothing herein contained shall prohibit
franchisee from verifying system operation and the transmission of signals to
an affected subscriber or from monitoring for the purpose of billing.



         (h)   Rates.  Subscriber charges.



            1.   Definitions.



               For the purpose of this subdivision the
following terms shall have the meanings stated as follows.



               BASIC SERVICE.  That package of broadcast
channels available to all subscribers. The package shall include a minimum of
18 broad-cast channels, including: one channel for each of the major
networks, one channel for an independent network, the local TV channel for
public educational television, one governmental public access channel and the
other cable casting filled channels to be at the franchisee's discretion,
with the reservation that if public access for public access broadcasting is
necessary one of these channels could be pre-empted. Initially only 2 pay
channels shall be allowed, for additional channels the franchisee shall
demonstrate the need to the City Council.



               MULTI-RATE SUBSCRIBERS.  All institutional
subscribers, all multiple outlet commercial subscribers, and any residential
subscribers who receive a single bill for multiple dwelling units. This may
include trailer parks, college dormitories, apartment complexes, senior
citizen complexes, schools, hospitals, nursing homes, hotels and motels.



               RESIDENTIAL SUBSCRIBER.  All subscribers who
are billed for cable service to a single dwelling unit. This shall include
single family homes, double bungalows, three and four plexes or any
multi-family units which can be billed in this manner.



               SINGLE OUTLET COMMERCIAL SUBSCRIBERS.  A
commercial subscriber that uses cable broadcasting in conjunction with their
business or commercial enterprise. Prime examples would be bars, restaurants,
TV or radio stores, however, also included would be other commercial or
business enterprises that use television as a communication source within
their business area, be that for news or entertainment value but still
primarily within the commercial area.



            2.   Residential subscribers.  The franchisee has
established and shall continue to adhere to the following schedule of charges
for residential subscribers.



 



Basic Service Charge
 
$8/per month


 
$9/per month with converter


Installation Charge
 
$15/per existing


 
$20/per new


Additional Outlets
 
$1.50/per first


 
$1.00/per each additional


Converter Deposit
 
Up to $20


Delinquent Payment Penalty
 
$5.00




 



            3.   Single outlet commercial subscribers.  The
franchisee has established and shall adhere to the following schedule of
charges for single outlet subscribers:



 

Basic Service Charge
 
$11.50/per month


Installation Charge
 
Cost Basis



 



            4.   Multi-rate subscribers.  The basic service
charge for multi-rate subscribers shall be $11.50/per month for the first
unit and an additional charge for each subsequent unit which will be
negotiated by the franchisee and the subscriber. The franchisee and the
subscriber will also negotiate installation and additional outlet charges.
This section will not force apartment owners to supply this service but will
allow them the flexibility to have the apartment unit placed under a
multi-rate subscribers section. Upon request of the franchisor, the
franchisee will submit a list of the multi-rate customers within the city,
indicating the average monthly service charge of each subsequent unit.



            5.   The procedure for changing the charge for
basic services is as follows:



               a.   Sixty days prior to the date that a
proposed impending increase in the basic service charge will take effect, the
franchisee shall notify the city, in writing, publish legal notice of a
proposed charge increase in the official newspaper for three consecutive days
and notify, in writing, all affected subscribers.



               b.   The city may instruct the advisory
Board to conduct a public hearing if the proposed increase:



                  i.   Is within 12 months of the most
recent increase;



                  ii.   Would exceed 5% of the present
basic rate;



                  iii.   Or 5% of the affected
subscribers have petitioned for a hearing concerning the proposed increase.
The Advisory Board shall then make. recommendations concerning the proposed
increase to the respective City Councils. The City Councils shall then have
the total authority to accept, reject, or modify the proposed rates requested
by the franchisee.



               c.   In cases where no hearing is required,
the City Council shall adopt the revised charges at the last possible Council
meeting prior to the effective date of the increase.



            6.   The franchisee shall establish a schedule of
charges for optional subscriber services; such as paid TV, optional TV
channels, sports networks, and the like. The franchisee shall file with the
City Clerk a schedule of current operational subscriber service charges for
all charges in effect. There shall be a limit on the number of pay options
approved by the respective Councils. Initial options shall allow a 2 pay
levels only beyond basic service.



            7.   No contract with a residential subscriber may
exceed 12 months. All billing shall be monthly, payable within 30 calendar
days.



            8.   Nothing stated herein shall be construed to
limit the mini-mum rate of subscriber contracts with commercial subscribers.



            9.   There will be no decrease in the quality of
service from what is required as the effective date of this franchise unless
reduction is required in order for the Franchisee to comply with rules and
regulations of the FCC or the State Cable Board or is first approved by the
respective City Councils.



            10.   No increase in the charges specified in
divisions (h)(2), (3), and (4) above shall be made except by amendments of
this section.



         (i)   Channel designations.



            In order to give the franchisee as much flexibility
as possible, it is the intention of the enabling bodies to allow the
franchisee to designate all channels within his or her system as long as
these designating channels are strictly within the rules and regulations of
both the Federal Communications Board and the State Communications Board
rules and regulations. However, it must be remembered, along these lines, it
is expected that one public access channel specifically the government
channel must be designated and kept in a priority state for whatever purposes
the government entities would deem necessary. All other public access
channels, again, can be used in conjunction with other cable casting users
but public access time must be made available when programming is brought on
line.



         (j)   Channel capacity.



            The franchisee shall initially provide and thereafter
maintain a subscriber network having at least a forward capacity of 22 video
channels, plus the FM audio band of 20 FM offset radio channels, and a
possible reverse capacity of 4 video channels within 6 months of the
effective date of the franchise. It is understood that it may be required
that within 60 months of the effective date of the franchise the system may
be expanded to a 54 channel system. Due to the state of the art of the
communications industry, there is the possibility of substantial additional
channels being added in the next 5 to 10 year period. Therefore, the cable
board will review the channel capacity requirements necessary on the 5 year
anniversary date of the effective date of the agreement and therefore the
system shall be capable of increasing its channel capacity as technology
permits and needs arise.



         (k)   Public access requirements.



            1.   Franchisee will carry broadcast stations in
accordance with this section as from time to time revised.



            2.    Franchisee will provide an audio emergency
alert override system that will permit the initial interruption by city of
all audio (including FM) and video programming.



            3.   Franchisee shall provide at least 4 channels
for access use (including one for each of the following uses: public,
governmental, educational network, and others). All residential subscribers
who receive all or any part of the total services offered on the system shall
also receive all of the 4 access channels at no additional charge. These
channels shall be activated upon system need and thereafter be maintained.
Franchisee shall establish rules and regulations prior to system activation
for the use of access channels which shall be approved by city before
implementation and thereafter shall not be altered or amended without
approval of city. In preparing such rules:



               a.   Franchisee shall provide an equal
opportunity for use of access services.



               b.   Franchisee will consider needs
assessments prepared by city.



               c.   Franchisee shall develop a plan to
allocate to city a reasonable use and fair schedule of channel time, use of
equipment and facilities so that it can receive programming unique to its
needs.



               d.   Franchisee will comply, at a minimum,
with the requirements of city and the Board now or hereafter adopted or
determined by city or the Board regarding access channels. Such requirements
of the Board are hereby made a part of this section and include the following:



                  i.   Franchisee shall, to the extent
of the system’s available channel capacity, provide to each of its
subscribers who receive all or any part of the total services offered on the
system, reception on at least one specially designated non-commercial public
access channel available for use by the general public on a first come,
non-discriminatory basis; at least one specially designated access channel
for use by local educational authorities; at least one specially designated
access channel available for local government use; and at least one specially
designated access channel available for lease on a first come,
non-discriminatory basis by commercial and non-commercial users (hereinafter
the "access channels"). Subscribers receiving only alarm system services or
only data transmission services for computer operated functions shall be
exempt from this requirement. The VHF spectrum shall be used for at least one
of the specially designated non-commercial public access channels required.
No charges shall be made for channel time or playback of prerecorded
programming on at least one of the specially designated non-commercial public
access channels. However, personnel, equipment and production costs may be
assessed for live studio presentation exceeding five minutes in length.
Charges for such production costs and any fees for use of other public access
channels shall be consistent with the goal of affording the public a low cost
means of television access. Access facilities, equipment and/or channel time
will be made available to the general public, any group or individual
resident in city for the production and/or cablecasting of non-commercial
programming free of charge on a first come, non-discriminatory basis.



                  ii.   Whenever any of the access
channels are in use during 80% of the weekdays (Monday through Friday), for
80% of the time during any consecutive 3 hour period for 6 weeks running, and
there is demand for use of an additional channel for the same purpose,
franchisee shall then have 6 months in which to provide a new specially
designated access channel for the same purpose at no additional cost to
subscribers.



                  iii.   The rules and regulations
established by the franchisee and approved by city governing the access
channels shall be filed with the Board within 90 days after any such channels
are put into use.



                  iv.   Subscribers receiving programs
on one or more special service channels without also receiving the regular
subscriber services may receive only one specially designated composite
access channel composed of the programming on access channels. Subscribers
receiving only alarm system services or only data transmission services for
computer operated functions shall not be included in this requirement.



                  v.   The franchisee shall comply at a
minimum, with the requirements of city and Board, now or hereafter adopted by
city or Board regarding public use of its equipment, including the following:



                     a.   Franchisee shall donate for
public use at least minimal equipment necessary for the production of
programming and playback of pre-recorded programs for the specially
designated non-commercial public access channel and the minimum equipment
necessary to make it possible to record programs at remote locations with
battery operated portable equipment. The franchisee shall also donate, upon
need being shown, all items listed in equipment appendix, by the City Council.



                     b.   Need within the meaning of
this paragraph shall be determined in the sole discretion of city or by
subscriber petition. The petition must contain the signatures of at least 10%
of the subscribers of the system, but in no case more than 500 nor fewer than
100 signatures.



                  vi.   Service to public buildings and
educational institutions.



                     a.   Upon demonstration or
determination of need, the franchisee shall provide, at a minimum, subscriber
and institutional network service to all publicly owned buildings, in city
(City Hall, police department fire department, schools, libraries, and the
like), all educational institutions in city, and all buildings now or
hereafter wholly or partially owned or leased by school districts or
educational institutions in city, the cost of which shall be negotiated.



                     b.   Need for either or both of
such network services as referred to in the offering shall be determined in
the sole discretion of city.



                  vii.   Public access authority.



                     a.   When the need is determined
by the Advisory Board it is hereby designated that the organization given
authority to operate the public access channels for the good of the public
shall be known as the Cable TV Public Access Authority (hereafter known as
the "Authority"). The Authority shall have a charter adopted after review and
authorization by the cable TV board and then total review and a resolution
passed by each of the City Councils involved in the cable franchise system.



                     b.   All rules and regulations
adopted by the Authority shall be subject to the approval of the Advisory
Board.



                     c.   The annual budget to be
adopted by the Authority will be reviewed and approved by the Advisory Board.



                     d.   There shall be 1 board
member sitting on the Authority's Board of Directors acting as an ex officio
member for liaison and communication between the Public Access Authority and
the Cable Advisory Board.



         (l)   Franchise fee.



             1.   As per the Federal Communication
Commission's rules and regulations, all franchise systems can assess a 3%
franchise fee. Throughout the term of this franchise, franchisee will pay to
city, within 60 days after the end of each fiscal year of franchise, an
annual fee of 3% of all gross revenues. Franchisee agrees to support any
waiver required by the FCC for established franchise fee. The annual fee may
be subject to renegotiation at such time as federal or state authorities no
longer regulate the amount of the fee, but in no event shall the renegotiated
fee be less than 3%. It is understood that the cost of this franchise fee may
be passed on to the consumer.



            2.   Payment will be made to city with an
itemization of the gross revenues derived from the services in city.



            3.   It is the intention of the enabling bodies to
use a major portion of this 3% franchise fee specifically for public access
cablecasting. This fee may specifically be placed in a designated fund for
this purpose and may be used both for providing a source of funds for any
coordination of the cablecasting and additional moneys that may be necessary
because of these cablecasting operations.



         (m)   Complaints and repairs.



            1.   For the purposes of interpreting this
subdivision, the term COMPLAINT shall mean an accusation, stipulated in
writing, that the franchisee has failed to provide proper service or in some
other way violated this franchise, including, but not limited to, service
received, signal quality, equipment malfunction and billing disputes. Initial
requests for service and inquiries relating to temporary service outages
shall not constitute a complaint.



            2.   If the franchisee should expand the service
area into locations outside of the local telephone system, he or she shall
provide a collect-call telephone number for the purpose of complaints from
subscribers in those areas.



            3.   The franchisee shall keep a maintenance and
repair system log indicating:



               a.   The nature of each complaint by the
franchisor, subscriber, or other citizen.



               b.   The date and time the complaint was
received.



               c.   The disposition of the complaint and
the time and date of disposition.



               The log shall be made available for periodic
inspections by the city. All complaint entries to the log shall be kept on
file for a period of 3 years.



            4.   The franchisee shall investigate all
complaints as soon as possible and shall rectify the cause of the complaint
if reasonably possible. Twenty-four hours shall generally be accepted as a
reasonable amount of time within which to initiate investigations of
complaints. If the complaint is received on a Saturday, then the
investigation should be initiated on the following Monday.



            5.   If a subscriber or citizen complaint cannot
be resolved, the complainant may then file the complaint with the city. The
City Administrator shall attempt to resolve the complaint. If the complaint
remains unresolved, the complainant may present it to the City Council for a
decision. The franchisee or the complainant may appeal a decision of the City
Council to the Board, in accordance to Board rules governing subscriber
complaints.



            6.   The Advisory Board shall hold a public
meeting in October of each year for the purpose of reviewing complaints.
Legal notice of this meeting shall be published not less than 10 days prior
to the date of the meeting.



            7.   The franchisee shall maintain a repair
service capable or responding to subscriber complaints or requests for
service within 24 hours after receipt of the complaint or request for service.



            8.   Whenever it is necessary to shut off or
interrupt services for the purpose of making repairs, adjustments, or
installation, the franchisee shall attempt to do so during periods of minimum
use of the system by subscribers. Unless such interruption is unforeseen and
immediately necessary, the franchisee shall give reasonable notice thereof to
the subscribers affected. All costs incurred in making such repairs,
adjustments, or installations shall be borne by the franchisee unless
otherwise provided for in the franchise or subscriber contract.



         (n)   Construction of system.



            1.   Permission for the franchisee to construct
cable communication systems within the city is hereby authorized, provided
that the franchisee has given the city reasonable notice of the proposed
construction thereof, so as to coordinate all work between the city and the
franchisee.



            2.   The franchisee shall not open or disturb the
surface of any street, sidewalk, driveway or public place for any purpose
without first having obtained a permit to do so from the City Council, for
which permit the city may impose a reasonable fee to be paid by the
franchisee. The lines, conduits, cables and other property placed in the
streets and public places pursuant to such permit shall be located in the
streets, or portions of the streets and public places as shall be determined
by the City Council. The franchisee shall, upon completion of any work
requiring the opening of any street or public place, restore the same,
including the paving and its foundations, to as good a condition as formerly,
and in a manner and quality approved by the City Council, and shall exercise
reasonable care to maintain the same thereafter in good condition. Such work
shall be performed with due diligence and if the franchisee shall fail to
perform the work promptly, to remove all dirt and rubbish and to put the
street or public place back in good condition,. the city shall have the right
to put the street or public place back into good condition, at the expense of
the franchisee and the franchisee shall, upon demand, pay to the city, cost
of such work done or performed by the city together with an additional sum as
liquidated damages to be determined by the city.



            3.   All wires, conduits, cables and other
property and facilities of the facilities of the franchisee shall be so
located, constructed, installed and maintained as not to endanger or
unnecessarily interfere with the usual and customary trade, traffic and
travel upon the streets and public places of the city. The franchisee shall
keep and maintain all of its property in good condition, order and re-pair,
so that the same shall not menace or endanger the life or property of any
person. The city shall have the right to inspect and examine at any
reasonable time and upon reasonable notice the property owned or used, in
part or in whole, by the franchisee. The franchisee shall keep accurate maps
and records of all its facilities and furnish copies of such maps and records
as requested by the city.



            4.   All wires, cables, amplifiers and other
property of the franchisee shall be constructed and installed in an orderly
and workmanlike manner. All cables and wires shall be installed parallel with
existing telephone and electric wires whenever possible. Multiple cable
configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled, with due respect
for engineering considerations.



            5.   All construction, installation, maintenance
and operation of any cable communications system or any facilities employed
in connection therewith shall be in compliance with the provisions of the
National Electrical Safety Code as prepared by the National Bureau of
Standards, the National Electrical Code of the National Board of Fire
Underwriters, the Bell Telephone System's Code of Pole Line Construction, any
standards issued by the Federal Communications Commission or other federal or
state regulatory agencies in relation thereto, and local zoning regulations.
In any event, shall be so designed, constructed, installed, maintained and
operated as not to endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or
property in the city.



            6.   Whenever the city shall undertake any public
improvement which affects cable communications equipment, it shall, with due
regard to reasonable working conditions, direct the franchisee to remove or
relocate its wires, conduits, cables and other property located in said
street, right of way, or public place. The franchisee shall relocate or
protect its facilities at its own expense. The city shall give the franchisee
reasonable notice of the under-taking of public improvements which affect the
franchisee's cable communications equipment.



         (o)   Certificate of confirmation.



            The franchise shall cease to be of any force and
effect if the franchisee fails to obtain either a regular certificate of
confirmation or renewal of a certificate of confirmation from the Board,
provided however, that the franchisee may operate his cable communications
system while the Board is considering the application for the renewal of his
or her certificate of confirmation.



         (p)   Transferability.



            No sale, assignment, or lease of this franchise shall
be effective until the city shall have approved the same and the vendee,
assignee, or lessee shall have filed in the office of the City Clerk an
instrument duly executed reciting the fact of the sale, assignment, or lease,
accepting the terms of this permit and agreeing to perform all conditions
thereof.



         (q)   Franchise terms.



            1.   The franchise will expire December 31, 1997.



            2.   Any renewal of this franchise shall not be
for a period of more than 15 years or the greatest number of years the state
or federal government will allow.



            3.   Renegotiation of any or all of the terms of
the franchise may occur at such times as may be mutually agreed upon by the
franchisor and the franchisee. Prior to December 31, 1987, and December 31,
1992, the franchisor shall conduct a complete evaluation of the performance
of the Franchisee. Based on this evaluation and for due cause, the franchisor
reserves the right to renegotiate the following subdivisions of the franchise
at these times: subscriber charges, complaints and repairs, channel capacity
and two-way capability. A complete renegotiation of the con-tract shall occur
at least at the end of the franchise term, unless the franchisor determines
not to reissue the franchise to the franchisee or desires to consider
additional applications for the franchise. At the city's discretion it may be
possible for the city to purchase the total system or a portion of the system
to be used for city operation.



            4.   Franchisee may apply for renewal of this
franchise not earlier than 18 months prior to the expiration of this
franchise on forms provided by city. The renegotiation period shall commence
not less than 12 months before the expiration of the franchise term.



            5.   Franchisee may be approved, and this
franchise or modification to it may be renewed or extended, by City, in
accordance with the then existing rules of the FCC, the Board, the City and
all other applicable laws, ordinances, rules or regulations.



            6.   Nothing in this franchise shall be construed
to require renewal or extension of this franchise.



            7.   City shall conduct an investigation and
evaluation of the franchisee and the system and the renewal proposal. This
investigation and evaluation shall be completed by city within 6 months after
receipt of the application and determination by city of its completeness.



         (r)   Equipment appendix.



            1.   Equipment selection for the Public Access
facility:



               a.   Equipment acquisitions or purchases
will be accomplished in stages.



               b.   Movement to the next stage will be
predicated on the amount of use the facility received in the preceding stage.



            2.   The first stage will be operated with
equipment furnished by franchisee. Subsequent stages will require the
purchase of equipment from monies acquired through the franchise fee (50%)
and 50% from the franchisee. (Except for the first year, when the franchisee
will be responsible for the first $5,000 of purchase.)



               a.   First stage.



                  i.   2 - 3 B/W video cameras.



                  ii.   1 - 3/4 Umatic video recorder.



                  iii.   1 - 1" Sony video recorder.



                  iv.   1 - portapak recorder w/color
camera.



                  v.   1 - color monitor 13".



                  vi.   1 - modulator.



                  vii.   2 - microphones EV635A.



                  viii.   1 set - portable lights.



                  ix.   1 - FM tuner w/pre amp.



                  x.   2 - tripods.



                  xi.   Device for converting 35 mm film
to video.



                  xii.   Interconnect equipment $600.



               b.   If sufficient use of the facility is
realized (by the pre-set standards), proceed to the next stage.



               c.   If usage dictates that the facility
showed considerable use, in the next stage a full color studio will replace
the B/W cameras furnished in the first stage. The cameras should be of the
medium to low cost variety. It is not felt that any professional or broadcast
quality equipment would be warranted due to the "amateur" use of the
equipment.



               d.   Second stage.



 

1
 
Portapak Recorder w/Color Camera
 
$2,000


1
 
Switcher (SEG)
 
$3,600


2
 
Color Cameras (example: Panasonic 3900)
 
$12,000


1
 
3/4 Umatic Video Recorder
 
$1,900


4-5
 
B/W 9" Monitors
 
$1,000


1
 
Audio Mixer
 
$1,000



 



 

 
Additional Lighting
 
$400


 
Misc. Studio Equipment
 
$3,000


 
Editing Equipment - 3/4 Umatic
 
$17,000



 



(Franchise 16, passed 9-8-1981)



      (2)   Ordinance No. 69, Third Series.



         (a)   An ordinance of the City of North Mankato,
Minnesota, amending the North Mankato City Code, chapter 3, entitled
"MUNICIPAL AND PUBLIC UTILITIES, RULES AND REGULATIONS, FRANCHISES AND RATES"
by modifying certain portions of the "CABLE TV FRANCHISE ORDINANCE FOR TV
SIGNAL COMPANY" as it relates to cable system capacity.



         (b)   The City Council of the City of North Mankato,
Minnesota, ordains:



            1.   The North Mankato City Code, Section 3.60,
Subdivision (F)(1)(h)(6) is hereby amended to read:



               a.   Subdivision (F)(1)(h)(6). The
franchisee shall establish a schedule of changes for optional subscriber
services: such as pay TV, optional TV channels and sports networks, and the
like. The franchisee shall file with the City Clerk a schedule of current
operational subscriber service charges for all charges in effect. There shall
be a limit on the number of pay options approved by the respective Councils.
Options shall allow for 4 pay channels plus one pay-for-view channel only
beyond basic service.



            2.   The North Mankato City Code, Section 3.60,
Subdivision (F)(1)(j), Channel Capacity, is hereby amended to read:



               a.   Subdivision (j). Channel Capacity. The
franchisee shall provide and hereafter maintain a subscriber network of
having at least a forward capacity of 35 video channels, plus the FM audio
band of 20 FM off-set or on-set radio channels, and a possible reverse
capacity of 4 video channels within 12 months of the effective date of this
amendment. It is understood that it may be required that within 60 months of
the effective date of this amendment, the system may be expanded to a 54
channel system. Due to the state of the art of the communications industry,
there is a possibility of substantial additional channels being added within
the next 5 to 10 year period. Therefore, the Cable Board will review the
channel capacity requirements necessary on the 5 year anniversary date of the
effective date of this amendment, and, therefore, the system shall be capable
of increasing its channel capacity as technology permits and needs arise.



(Franchise 69, passed - )



      (3)   Ordinance No. 106, Third Series.



         (a)   An ordinance granting Minnegasco, Inc., a
Minnesota corporation, its successors and assigns, a nonexclusive franchise
to construct, operate, repair and maintain facilities and equipment for the
transportation, distribution, manufacture and sale of gas energy for public
and private use and to use the public ground of the City of North Mankato,
Minnesota for such purposes; and prescribing certain terms and conditions
thereof.



         (b)   The City Council of North Mankato ordains:



            1.   Definitions.  The following terms shall mean:



               COMPANY.  Minnegasco, Inc., a Minnesota
corporation, its successors and assigns.



               GAS.  Natural gas, manufactured gas, mixture
of natural gas and manufactured gas or other forms of gas energy.



               MUNICIPALITY, MUNICIPAL COUNCIL, MUNICIPAL
CLERK.  These terms mean respectively, the City of North Mankato, the
Council of the City of North Mankato and the Clerk of the City of North
Mankato.



               PUBLIC GROUND.  All streets, alleys, public
ways, utility easements and public grounds of the Municipality as to which it
has the right to grant the use to the Company.



            2.   Franchise generally.



               a.   Grant of franchise. There is hereby
granted to the Company, for a period of 20 years, the right to import,
manufacture, transport, distribute and sell gas for public and private use in
the municipality, and for these purposes to construct, operate, repair and
maintain in, on, over, under and across the public ground of the
municipality, all facilities and equipment used in connection therewith, and
to do all things which are necessary or customary in the accomplishment of
these objectives, subject to zoning ordinances, other applicable ordinances,
permit procedures, customary practices, and the provisions of this franchise.



               b.   Effective date; written acceptance. 
This franchise shall be in force and effect from and after its passage and
publication as required by law, and its acceptance by the company in writing
filed with the Municipal Clerk within 60 days after publication.



               c.   Nonexclusive franchise.  This is not
an exclusive franchise.



               d.   Publication expense. The expense of
publication of this ordinance shall be paid by the Company.



               e.   Default.



                  i.   If the company is in default in
the performance of any material part of this franchise for more than 90 days
after receiving written notice from the municipality of such default, the
Municipal Council may, by ordinance, terminate all rights granted hereunder
to the company. The notice of default shall be in writing and shall specify
the provisions of this franchise under which the default is claimed and state
the basis therefor. Such notice shall be served on the company by personally
delivering the notice to an officer thereof at its principal place of
business in Minnesota.



                  ii.   If the company is in default as
to any part of this franchise, the municipality may, after reasonable notice
to the company and the failure of the company to cure the default within a
reasonable time, take such action as may be reasonably necessary to abate the
condition caused by the default, and the company agrees to reimburse the
municipality for all its reasonable costs.



                  iii.   Nothing in this section shall
bar the company from challenging the municipality's claim that a default has
occurred. In the event of disagreement over the existence of a default, the
burden of proving the default shall be on the municipality.



            3.   Conditions of use.



               a.   Use of public ground.  All utility
facilities and equipment of the company shall be located, constructed,
installed and maintained so as not to endanger or unnecessarily interfere
with the usual and customary traffic, travel, and use of public ground, and
shall be subject to those permit conditions the municipality has adopted for
all utilities.



               b.   Restoration.  Upon completion of any
work requiring the opening of any public ground, the company shall restore
the same, including paving and its foundations, to as good condition as
formerly, insofar as reasonably possible. The restoration shall be completed
as promptly as weather permits, but if the company shall not promptly perform
and complete the work, the municipality shall have the right to do so at the
expense of the company; and the company shall, upon demand, pay to the
municipality the reasonable cost of the work performed by the municipality.



               c.   Relocation of utility facilities.



                  i.   The company shall promptly, with
due regard for seasonal working conditions, permanently relocate its
facilities or equipment whenever the municipality orders such relocation. If
the relocation is for the sole benefit of the municipality in the furtherance
of a public purpose, the company shall relocate at its own expense. If the
relocation is not a result of the furtherance of a public purpose, the
relocation shall be at the expense of the municipality. If such relocation is
done without an agreement first being made as to who shall pay the relocation
cost, such relocation of the facilities by the company shall not be construed
as a waiver of its right to be reimbursed for the relocation cost. If the
company claims that it should be reimbursed for such relocation costs, it
shall notify the municipality within 30 days after receipt of such order. The
municipality shall give the company reasonable notice of plans requiring such
relocation.



                  ii.   Nothing contained in this
subsection shall require the company to remove and replace its mains or to
cut and reconnect its service pipe running from the main to a customer's
premises at its own expense where the removal and replacement or cutting and
reconnecting is made for the purpose of a more expeditious operation for the
construction or reconstruction of underground facilities; nor, shall anything
contained herein relieve any person from liability arising out of the failure
to exercise reasonable care to avoid damaging the company's facilities while
performing any work in any public ground.



               d.   Relocation when public ground
vacated.  If gas facilities or equipment are in place, the vacation of any
public ground shall not operate to deprive the company of the right to
operate and maintain its facilities therein. However, if the municipality
desires that such facilities or equipment be relocated, then the provisions
of division (b)(3)(c) above shall be controlling.



               e.   Street improvements, paving or
resurfacing. The municipality shall give the company reasonable written
notice of plans for street improvements where paving or resurfacing of a
permanent nature is involved. The notice shall contain the nature and
character of the improvements, the streets upon which the improvements are to
be made, the extent of the improvements and the time when the municipality
will start the work, and, if more than one street is involved, the order in
which this work is to proceed. The notice shall be given to the company a
sufficient length of time, considering seasonable working conditions, in
advance of the actual commencement of the work to permit the company to make
any additions, alterations or repairs to its facilities the company deems
necessary. The cost of making additions shall be paid in accordance with
Minnegasco's tariff or the rules and regulations established by the Minnesota
Public Utilities Commission. The cost of alterations or repairs shall be done
at the company's own expense.



            4.   Indemnification.



               a.   The company shall indemnify, keep and
hold the municipality, its elected officials, officers, employees, and agents
free and harmless from any and all claims and actions on account of injury or
death of persons or damage to property occasioned by the construction,
maintenance, repair, removal, or operation of the company s property located
in, on, over, under, or across the public ground of the municipality, unless
such injury or damage is the result of the negligence of an affirmative
physical act negligently performed by the municipality, its elected
officials, employees, officers, or agents. The municipality shall not be
entitled to reimbursement for its costs incurred prior to notification to the
company of claims or actions and a reasonable opportunity for the company to
accept and undertake the defense.



               b.   If a claim or action shall be brought
against the municipality under circumstances where indemnification applies,
the company, at its sole cost and expense, shall defend the municipality if
written notice of the claim or action is promptly given to the company within
a period wherein the company is not prejudiced by lack of such notice. The
company shall have complete control of such claim or action, but it may not
settle without the consent of the municipality, which shall not be
unreasonably withheld. This section is not, as to third parties, a waiver of
any defense or immunity otherwise available to the municipality, and the
company in defending any action on behalf of the municipality shall be
entitled to assert every defense or immunity that the municipality could
assert in its own behalf.



            5.   Assignment.  The company, upon notice to the
municipality shall have the right and authority to assign all rights
conferred upon it by this franchise to any person. The assignee of such
rights, by accepting such assignment, shall become subject to the terms and
provisions of this franchise.



            6.   Change in form of government.  Any change in
the form of government of the municipality shall not affect the validity of
this franchise. Any governmental unit succeeding the municipality shall,
without the consent of the company, automatically succeed to all of the
rights and obligations of the municipality provided in this franchise.



            7.   Severability.  If any portion of this
franchise is found to be invalid for any reason whatsoever, the validity of
the rest of this franchise shall not be affected.



            8.   Notices.  Any notice required by this
franchise shall be sufficient if, in any case of notice to the Company, it is
delivered to Minnegasco, Inc., attention Vice President, Minnesota Operations
Division, 201 South Seventh Street, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55402; and, in the
case of the municipality, it is delivered to:



(Franchise 106, passed 6-5-1989)



      (4)   Ordinance No. 128, Third Series



         (a)   An ordinance of the City of North Mankato,
Minnesota, amending Section 3.40 of the North Mankato City Code, entitled
"Franchise - Blue Earth-Nicollet Cooperative Electric Association" and
Section 3.41 entitled "Franchise - Northern States Power Company", by
extending the term of the same.



         (b)   The City Council of the City of North Mankato,
Minnesota, ordains:



            1.    North Mankato City Code, Section 3.40, is
amended by adding Subdivision 6, as follows:



               a.   Subd. 6. The term of this Section shall
be extended so as to expire effective September 23, 1993.



            2.   North Mankato City Code, Section 3.41, is
amended by adding Subdivision 6, as follows:



               a.   Subd. 6. The term of this Section shall
be extended so as to expire effective September 23, 1993.



(Franchise 128, passed 6-7-1993)



      (5)   Ordinance No. 131, Third Series



         (a)   An ordinance of the City of North Mankato,
Minnesota, amending Section 3.40 of the North Mankato City Code, entitled
"Franchise - Blue Earth-Nicollet Cooperative Electric Association" and
Section 3.41 entitled "Franchise - Northern States Power Company", by
extending the term of the same.



         (b)   The City Council of the City of North Mankato,
Minnesota, ordains:



            1.   North Mankato City Code, Section 3.40, is
amended by adding Subdivision 6, as follows:



               a.   Subd. 6. The term of this Section shall
be extended so as to expire effective December 23, 1993.



            2.   North Mankato City Code, Section 3.41, is
amended by adding Subdivision 6, as follows:



               a.   Subd. 6. The term of this Section shall
be extended so as to expire effective December 23, 1993.



(Franchise 131, passed 9-20-1993)



      (6)   Electric Franchise Ordinance No. 140



         (a)   An ordinance granting to Northern States Power
Company, a Minnesota corporation, its successors and assigns, permission to
construct, operate, repair and maintain in the city of North Mankato,
Minnesota, an electric distribution system and transmission lines, including
necessary poles, lines, fixtures and appurtenances, for the furnishing of
electric energy to the city, its inhabitants, and others, and to use the
public ways and public grounds of the city for such purposes.



         (b)   The City Council of the City of North Mankato,
Nicollet County, Minnesota, does ordain:



            1.   Definitions.



               CITY.  The City of North Mankato, County of
Nicollet, State of Minnesota.



               CITY UTILITY SYSTEM.  The facilities used for
providing sewer, water, or any other public utility service owned or operated
by city or agency thereof.



               COMPANY.  Northern States Power Company, a
Minnesota corporation, its successors and assigns.



               ELECTRIC FACILITIES.  Electric transmission
and distribution towers, poles, lines, guys, anchors, conduits, fixtures, and
necessary appurtenances owned or operated by the company for the purpose of
providing electric energy for public use.



               NOTICE.  A writing served by any party or
parties on any other party or parties. Notice to the Company shall be mailed
to the manager thereof at 210 Lime Street, P.O. Box 1090, Mankato, Minnesota
56002-1090. Notice to the city shall be mailed to the City Clerk, City Hall,
P.O. Box 2055, 1001 Belgrade Avenue, North Mankato, MN 56003. Each party may
change its respective address for the purpose of this ordinance by providing
written notice to the other party.



               PUBLIC GROUND.  Land owned by the city for
park, open space or similar purpose, which is held for use in common by the
public.



               PUBLIC WAY.  Any street, alley, or other
public right-of-way within the city.



            2.   Franchise.



               a.   Grant of franchise. City hereby grants
company, for a period of 20 years, from and after April 1, 1994, the right to
transmit and furnish electric energy for light, heat, power and other
purposes for public and private use within and through the limits of the city
as its boundaries now exist or as they may be extended in the future. For
these purposes, company may construct, operate, repair and maintain electric
facilities in, on, over, under and across the public ways and public grounds
of city, subject to the provisions of this ordinance. Company may do all
reasonable things necessary or customary to accomplish these purposes,
subject, however, to zoning ordinances, other applicable ordinances, permit
procedures, and to the further provisions of this franchise.



               b.   Effective date written acceptance. This
franchise shall be in force and effect from and after its passage and its
acceptance by the company, and its publication as required by law and the
City Code. An acceptance by the company must be filed with the City Clerk
within 90 days after publication.



               c.   Service rates and area. The service to
be provided and rates to be charged by company for electric service in city
currently are subject to the jurisdiction of the Minnesota Public Utilities
Commission. The area within the city in which the company may provide
electric service currently is subject to the provisions of M.S. § 216B.40.



               d.   Publication expense. The expense of
publication of this ordinance shall be paid by the company.



               e.   Default. If either party asserts that
the party is in default in the performance of any obligation hereunder, the
complaining party shall notify the other party of the default and the desired
remedy. The notification shall be written. If the dispute is not resolved
with 30 days of the written notice, either party may commence an action in
District Court to interpret and enforce this franchise or for such other
relief as may be permitted by law or equity for breach of contract, or either
party may take any other action permitted by law.



               f.   Termination of franchise. The city in
granting this franchise does so with an objective of establishing a uniform
fee to be collected and paid to city by all energy suppliers using facilities
installed in city streets to provide electricity, gas or other energy service
for the purposes referenced in division (9)(d). At the current time, the
city's franchise with the local gas utility does not permit collection of a
franchise fee. The city intends to establish uniform franchise fees upon the
termination of such gas franchise on or about June 5, 2009. If the provisions
of this franchise frustrate this objective of the city, then the city may,
after at least 90 days prior written notice to company, terminate the
franchise hereby granted effective any date on or after May 31, 2009, unless
the company agrees to an amendment to this franchise reasonably requested by
the city to fulfill its uniform franchise fee objective.



            3.   Location, other regulations.



               a.   Location of facilities. Electric
facilities shall be located and constructed so as not to interfere with the
safety and convenience of ordinary travel along and over public ways and they
shall be located on public grounds as determined by the city. The company's
construction, reconstruction, operation, repair, maintenance and location of
electric facilities shall be subject to other reasonable regulations of the
city.



               b.   Field locations. The company shall
provide field locations for any of its underground electric facilities within
a reasonable period of time on request by the city. The period of time will
be considered reasonable if it compares favorably with the average time
required by the cities in the same county or adjacent counties to locate
municipal underground facilities for the company.



               c.   Street openings. The company shall not
open or disturb the paved surface of any public way or public ground for any
purpose without first having obtained permission from the city, for which the
city may impose a reasonable fee. Permit conditions imposed on the company
shall not be more burdensome than those imposed on other utilities for
similar facilities or work. The company may, however, open and disturb the
paved surface of any public way or public ground without permission from the
city where an emergency exists requiring the immediate repair of electric
facilities. In such event the company shall notify the city by telephone to
the office designated by the city before opening or disturbing a paved
surface of a public way or public ground. Not later than the second working
day thereafter, the company shall obtain any required permits and pay any
required fees.



               d.    Restoration. After undertaking any
work requiring the opening of any public way or public ground, the company
shall restore the same, including paving and its foundation, to as good
condition for two years thereafter. The work shall be completed as promptly
as weather permits, and if the company shall not promptly perform and
complete the work, remove all dirt, rubbish, equipment and material, and put
the public way or public ground in the said condition, the city shall have,
after demand to the company to cure and the passage of a reasonable period of
time following the demand, but not to exceed 5 days, the right to make the
restoration at the expense of the company. The company shall pay to the city
the cost of such work done or performed by the city, including its
administrative expense and overhead. This remedy shall be in addition to any
other remedy available to the city.



               e.   Shared use of poles. The company shall
make space available on its poles or towers for city fire, water utility,
police or other city facilities whenever such use will not interfere with the
use of such poles or towers by the company, by another electric utility, by a
telephone utility, or by any cable television company or other form of
communication company. In addition, the city shall pay for any added cost
incurred by the company because of such use by city.



            4.   Relocations.



               a.   Relocation of electric facilities in
public ways.  Except as provided in division (4)(c) below, if the city
determines to vacate for a city improvement project, or to grade, regrade, or
change the line of any public way, or construct or reconstruct any city
utility system in any public way, it may order the company to relocate its
electric facilities located therein. The company shall relocate its electric
facilities at its own expense. The city shall give the company reasonable
notice of plans to vacate for a city improvement project, or to grade,
regrade, or change the line of any public way or to construct or reconstruct
any city utility system. If a relocation is ordered within 5 years of a prior
relocation of the same electrical facilities, which was made at company
expense, the city shall reimburse company for non-betterment expenses on a
time and material basis, provided that if a subsequent relocation is required
because of the extension of a city utility system to a previously unserved
area, company may be required to make the subsequent relocation at its
expense. Nothing in this ordinance requires company to relocate, remove,
replace or reconnect at its own expense its facilities where such relocation,
removal, replacement or reconstruction is solely for the convenience of the
city and is not reasonably necessary for the construction or reconstruction
of a public way or city utility system or other city improvement.



               b.   Relocation of electric facilities in
public ground.  Except as may be provided in division (4)(c) below, city may
require the company to relocate or remove its electric facilities from public
ground upon a finding by city that the electric facilities have become or
will become a substantial impairment of the public use to which the public
ground is or will be put. The relocation or removal shall be at the company's
expense.



               c.   Projects with state or federal
funding.  Relocation, removal, or rearrangement of any company facilities
made necessary because of the extension into or through city of a federally
aided or state aided highway project shall be governed by the provisions of
M.S. § 161.46 as supplemented or amended. It is understood that the right
herein granted to company is a valuable right. city shall not order company
to remove, or relocate its facilities when a public way is vacated, improved
or realigned because of a renewal or a redevelopment plan which is
financially subsidized in whole or in part by the federal government or any
agency thereof, unless the reasonable non-betterment costs of such relocation
and the loss and expense resulting therefrom are first paid to company, but
the city need not pay those portions of such for which reimbursement to it is
not available.



               d.   No waiver by company.  The provisions
of division (4) apply only to electric facilities constructed in reliance on
a franchise and the company does not waive its right under an easement or
prescriptive right, or state or county permit.



               e.   Liability.  Nothing in this ordinance
relieves any person from liability arising out of the failure to exercise
reasonable care to avoid damaging electric facilities while performing any
activity.



            5.   Tree trimming.  The company may trim all
trees and shrubs in the public ways and public grounds of city interfering
with the proper construction, operation, repair and maintenance of any
electric facilities installed hereunder, provided that the company shall save
the city harmless from any liability arising therefrom, and subject to permit
or other reasonable regulation by the city.



            6.   Indemnification.



               a.   The company shall indemnify, keep and
hold the city free and harmless from any and all liability on account of
injury to persons or damage to property occasions by the construction,
maintenance, repair, inspection, the issuance of permits, or the operation of
the electric facilities located in the city. The city shall not be
indemnified for losses or claims occasioned through its own negligence except
for losses or claims arising out of or alleging the city's negligence as to
the issuance of permits for, or inspection of, the company's plans or work.
The city shall not be indemnified if the injury or damage results from the
performance in a proper manner of acts reasonably deemed hazardous by
company, and such performance is nevertheless ordered or directed by city
after notice of company's determination.



               b.   In the event a suit is brought against
the city under circumstances where this agreement to indemnify applies, the
company at its sole cost and expenses shall defend the city in such suit if
written notice thereof is promptly given to the company within a period
wherein the company is not prejudiced by lack of such notice. If the company
is required to indemnify and defend, it will thereafter have control of such
litigation, but the company may not settle such litigation without the
consent of the city, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. This
section is not, as to third parties, a waiver of any defense or immunity
otherwise available to the city; and the company, in defending any action on
behalf of the city shall be entitled to assert in any action every defense or
immunity that the city could assert in its own behalf.



            7.   Vacation of public ways.



               a.   The city shall give the company at
least 2 weeks' prior written notice of a proposed vacation of a public way.



               b.   Except where required for a city street
or other improvement projects, the vacation of any public way, after the
installation of electric facilities, shall not operate to deprive company of
its rights to operate and maintain such electrical facilities, until the
reasonable cost of relocating the same and the loss and expense resulting
from such relocation are first paid to company. In no case, however, shall
city be liable to the company for failure to specifically preserve a
right-of-way, under M.S. § 160.29.



            8.   Change in form of government.  Any change in
the form of government of the city shall not affect the validity of this
ordinance. Any governmental unit succeeding the city shall, without the
consent of the company, succeed to all of the rights and obligations of the
city provided in this ordinance.



            9.   Franchise fee.



               a.   Separate resolution.  During the term
of the franchise hereby granted, and in lieu of any permit or other fees
being imposed on the company, the city may impose on the company a franchise
fee of not more than 5% of the company's gross revenues as hereinafter
defined. The franchise fee may be imposed by a resolution duly adopted by the
City Council, which resolution shall not be adopted until at least 60 days
after written notice enclosing such proposed resolution has been served upon
the company by certified mail. The fee shall not become effective until at
least 60 days after written notice enclosing such adopted resolution has been
served upon the company by certified mail. Except as provided in division
(9)(e), division (2)(e) of this ordinance shall constitute the sole remedy
for solving disputes between the company and the city in regard to the
interpretation of, or enforcement of, the resolution. No action by the city
to implement a franchise fee by resolution will commence until this ordinance
is effective. Except as permitted in divisions (9)(e) and (f) herein, a
resolution which does not impose a uniform franchise fee on all revenues
within the definition of gross revenues shall not be effective against the
company.



               b.   Terms defined.  The term GROSS
REVENUES means all sums, excluding any surcharge or similar addition to the
company's charges to customers for the purpose of reimbursing the company for
the cost resulting from the franchise fee, received by the company from the
sale of electricity to its retail customers within the corporate limits of
the city.



               c.   Collection of fees.  The franchise fee
shall be payable not less often than quarterly and shall be based upon the
gross revenues of the company during complete billing months during the
period for which payment is to be made. The payments shall be due the last
business day of the month following the period for which the payment is made.
The percent fee may be changed by resolution from time to time; however, each
change shall meet the same notice requirements as described in division
(9)(a) and the percentage may not be changed more often than annually. Such
franchise fee shall not exceed any amount which the company may legally
charge to its customers prior to payment to the city by imposing a surcharge
equivalent to such franchise fee in its rates for electric service. The
company shall pay the city the franchise fee based upon amounts billed
subject to subsequent reductions to account for uncollectibles or customer
refunds. The time and manner of collecting the franchise fee is subject to
the approval of the Public Utilities Commission, which the company agrees to
use best efforts to obtain. The company agrees to make its gross revenue
records available for inspection by the city at reasonable times, upon
reasonable notice.



               d.   Condition of the fee. Except as
provided in divisions (9)(e) and (f) herein the resolution imposing the
franchise fee shall not be effective against the company unless it lawfully
imposes and the city quarterly or more often collects a fee or tax of the
same or greater percentage on the receipts from sales of energy within the
city by any other energy supplier, provided that, as to such a supplier, the
city has the authority to require a franchise fee or to impose a tax. The
franchise fee or tax shall be applicable to energy sales for any energy use
related to heating, cooling or lighting, as well as to the supply of energy
needed to run machinery and appliances on premises located within the city,
but shall not apply to energy sales for the purpose of providing fuel for
vehicles.



               e.   Protection from loss of customer. The
company has agreed to collect and pay any franchise fee imposed pursuant to
division (9), with the understanding that the imposition of such fee will not
solely cause a customer to cease or reduce its electric energy purchases from
the company by modifying equipment, or installing new equipment, to use a
form of energy (including electricity not purchased from the company) subject
to a lesser or no fee paid by the energy supplier to city. In the event, a
customer advises the company in writing that it does intend to modify its
equipment or install new equipment or to change to a different form of
energy, including energy not purchased from company, which is subject to a
lesser or no franchise fee, payable by the proposed new supplier, it is
agreed that the company will notify the city in writing of such customer
position. The parties shall make every effort to consider the needs of the
customer, and if the city agrees to an adjustment, the city shall by
resolution adjust the franchise fee which the city would impose on that
particular customer which adjustment may include either the elimination or
reduction of the franchise fee. If the parties cannot agree to a resolution
of the franchise fee respecting the complaining customer within 30 days of
the date of written notice to the city, the issue will be submitted to an
agreed and willing professional evaluator selected by the City Manager and
the company, who shall make a final and binding determination regarding the
question of whether the imposition of the franchise fee will solely cause a
customer to cease or reduce its electric energy purchases from the company by
modifying equipment or installing new equipment, to use a form of energy
(including electricity not purchased from the company) subject to a lesser or
no fee paid by the energy supplier to the city. The professional evaluator
based upon his determination of this issue, shall make a final and binding
determination regarding the imposition of the franchise fee to the particular
customer which determination may include the retention, elimination, or
reduction of the franchise fee to the customer. In the event the city and the
company cannot agree on an individual to serve as a professional evaluator,
then the provisions and disagreement shall be submitted to an arbitrator
chosen in accordance with the provisions and procedures of the American
Arbitration Association. The request for an arbitrator shall be made within
the aforementioned 30 day period. The arbitrator so chosen, shall have the
same authority as the professional evaluator would possess had the parties
agreed on the individual so chosen. Any adjustment in the franchise fee for
the customer, shall be retroactive to the date of the next regularly
scheduled billing date following the date of notice to the city of the
request for franchise fee adjustment and to the extent that a rebate is
determined, may be accomplished by the company with its next regularly
scheduled billing cycle after receipt of the decision of the evaluator or the
arbitrator. If any reduction in franchise fees occurs under this section, the
basis for the reduction will be reviewed annually to assure such reduction
continues to be warranted.



               f.   Exception for 1% Fee. Notwithstanding
other provisions of this section herein, the city may impose a franchise fee
not to exceed 1% of the company's gross revenues by a resolution meeting the
notice and other requirements of this section. Such resolution need only
impose the fee on sales of electric energy within the city and need not
impose a fee on sale of other suppliers of other forms of energy. Any
franchise fee imposed pursuant to this section is exclusive of and not in
addition to any other franchise fee imposed pursuant to division (9)(a).



            10.   Severability.  If any portion of this
franchise is found to be invalid for any reason whatsoever, the validity of
the remainder shall not be affected.



            11.   Consumer information.  The company shall
furnish to the city such consumer usage information, by class of consumer, as
may be requested by the city and permitted by law.



            12.   Amendment.  This ordinance may be amended
at any time by the city passing a subsequent ordinance declaring the
provisions of the amendment, which amendatory ordinance shall become
effective upon the filing of the company's written consent thereto with the
City Clerk within 90 days after the effective date of the amendatory
ordinance.



            13.   Previous franchises superseded.  This
franchise supersedes any previous electric franchise granted to the company
or its predecessor.



(Franchise 140, passed 4-18-1994)



      (7)   Electric Franchise Ordinance No. 141.



         (a)   An ordinance granting to Blue
Earth-Nicollet-Faribault cooperative electric association a/k/a
Frost-Benco-Wells Electric, a Minnesota electric cooperative association, its
successors and assigns, permission to construct, operate, repair and maintain
in the City of North Mankato, Minnesota, an electric distribution system and
transmission lines, including necessary poles, lines, fixtures and
appurtenances, for the furnishing of electric energy to the city, its
inhabitants, and others, and to use the public ways and public grounds of the
city for such purposes.



         (b)   The City Council of the City of North Mankato,
Nicollet County, Minnesota, does ordain:



            1.   Definitions.



               CITY.  The City of North Mankato, County of
Nicollet, State of Minnesota.



               CITY UTILITY SYSTEM.  The facilities used for
providing sewer, water, or any other public utility service owned or operated
by city or agency thereof.



               COOPERATIVE.  Frost-Benco-Wells Electric, a
Minnesota electric cooperative association, its successors and assigns.



               ELECTRIC FACILITIES.  Electric transmission
and distribution towers, poles, lines, guys, anchors, conduits, fixtures, and
necessary appurtenances owned or operated by the company for the purpose of
providing electric energy for public use.



               NOTICE.  A writing served by any party or
parties on any other party or parties. Notice to the Company shall be mailed
to the manager thereof at P.O. Box 8, Mankato, Minnesota 56002-0008. Notice
to the city shall be mailed to the City Clerk, City Hall, P.O. Box 2055, 1001
Belgrade Avenue, North Mankato, MN 56003. Each party may change its
respective address for the purpose of this ordinance by providing written
notice to the other party.



               PUBLIC GROUND.  Land owned by the city for
park, open space or similar purpose, which is held for use in common by the
public.



               PUBLIC WAY.  Any street, alley, or other
public right-of-way within the city.



            2.   Franchise.



               a.   Grant of franchise. City hereby grants
cooperative, for a period of 20 years, from and after April 1, 1994, the
right to transmit and furnish electric energy for light, heat, power and
other purposes for public and private use within and through the limits of
the city as its boundaries now exist or as they may be extended in the
future. For these purposes, cooperative may construct, operate, repair and
maintain electric facilities in, on, over, under and across the public ways
and public grounds of city, subject to the provisions of this ordinance.
Cooperative may do all reasonable things necessary or customary to accomplish
these purposes, subject, however, to zoning ordinances, other applicable
ordinances, permit procedures, and to the further provisions of this
franchise.



               b.   Effective date written acceptance. 
This franchise shall be in force and effect from and after its passage and
its acceptance by the cooperative, and its publication as required by law and
the City Code. An acceptance by the cooperative must be filed with the City
Clerk within 90 days after publication.



               c.   Service rates, standard and area
agreement.



                  i.   The service rates to be charged
by the cooperative for electric energy sold within the city limits shall be
reasonable rates consistent with the financial and economic requirements of
the cooperative to construct and maintain adequate facilities. to provide
reliable services. The cooperative' service rules and standard shall conform
to those standards consistently applied by other similarly non-regulated
rural cooperatives in the State of Minnesota. To the extent service standards
for electric service are or may be subject to the jurisdiction of the
Minnesota Public Utilities Commission, they shall be subject to the
conditions that the Commission may provide.



                  ii.   The cooperative shall have the
exclusive right to provide electric service at retail to each and ever
present and future customer in its assigned service area within the
boundaries of the city as may be determined from time to time by the Public
Utilities Commission after notice and hearing as provided in M.S. Chap.
216B.40 or any laws amendatory thereto.



               d.   Publication expense. The expense of
publication of this ordinance shall be paid by the cooperative.



               e.   Default. If either party asserts that
the party is in default in the performance of any obligation hereunder, the
complaining party shall notify the other party of the default and the desired
remedy. The notification shall be written. If the dispute is not resolved
with 30 days of the written notice, either party may commence an action in
District Court to interpret and enforce this franchise or for such other
relief as may be permitted by law or equity for breach of contract, or either
party may take any other action permitted by law.



               f.   Termination of franchise. The city in
granting this franchise does so with an objective of establishing a uniform
fee to be collected and paid to city by all energy suppliers using facilities
installed in city streets to provide electricity, gas or other energy service
for the purposes referenced in division (9)(d). At the current time, the
city's franchise with the local gas utility does not permit collection of a
franchise fee. The city intends to establish uniform franchise fees upon the
termination of such gas franchise on or about June 5, 2009. If the provisions
of this franchise frustrate this objective of the city, then the city may,
after at least 90 days prior written notice to cooperative, terminate the
franchise hereby granted effective any date on or after May 31, 2009, unless
the cooperative agrees to an amendment to this franchise reasonably requested
by the city to fulfill its uniform franchise fee objective.



            3.   Location, other regulations.



               a.   Location of facilities. Electric
facilities shall be located and constructed so as not to interfere with the
safety and convenience of ordinary travel along and over public ways and they
shall be located on public grounds as determined by the city. The
cooperative's construction, reconstruction, operation, repair, maintenance
and location of electric facilities shall be subject to other reasonable
regulations of the city.



               b.   Field locations. The cooperative shall
provide field locations for any of its underground electric facilities within
a reasonable period of time on request by the city. The period of time will
be considered reasonable if it compares favorably with the average time
required by the cities in the same county or adjacent counties to locate
municipal underground facilities for the cooperative.



               c.   Street openings. The cooperative shall
not open or disturb the paved surface of any public way or public ground for
any purpose without first having obtained permission from the city, for which
the city may impose a reasonable fee. Permit conditions imposed on the
cooperative shall not be more burdensome than those imposed on other
utilities for similar facilities or work. The cooperative may, however, open
and disturb the paved surface of any public way or public ground without
permission from the city where an emergency exists requiring the immediate
repair of electric facilities. In such event the cooperative shall notify the
city by telephone to the office designated by the city before opening or
disturbing a paved surface of a public way or public ground. Not later than
the second working day thereafter, the cooperative shall obtain any required
permits and pay any required fees.



               d.    Restoration. After undertaking any
work requiring the opening of any public way or public ground, the
cooperative shall restore the same, including paving and its foundation, to
as good condition for two years thereafter. The work shall be completed as
promptly as weather permits, and if the cooperative shall not promptly
perform and complete the work, remove all dirt, rubbish, equipment and
material, and put the public way or public ground in the said condition, the
city shall have, after demand to the cooperative to cure and the passage of a
reasonable period of time following the demand, but not to exceed 5 days, the
right to make the restoration at the expense of the cooperative. The
cooperative shall pay to the city the cost of such work done or performed by
the city, including its administrative expense and overhead. This remedy
shall be in addition to any other remedy available to the city.



               e.   Shared use of poles. The cooperative
shall make space available on its poles or towers for city fire, water
utility, police or other city facilities whenever such use will not interfere
with the use of such poles or towers by the cooperative, by another electric
utility, by a telephone utility, or by any cable television cooperative or
other form of communication company. In addition, the city shall pay for any
added cost incurred by the cooperative because of such use by city.



            4.   Relocations.



               a.   Relocation of electric facilities in
public ways.  Except as provided in division (4)(c) below, if the city
determines to vacate for a city improvement project, or to grade, regrade, or
change the line of any public way, or construct or reconstruct any city
utility system in any public way, it may order the cooperative to relocate
its electric facilities located therein. The cooperative shall relocate its
electric facilities at its own expense. The city shall give the cooperative
reasonable notice of plans to vacate for a city improvement project, or to
grade, regrade, or change the line of any public way or to construct or
reconstruct any city utility system. If a relocation is ordered within 5
years of a prior relocation of the same electrical facilities, which was made
at cooperative expense, the city shall reimburse cooperative for
non-betterment expenses on a time and material basis, provided that if a
subsequent relocation is required because of the extension of a city utility
system to a previously unserved area, cooperative may be required to make the
subsequent relocation at its expense. Nothing in this ordinance requires
cooperative to relocate, remove, replace or reconnect at its own expense its
facilities where such relocation, removal, replacement or reconstruction is
solely for the convenience of the city and is not reasonably necessary for
the construction or reconstruction of a public way or city utility system or
other city improvement.



               b.   Relocation of electric facilities in
public ground.  Except as may be provided in division (4)(c) below, city may
require the cooperative to relocate or remove its electric facilities from
public ground upon a finding by city that the electric facilities have become
or will become a substantial impairment of the public use to which the public
ground is or will be put. The relocation or removal shall be at the
cooperative's expense.



               c.   Projects with state or federal
funding.  Relocation, removal, or rearrangement of any cooperative
facilities made necessary because of the extension into or through city of a
federally aided or state aided highway project shall be governed by the
provisions of M.S. § 161.46 as supplemented or amended. It is understood
that the right herein granted to cooperative is a valuable right. city shall
not order cooperative to remove, or relocate its facilities when a public way
is vacated, improved or realigned because of a renewal or a redevelopment
plan which is financially subsidized in whole or in part by the federal
government or any agency thereof, unless the reasonable non-betterment costs
of such relocation and the loss and expense resulting therefrom are first
paid to cooperative, but the city need not pay those portions of such for
which reimbursement to it is not available.



               d.   No waiver by cooperative.  The
provisions of division (4) apply only to electric facilities constructed in
reliance on a franchise and the cooperative does not waive its right under an
easement or prescriptive right, or state or county permit.



               e.   Liability.  Nothing in this ordinance
relieves any person from liability arising out of the failure to exercise
reasonable care to avoid damaging electric facilities while performing any
activity.



            5.   Tree trimming.  The cooperative may trim all
trees and shrubs in the public ways and public grounds of city interfering
with the proper construction, operation, repair and maintenance of any
electric facilities installed hereunder, provided that the cooperative shall
save the city harmless from any liability arising therefrom, and subject to
permit or other reasonable regulation by the city.



            6.   Indemnification.



               a.   The cooperative shall indemnify, keep
and hold the city free and harmless from any and all liability on account of
injury to persons or damage to property occasions by the construction,
maintenance, repair, inspection, the issuance of permits, or the operation of
the electric facilities located in the city. The city shall not be
indemnified for losses or claims occasioned through its own negligence except
for losses or claims arising out of or alleging the city's negligence as to
the issuance of permits for, or inspection of, the cooperative's plans or
work. The city shall not be indemnified if the injury or damage results from
the performance in a proper manner of acts reasonably deemed hazardous by
cooperative, and such performance is nevertheless ordered or directed by city
after notice of cooperative's determination.



               b.   In the event a suit is brought against
the city under circumstances where this agreement to indemnify applies, the
cooperative at its sole cost and expenses shall defend the city in such suit
if written notice thereof is promptly given to the cooperative within a
period wherein the cooperative is not prejudiced by lack of such notice. If
the cooperative is required to indemnify and defend, it will thereafter have
control of such litigation, but the cooperative may not settle such
litigation without the consent of the city, which consent shall not be
unreasonably withheld. This section is not, as to third parties, a waiver of
any defense or immunity otherwise available to the city; and the cooperative,
in defending any action on behalf of the city shall be entitled to assert in
any action every defense or immunity that the city could assert in its own
behalf.



            7.   Vacation of public ways.



               a.   The city shall give the cooperative at
least 2 weeks' prior written notice of a proposed vacation of a public way.



               b.   Except where required for a city street
or other improvement projects, the vacation of any public way, after the
installation of electric facilities, shall not operate to deprive cooperative
of its rights to operate and maintain such electrical facilities, until the
reasonable cost of relocating the same and the loss and expense resulting
from such relocation are first paid to cooperative. In no case, however,
shall city be liable to the cooperative for failure to specifically preserve
a right-of-way, under M.S. § 160.29.



            8.   Change in form of government.  Any change in
the form of government of the city shall not affect the validity of this
ordinance. Any governmental unit succeeding the city shall, without the
consent of the cooperative, succeed to all of the rights and obligations of
the city provided in this ordinance.



            9.   Franchise fee.



               a.   Separate resolution.  During the term
of the franchise hereby granted, and in lieu of any permit or other fees
being imposed on the company, the city may impose on the cooperative a
franchise fee of not more than 5% of the cooperative's gross revenues as
hereinafter defined. The franchise fee may be imposed by a resolution duly
adopted by the City Council, which resolution shall not be adopted until at
least 60 days after written notice enclosing such proposed resolution has
been served upon the cooperative by certified mail. The fee shall not become
effective until at least 60 days after written notice enclosing such adopted
resolution has been served upon the cooperative by certified mail. Except as
provided in division (9)(e), division (2)(e) of this ordinance shall
constitute the sole remedy for solving disputes between the cooperative and
the city in regard to the interpretation of, or enforcement of, the
resolution. No action by the city to implement a franchise fee by resolution
will commence until this ordinance is effective. Except as permitted in
divisions (9)(e) and (f) herein, a resolution which does not impose a uniform
franchise fee on all revenues within the definition of gross revenues shall
not be effective against the company.



               b.   Terms defined.  The term GROSS
REVENUES means all sums, excluding any surcharge or similar addition to the
cooperative's charges to customers for the purpose of reimbursing the
cooperative for the cost resulting from the franchise fee, received by the
cooperative from the sale of electricity to its retail customers within the
corporate limits of the city.



               c.   Collection of fees.  The franchise fee
shall be payable not less often than quarterly and shall be based upon the
gross revenues of the cooperative during complete billing months during the
period for which payment is to be made. The payments shall be due the last
business day of the month following the period for which the payment is made.
The percent fee may be changed by resolution from time to time; however, each
change shall meet the same notice requirements as described in division
(9)(a) and the percentage may not be changed more often than annually. Such
franchise fee shall not exceed any amount which the cooperative may legally
charge to its customers prior to payment to the city by imposing a surcharge
equivalent to such franchise fee in its rates for electric service. The
cooperative shall pay the city the franchise fee based upon amounts billed
subject to subsequent reductions to account for uncollectibles or customer
refunds. The time and manner of collecting the franchise fee is subject to
the approval of the Public Utilities Commission, which the cooperative agrees
to use best efforts to obtain. The cooperative agrees to make its gross
revenue records available for inspection by the city at reasonable times,
upon reasonable notice.



               d.   Condition of the fee. Except as
provided in divisions (9)(e) and (f) herein the resolution imposing the
franchise fee shall not be effective against the cooperative unless it
lawfully imposes and the city quarterly or more often collects a fee or tax
of the same or greater percentage on the receipts from sales of energy within
the city by any other energy supplier, provided that, as to such a supplier,
the city has the authority to require a franchise fee or to impose a tax. The
franchise fee or tax shall be applicable to energy sales for any energy use
related to heating, cooling or lighting, as well as to the supply of energy
needed to run machinery and appliances on premises located within the city,
but shall not apply to energy sales for the purpose of providing fuel for
vehicles.



               e.   Protection from loss of customer. The
cooperative has agreed to collect and pay any franchise fee imposed pursuant
to division (9), with the understanding that the imposition of such fee will
not solely cause a customer to cease or reduce its electric energy purchases
from the cooperative by modifying equipment, or installing new equipment, to
use a form of energy (including electricity not purchased from the
cooperative) subject to a lesser or no fee paid by the energy supplier to
city. In the event, a customer advises the cooperative in writing that it
does intend to modify its equipment or install new equipment or to change to
a different form of energy, including energy not purchased from cooperative,
which is subject to a lesser or no franchise fee, payable by the proposed new
supplier, it is agreed that the cooperative will notify the city in writing
of such customer position. The parties shall make every effort to consider
the needs of the customer, and if the city agrees to an adjustment, the city
shall by resolution adjust the franchise fee which the city would impose on
that particular customer which adjustment may include either the elimination
or reduction of the franchise fee. If the parties cannot agree to a
resolution of the franchise fee respecting the complaining customer within 30
days of the date of written notice to the city, the issue will be submitted
to an agreed and willing professional evaluator selected by the City Manager
and the cooperative, who shall make a final and binding determination
regarding the question of whether the imposition of the franchise fee will
solely cause a customer to cease or reduce its electric energy purchases from
the cooperative by modifying equipment or installing new equipment, to use a
form of energy (including electricity not purchased from the cooperative)
subject to a lesser or no fee paid by the energy supplier to the city. The
professional evaluator based upon his determination of this issue, shall make
a final and binding determination regarding the imposition of the franchise
fee to the particular customer which determination may include the retention,
elimination, or reduction of the franchise fee to the customer. In the event
the city and the cooperative cannot agree on an individual to serve as a
professional evaluator, then the provisions and disagreement shall be
submitted to an arbitrator chosen in accordance with the provisions and
procedures of the American Arbitration Association. The request for an
arbitrator shall be made within the aforementioned 30 day period. The
arbitrator so chosen, shall have the same authority as the professional
evaluator would possess had the parties agreed on the individual so chosen.
Any adjustment in the franchise fee for the customer, shall be retroactive to
the date of the next regularly scheduled billing date following the date of
notice to the city of the request for franchise fee adjustment and to the
extent that a rebate is determined, may be accomplished by the cooperative
with its next regularly scheduled billing cycle after receipt of the decision
of the evaluator or the arbitrator. If any reduction in franchise fees occurs
under this section, the basis for the reduction will be reviewed annually to
assure such reduction continues to be warranted.



               f.   Exception for 1% Fee. Notwithstanding
other provisions of this section herein, the city may impose a franchise fee
not to exceed 1% of the cooperative's gross revenues by a resolution meeting
the notice and other requirements of this section. Such resolution need only
impose the fee on sales of electric energy within the city and need not
impose a fee on sale of other suppliers of other forms of energy. Any
franchise fee imposed pursuant to this section is exclusive of and not in
addition to any other franchise fee imposed pursuant to division (9)(a).



            10.   Severability.  If any portion of this
franchise is found to be invalid for any reason whatsoever, the validity of
the remainder shall not be affected.



            11.   Consumer information.  The cooperative
shall furnish to the city such consumer usage information, by class of
consumer, as may be requested by the city and permitted by law.



            12.   Amendment.  This ordinance may be amended
at any time by the city passing a subsequent ordinance declaring the
provisions of the amendment, which amendatory ordinance shall become
effective upon the filing of the cooperative's written consent thereto with
the City Clerk within 90 days after the effective date of the amendatory
ordinance.



            13.   Previous franchises superseded.  This
franchise supersedes any previous electric franchise granted to the
cooperative or its predecessor.



(Franchise 141, passed 4-18-1994)



      (8)   Cable Communications Franchise Ordinance, Ordinance
No.156



         (a)   An ordinance granting a franchise to Bresnan
communications company, a Michigan limited partnership, to construct,
operate, and maintain a cable television system in the City of North Mankato;
setting forth conditions accompanying the grant of the franchise; providing
for regulation and use of the system; and prescribing penalties for the
violation of its provisions



         (b)   The City Council of the City of North Mankato
ordains:



            1.   Statement of intent and purpose.



               a.   The city intends, by the adoption of
this franchise, to bring about the development of a cable communications
system, and the continued operation of it. Such a development can contribute
significantly to the communication needs and desires of many. Further, the
city may achieve better utilization and improvement of public services with
the development and operation of a cable communications system.



               b.   Past studies by the city have led the
way for organizing a means of procuring and securing of cable communications
system which, in the judgment of the Council, is best suited to the city.
This has resulted in the preparation and adoption of this franchise.



            2.   Findings.  In the review of the proposal and
application of Bresnan ("grantee"), and as a result of a public hearing, the
City Council makes the following findings:



               a.   The grantee's technical ability,
financial condition, legal qualifications, and character were considered and
approved in a full public proceeding after due notice and a reasonable
opportunity to be heard;



               b.   Grantee's plans for constructing,
upgrading, and operating the system were considered and found adequate and
feasible in a full public proceeding after due notice and a reasonable
opportunity to be heard;



               c.   The franchise granted to grantee by the
city complies with the existing applicable Minnesota Statutes, federal laws
and regulations; and



               d.   The franchise granted to grantee is
nonexclusive.



            3.   Short title and definitions.



               a.   Short title.  This franchise ordinance
shall be known and cited as the Cable Communications Ordinance.



               b.   Definitions.



                  For the purposes of this franchise, the
following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning
given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall' is always mandatory and
not merely directory. The word "may" is directory and discretionary and not
mandatory.



                  BASIC CABLE SERVICE.  Any service tier
which, at a minimum, includes the lawful retransmission of local television
broadcast signals, and any public, educational, and governmental programming
required by the franchise to be carried on the basic tier. Nothing herein
shall limit the ability of the grantee to offer additional services in the
basic cable service tier, and basic cable service as defined herein shall not
be inconsistent with 47 U.S.C. § 543(b)(7) (1993).



                  BULK SUBSCRIBER EQUIVALENT.  Calculated
for each bulk contract based on the following formula: the full basic and
cable programming service tier monthly rate shall be divided into the gross
monthly bulk contract rate, equaling BULK SUBSCRIBER EQUIVALENTS.BULK
SUBSCRIBER EQUIVALENTS shall be limited to residential-only facilities where
tenants are not individually billed for service and shall exclude service to
non-residential buildings and to Mankato State University.



                  CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM or SYSTEM. 
A system of antennas, cables, wires, lines, towers, waveguides, or other
conductors, converters, equipment, or facilities located in city and designed
and constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving, transmitting,
amplifying, or distributing audio, video, and other forms of electronic
signals in city. SYSTEM as defined herein shall not be inconsistent with the
definition as set forth in M.S. § 238.02, subd. 3 (1994) and 47 U.S.C. §
522(7) (1993).



                  CABLE PROGRAMMING SERVICE.  Any video
programming provided over a cable system, regardless of service tier,
including installation or rental of equipment used for the receipt of such
video programming, other than:



                     (1)   Video programming carried
on the basic service tier as defined in this section;



                     (2)   Video programming offered
on a pay-per-channel or pay-per program basis; or



                     (3)   A combination of multiple
channels of pay-per-channel or pay-per-program video programming offered on a
multiplexed or time-shifted basis so long as the combined service:



                        (a)   Consists of
commonly-identified video programming; and



                        (b)   Is not bundled with
any regulated tier of service.



                  CABLE PROGRAMMING SERVICE as defined
herein shall not be inconsistent with the definition as set forth in 47
U.S.C. § 543(1)(2)(1993) and 47 C.F.R. 76.901(b).



                  CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE.  The provision
of television reception, communications and/or entertainment services
regulated pursuant to M.S. § 238.01 et seq. as may be amended from time to
time for direct or indirect compensation, or as otherwise provided by this
franchise ordinance, and distributing the same over a cable communications
system. This definition shall not include telephone services regulated
pursuant to M.S. § 237.01 et seq. and telecommunications services as defined
in federal law as may be amended from time to time.



                  CITY.  The City of North Mankato, a
municipal corporation, in the State of Minnesota, acting by and through its
City Council.



                  CITY COUNCIL.  The North Mankato,
Minnesota City Council.



                  CLASS IV CABLE COMMUNICATIONS CHANNEL. 
A signaling path provided by a cable communications system to transmit
signals of any type from a subscriber terminal to another point in the system.



                  CONVERTER.  An electronic device which
converts signals to a frequency acceptable to a television receiver of a
subscriber and by an appropriate selector permits a subscriber to view all
subscriber signals included in the service.



                  DROP.  The cable that connects the
ground block on the subscriber's residence to the nearest feeder cable of the
system.



                  FCC.  The Federal Communications
Commission and any legally appointed, designated or elected agent or
successor.



                  GRANTEE.  Bresnan Communications
Company, its agents and employees, lawful successors, transferees or
assignees.



                  GROSS REVENUES.  All revenue received
from cable television service, as defined, directly or indirectly by the
grantee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parent, or person in which grantee has
financial interest of 5% or more from or in connection with the operation of
its system within the city, including but not limited to basic cable service
fees, cable programming service fees, pay television fees, installation and
reconnection fees, upgrade and downgrade fees, converter rentals, lockout
device fees, advertising revenues and shopping channel revenues, studio
rental revenues, leased channel revenues, and production equipment and
personnel fees or other services. GROSS REVENUES shall not include franchise
fees, access operating fees, copyright fees, any fees itemized and passed
through as a result of franchise imposed requirements, or any taxes or fees
on services furnished by grantee imposed directly on any subscriber or user
by any municipality, state, or other governmental unit and collected by
grantee for such governmental unit.



                  INSTALLATION.  The connection of the
system from feeder cable to the point of connection, including standard
installations and custom installations.



                  LOCKOUT DEVICE.  An optional mechanical
or electrical accessory to a subscriber's terminal which inhibits the viewing
of a certain program, certain channel, or certain channels provided by way of
the cable communication system.



                  NON-VOICE RETURN CAPABILITY.  A system
which is designed with the installation of cable and amplifiers suitable for
the subsequent insertion of necessary non-voice communications electronic
modules.



                  PAY TELEVISION.  The delivery over the
system of pay-per-channel or pay- per-program audio-visual signals to
subscribers for a fee or charge, in addition to the charge for basic service
or cable programming services.



                  PERSON.  Any person, firm, partnership,
association, corporation, company, or other legal entity.



                  STANDARD INSTALLATION.  Any residential
installation which can be completed using a drop of 150 feet or less.



                  STREET. The surface of, and the space
above and below, any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley,
path, court, sidewalk, parkway, or drive, or any easement or right-of-way now
or hereafter held by the city.



                  SUBSCRIBER.  Any person who lawfully
receives cable television services. In the case of multiple office buildings
or multiple dwelling units, the SUBSCRIBER means the lessee, tenant or
occupant.



            4.   Grant of authority and general provisions.



               a.   Grant of franchise. This franchise is
granted pursuant to the terms and conditions contained herein. Such terms and
conditions shall be subordinate to all applicable provisions of state and
federal laws, rules and regulations.



                  i.   Grantee shall accept this
franchise in the following manner, and not later than the time set out in
section 15(b).



                     (a)   This franchise will be
properly executed and acknowledged by grantee and delivered to city.



                     (b)   All certificates of
insurance, acceptances, security fund and bond(s) as required of grantee by
this franchise, shall be delivered with the executed franchise.



               b.   Grant of nonexclusive authority.



                  i.   The grantee shall have the right
and privilege to construct, erect, operate, and maintain, in, upon, along,
across, above, over and under the streets, alleys, public ways and public
places now laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof, and additions
thereto in the city, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes,
and other television conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance
and operation in the city of a cable communications system as herein defined.
The Cable communications system constructed and maintained by grantee or its
agents shall not interfere with other uses of streets. Grantee shall make use
of existing poles and other facilities available to grantee to the extent it
is technically and economically feasible to do so.



                  ii.   Notwithstanding the above grant
to use streets, no street shall be used by grantee if city in its sole
opinion determines that such use is inconsistent with the terms, conditions,
or provisions by which such street was created or dedicated, or with the
present use of the street.



                  iii.   This franchise shall be
nonexclusive, and the city reserves the right to grant a similar use of the
streets, alleys, public ways and places, to any person at any time during the
period of this franchise, provided, however, that to the extent permitted by
law, any additional franchise grants shall be under the same substantive
terms and conditions as this franchise.



                  iv.   Grantee shall have the authority
to use city easements, public rights-of- way, streets and other conduits for
the distribution of grantee's cable communications system. The city may
require all developers of future subdivisions to allow and accommodate the
construction of the system as part of any provisions for utilities to serve
such subdivisions.



               c.   Franchise term.  This franchise shall
be in effect for a period of 15 years from the date of acceptance by grantee,
unless renewed, revoked or terminated sooner as herein provided.



               d.   Previous franchises.  Upon acceptance
by grantee as required by section 15 herein, this franchise shall supersede
and replace any previous ordinance or agreement granting a franchise to
grantee to own, operate and maintain a cable communications system within the
city. Ordinance No. 3.6 is hereby expressly repealed.



               e.   Compliance with applicable laws,
resolutions and ordinances. The grantee shall at all times during the life of
this franchise be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power and the
right of eminent domain by the city. This franchise shall comply with the
Minnesota franchise standards contained in M.S. § 238.01 (1994) et seq.
which are not otherwise pre-empted by federal law.



               f.   Rules of grantee. The grantee shall
have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and
conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably
necessary to enable the grantee to exercise its rights and perform its
obligation under this franchise and to assure uninterrupted service to each
and all of its subscribers; provided that such rules, regulations, terms and
conditions shall not be in conflict with provisions hereto, the rules of the
FCC, the laws of the State of Minnesota, city, or any other body having
lawful jurisdiction thereof.



               g.   Territorial area involved. This
franchise is granted for the corporate boundaries of the city, as it exists
from time to time. In the event of annexation by the city, or as development
occurs, any new territory shall become part of the area covered, provided,
however, that grantee shall not be required to extend service beyond its
present system boundaries unless there is a minimum of 30 homes per cable
mile as measured from the last fiber node or terminating amplifier. Access to
cable service shall not be denied to any group of potential residential cable
subscribers because of the income of the residents of the area in which such
group resides. Grantee shall be given a reasonable period of time to
construct and activate cable plant to service annexed or newly developed
areas.



               h.   Written notice.



                  i.   All notices, reports, or demands
required to be given in writing under this franchise shall be deemed to be
given when delivered personally to any officer of grantee or city's
Administrator of this franchise or 48 hours after it is deposited in the
United States mail in a sealed envelope, with registered or certified mail
postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the party to whom notice is being
given, as follows:



 



(a)
 
If to city:
 
City of North Mankato


 
 
P.O. Box 2055


 
 
North Mankato, Minnesota 56002-2055


 
 
Attention: Denny Kemp


 
 


(b)
 
With copies to:
 
Susan Rester Miles


 
 
Hessian, McKasy & Soderberg, P.A.


 
 
4700 IDS Center


 
 
Minneapolis, MN 55402


 
 


(c)
 
If to grantee:
 
Bresnan Communications Company


 
 
709 Westchester Avenue


 
 
White Plains, New York 10604


 
 
Attention: Robert V. Bresnan, Esq.


 
 


(d)
 
With copies to:
 
Larkin, Hoffman, Daly & Lindgren, Ltd.


 
 
1500 Norwest Financial Center


 
 
7900 Xerxes Avenue South


 
 
Bloomington, Minnesota 55431


 
 
Attention: Jane E. Bremer, Esq.




 



                  ii.   Such addresses may be changed by
either party upon notice to the other party given as provided in this section.



               i.   Drops to public buildings.



                  (a)   Grantee shall provide
installation of 1 cable drop, 1 cable outlet, and monthly basic service and
the weather channel without charge to the following institutions and such
other public or educational institutions located within 150 feet of the
system which city may designate:



                     (1)   North Mankato City Hall.



                     (2)   North Mankato Police
Station.



                     (3)   North Mankato Fire
Department (when constructed).



                     (4)   North Mankato Street
Department.



                     (5)   North Mankato Park
Department.



                     (6)   North Mankato Water Plant
#1 and #2.



                     (7)   South Central Technical
College.



                  (b)   No redistribution of the free
basic cable service and the weather channel provided pursuant to this section
shall be allowed. Additional drops and/or outlets in any of the above
locations will be provided at the cost of grantee's time and material.
Alternatively, at the institution's request, said institution may add outlets
at its own expense, as long as such installation meets grantee's standards
and provided that any fees for cable television services are paid. Nothing
herein shall be construed as requiring grantee to extend the system to serve
additional institutions as may be designated by city. Grantee shall have 1
year from the date of City Council designation of additional institution(s)
to complete construction of the drop and outlet.



            5.   Construction standards.



               a.   Construction standards.  If the
system, or subsequent rebuilds or extensions, proposed for the franchise area
consist of fewer than 100 plant miles of cable:



                  i.   Within 90 days of the granting of
the franchise or in accordance with the construction schedule proposed by
grantee, the grantee shall apply for the necessary governmental permits,
licenses, certificates, and authorizations;



                  ii.   The energized trunk cable must
be extended substantially throughout the authorized area within 1 year after
receipt of the necessary governmental permits, licenses, certificates, and
authorizations and the persons along the route of the energized cable shall
have individual drops as desired during the same period of time; and



                  iii.   The above-stated requirements
may be waived by the city only upon occurrence of acts beyond the reasonable
control of grantee or acts of God.



               b.   Construction codes and permits.



                  i.   Grantee shall obtain all
necessary permits from the city before commencing any construction or
extension of the system, including the opening or disturbance of any street,
or private or public property within the city. Grantee shall comply with all
building and zoning codes currently or hereafter applicable to construction,
operation or maintenance of the system in the city and give due consideration
at all times to the aesthetics of the property.



                  ii.   The city shall have the right to
inspect all construction or installation work performed pursuant to the
provisions of the franchise and to make such tests as it shall find necessary
to ensure compliance with the terms of the franchise and applicable
provisions of local, state and federal law. City shall provide written notice
to grantee at least 5 business days prior to conducting any tests on the
system any shall be accompanied by a representative of grantee in grantee's
discretion.



               c.   Repair of streets and property. Any and
all streets or public property or private property, which are disturbed or
damaged during the construction, repair, replacement, relocation, operation,
maintenance or reconstruction of the system shall be promptly and fully
restored by grantee, at its expense, to a condition as good as that
prevailing prior to grantee's work, as approved by the city in the case of
streets and other public property. If grantee shall fail to promptly perform
the restoration required herein, city shall have the right to put the
streets, public, or private property back into good condition. City reserves
its rights to pursue reimbursement for such restoration from grantee.



               d.   Conditions on street use.



                  i.   Nothing in this franchise shall
be construed to prevent the city from constructing, maintaining, repairing or
relocating sewers; grading, paving, maintaining, repairing, relocating and/or
altering any street; constructing, laying down, repairing, maintaining or
relocating any water mains; or constructing, maintaining, relocating, or
repairing any sidewalk or other public work.



                  ii.   All system transmission and
distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by the grantee within
the city shall be located so as not to obstruct or interfere with the proper
use of streets, alleys and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum
interference with the rights of property owners who abut any of the streets,
alleys and other public ways and places, and not to interfere with existing
public utility installations. The grantee shall furnish to and file with the
City Administrator the maps, plats, and permanent records of the location and
character of all facilities constructed, including underground facilities,
and grantee shall file with the city updates of such maps, plats and
permanent records annually if changes have been made in the system.



                  iii.   No poles, conduits or other
wire-holding structures shall be erected or installed by grantee without the
prior approval of the City Administrator with regard to the location, height,
type and other pertinent aspects. The location of any pole, conduit or other
wire-holding structure of the grantee shall not be a vested right and such
pole, conduit, or other structure shall be removed or modified by the grantee
at its own expense upon order of city that such removal or modification is
reasonably required by the public health, safety or welfare.



                  iv.   Grantee shall use its best
efforts to obtain the permission and consent of any public utility company
for the use of existing poles, conduits or other wire-holding structures
located in city. Grantee shall utilize existing poles, conduits, or other
wire-holding structures of existing public utilities to the extent
technically and economically feasible. City shall have no obligation to
assist grantee in obtaining the consent for use of existing facilities from
any public utility company.



                  v.   If at any time during the period
of this franchise the city shall elect to alter, or change the grade or
location of any street, alley or other public way, the grantee shall, upon
reasonable notice by the city, remove and relocate its poles, wires, cables,
conduits, manholes and other fixtures of the system at its own expense, and
in each instance comply with the standards and specifications of city. If
city reimburses other occupants of the street, grantee shall be likewise
reimbursed.



                  vi.   The grantee shall not place
poles, conduits, or other fixtures of system above or below ground where the
same will interfere with any gas, electric, telephone, water or other utility
fixtures and all such poles, conduits, or other fixtures placed in any street
shall be so placed as to comply with all requirements of the city.



                  vii.   The grantee shall, on request
of any person holding a moving permit issued by the city, temporarily move
its wires or fixtures to permit the moving of buildings with the expense of
such temporary removal to be paid by the person requesting the same, and the
grantee shall be given not less than 10 days advance notice to arrange for
such temporary changes.



                  viii.   The grantee shall have the
authority to trim any trees upon and overhanging the streets, alleys,
sidewalks, or public easements of the city so as to prevent the branches of
such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the grantee.



                  ix.   Nothing contained in this
franchise shall relieve any person from liability arising out of the failure
to exercise reasonable care to avoid injuring grantee's facilities.



               e.   Undergrounding of cable.



                  i   In all areas of the city where all
other utility lines are placed underground, grantee shall construct and
install its cables, wires and other facilities underground. Amplifier boxes
and pedestal mounted terminal boxes may be placed above ground if existing
technology reasonably requires, but shall be of such size and design and
shall be so located as not to be unsightly or unsafe.



                  ii.   In any area of the city where
there are certain cables, wires and other like facilities of a public utility
or public utility district underground and at least one operable cable, wire
or like facility of a public utility or public utility district suspended
above the ground from poles grantee may construct and install its cables,
wires and other facilities from the same pole with the consent of the owner
of the pole.



                  iii.   Grantee shall be granted access
to any easements granted to a public utility or utility district in any areas
annexed by the city or new developments.



               f.   Safety requirements.



                  i.   The grantee shall at all times
employ ordinary and reasonable care and shall install and maintain in use
nothing less than commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing
failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or
nuisances to the public.



                  ii.   The grantee shall install and
maintain its system wires, cables, fixtures and other equipment in
substantial compliance with the requirements of the National Electric Safety
Code and in full compliance with all applicable FCC, state and local
regulations, and in such manner that they will not interfere with any
installations of the city or of any public utility serving the city.



                  iii.   All system structures and all
system lines, equipment and connections in, over, under and upon the streets,
sidewalks, alleys, and public ways and places of the city, wherever situated
or located, shall at all times be kept and maintained in good condition,
order, and repair so that the same shall not menace or endanger the life or
property of any person.



               g.   Emergency use of facilities.



                  i.   In the case of any emergency or
disaster, the grantee shall, upon request of the city, make available its
facilities to the city during the period of emergency or disaster.



                  ii.   The city may, in case of fire,
disaster, or other catastrophic emergency, as reasonably determined by the
city, cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances, or other
parts of the system. Except as provided in section 10 of this franchise, the
city shall not be responsible for damage to grantee's system or for
interruption of service provided by grantee.



            6.   Design provisions.



               a.   Minimum channel capacity.



                  i.   Grantee shall provide a system
which utilizes 750 Mhz equipment, and which is capable of delivering a
minimum of 78 channels within 15 months of the effective date of this
ordinance. Grantee agrees to use its best efforts to program a minimum of 47
channels with video programming upon completion of the construction
contemplated by this section. Grantee shall also continue to provide local FM
service in a manner and at a cost in grantee's discretion.



                  ii.   While city and grantee agree
that the system upgrade required herein will have the capacity of a minimum
of 78 analog downstream channels utilizing 750 Mhz equipment, and that both
parties desire a system with state-of-the-art design, and that such a system
would incorporate fiber optic technology, the parties recognize that
technological changes and advances are rapidly occurring such that in the
future other system designs may be more advantageous to the parties
considering economic and technological factors. Therefore, fiber optic trunk
line at a minimum will be incorporated into the system upgrade design unless
grantee determines in its sole discretion that economic and technological
factors dictate otherwise.



                  iii.   At any time after the initial
system upgrade that grantee undertakes to upgrade or rebuild a significant
portion of its cable communications system, it shall notify the city in
writing at least 30 days before such upgrade or rebuild is commenced. City
may at that time meet with grantee for the purpose of mutually determining
what features will be in the public interest. Grantee shall in all cases
exercise its best efforts to comply with the buy-through provisions of 47
C.F.R. 76.900 (c) (1995) as soon as reasonably practicable.



                  iv.   All programming decisions remain
the sole discretion of grantee provided that grantee notifies the city and
subscribers in writing 30 days prior to any channel additions, deletions, or
realignments.



               b.   Operation and maintenance of system.
The grantee shall render commercially reasonable service, 24 hours per day, 7
days a week, and shall make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for
good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruption, to the
extent feasible, shall be preceded by notice in accordance with section 4(I)
herein and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system.



               c.   Technical standards. The technical
standards used in the operation of the system shall comply, at minimum, with
the technical standards promulgated by the FCC relating to cable
communications systems pursuant to the Federal Communications Commissions
rules and regulations and found in 47 C.F.R. §§ 76.601 to 76.617, which
regulations are expressly incorporated herein by reference. Copies of all
technical standards reports and test results required to be performed by
grantee pursuant to such technical standards shall be filed with the City
Administrator within 15 days of finalization. For purposes of this section,
finalization shall be deemed to occur on the date the technical reports are
forwarded in final form to the FCC.



               d.   Special testing. City may request
special testing of a location or locations within the system if there is a
particular matter of controversy or unresolved complaints pertaining to such
location(s). Demand for such special tests may be made on the basis of
complaints received or other evidence indicating an unresolved controversy or
noncompliance. Such tests shall be limited to the particular matter in
controversy or noncompliance. The city shall endeavor to so arrange its
request for such special testing so as to minimize hardship or inconvenience
to grantee or to the subscribers caused by such testing. Before ordering such
tests, grantee shall be afforded 30 days to correct problems or complaints
upon which tests were ordered. The city shall meet with grantee prior to
requesting special tests to discuss the need for such and, if possible,
visually inspect those locations which are the focus of concern. If, after
such meetings and inspections, the city wishes to commence special tests and
the 30 days have elapsed without correction of the matter in controversy, the
tests shall be conducted by a qualified engineer selected by the city. If the
testing reveals the source of the technical difficulty to be within grantee's
reasonable control then the cost of such testing shall be borne by grantee.
If the testing reveals the difficulties to be caused by factors which are
beyond grantee's reasonable control then the cost of said test shall be borne
by the city.



               e.   Emergency override. Grantee shall
provide an audio emergency alert override system consistent with federal law.
In the interim between the effective date of this franchise and the
implementation of this section, grantee shall continue to provide a working
character generator which can be used by public safety officials to provide
emergency alert services.



               f.   FCC reports. The results of any tests
required by the FCC to be filed or performed by grantee shall also be filed
with the city's designee with 15 days of finalization.



               g.    Nonvoice return capability. Grantee is
required to use cable having the technical capacity for nonvoice return
communications.



               h.   Lockout device. Upon the request of a
subscriber, grantee shall provide by sale or lease a lockout device.



            7.   Services provisions.



               a.   Regulation of service rates.



                  i.   The city may regulate rates for
the provision of cable service, equipment, or any other communications
service provided over the system to the extent allowed under federal or state
law(s). In exercising its jurisdiction to regulate any such rates, city will
adhere to regulations adopted by the Federal Communications Commission at 47
C.F.R. § 76.900, et. seq. as they may be amended from time to time.



                  ii.   A list of grantee's current
subscriber rates and charges shall be maintained on file with the city and
shall be available for public inspection. Grantee shall give city and
subscribers written notice of any change in a rate or charge no less than 30
days prior to the effective date of the change.



                  iii.   In the event that city elects
to exercise its jurisdiction over locally regulatable rates, it shall, after
notice, hold a public hearing for the consideration of views of interested
parties with respect to initial rates filed and any subsequent proposed
changes in rates.



                  iv.   City may hire personnel as
needed to assist in the administration of its rate regulation powers.



               b.   Sales procedures. Grantee shall not
exercise deceptive sales procedures when marketing its cable television
services within the city. Grantee shall have the right to market its cable
services door-to-door during reasonable hours consistent with local
ordinances and regulation.



               c.   Subscriber inquiry and complaint
procedures.



                  i.   Grantee shall have a publicly
listed toll free telephone number which shall be operated so as to receive
subscriber complaints and requests on a 24 hour-a-day, 7 days-a-week basis.



                  ii.   Grantee shall maintain and staff
its customer service telephone lines in compliance with Federal
Communications Commission customer service standards at 47 C.F.R. §
76.309(c), which standards are herein incorporated by reference.



                  iii.   Subject to the privacy
provisions of 47 U.S.C. § 521 et. seq. (1993), city and grantee shall
prepare and maintain written records of all complaints made to them and the
resolution of such complaints, including the date of such resolution. Grantee
shall provide city with a written summary of such complaints and their
resolution on a biannual basis.



                  iv.   Grantee shall at all times
throughout the term of this franchise maintain sufficient technical personnel
and access to replacement parts and supplies to enable it to resolve
subscriber complaints and repair outages within a reasonable time. Grantee
shall use commercially reasonable efforts to repair reported service problems
within 24 hours of grantee's receipt of a subscriber's complaint.



               d.   Subscriber contracts. Grantee shall
submit any residential non-bulk subscriber contract utilized to the city. If
no written contract exists, grantee shall file with the City Administrator a
document completely and concisely stating the terms of the residential
subscriber contract offered to customers, specifically including the length
of the subscriber contract. The length and terms of any subscriber contract
shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to limit city's rights under federal rate
regulation rules to regulate the rates of nonresidential, commercial, or bulk
service.



               e.   Refund policy.  In the event a
subscriber establishes or terminates service and receives less than a full
month's service, grantee shall prorate the monthly rate on the basis of the
number of days in the period for which service was rendered to the number of
days in the billing. If service is interrupted or discontinued for a total
period of more than 48 continuous hours in any 30 day period, subscribers
shall be credited pro rata for such interruption beginning with the date of
interruption.



               f.   Office policy. Grantee agrees to
maintain a local drop box for receiving subscriber payments and grantee
agrees to either maintain or arrange for a location where equipment can be
dropped off or exchanged as is necessary or, in the alternative, establish a
system for having the equipment picked up at the subscriber residence.



            8.   Public access provisions.



               a.   Public, educational and government
access.



                  i.   City or its designee is hereby
designated to operate, administer; promote, and manage access (public,
educational, and government) (hereinafter "PEG access") to the cable system
established pursuant to this section. Grantee shall have no responsibility
whatsoever for PEG access except as expressly stated in this section.



                  ii.   Grantee shall dedicate 3
channels for PEG access use for the following uses: public access,
educational access, and government access. All residential subscribers who
receive all or any part of the total video services offered on the system
shall be eligible to receive all of the 3 access channels at no additional
charge. The 3 channels shall be activated upon the completion of the System
upgrade.



                  iii.   Pursuant to section 8(a)(ii)
herein, grantee shall provide to each of its subscribers who receive all, or
part of, the total video services offered on the system, reception on at
least 1 specially designated noncommercial public access channel available
for use by the general public on a first-come, first-served,
nondiscriminatory basis; at least 1 specially designated access channel for
use by local educational authorities; at least one specially designated
access channel available for local government use; and at least 1 specially
designated access channel available for lease on a first-come, first-served
nondiscriminatory basis by commercial and noncommercial users. The VHF
spectrum must be used for the first specially designated access channel
required in the section. Grantee shall designate the channel locations of any
other access channels.



                  iv.   Grantee shall provide for video
and stereo audio and second audio programming audio baseband inputs for all 3
PEG channels from the city's access studio, if necessary.



                  v.   Grantee agrees to advance, on
behalf of the Cities of Mankato and North Mankato (hereinafter "the cities")
the costs of licensing and installing microwave equipment needed to permit
the transmission of broadband signals from points selected by the cities to
the access studio ("Microwave Equipment"). Such advanced costs shall be
reimbursed by the cities as set forth below.



               b.   Charges for use. Channel time and
playback of prerecorded programming on the specially designated access
channel must be provided without charge to the general public except that
personnel, equipment and production costs may be assessed for live studio
presentations exceeding 5 minutes in length. Charges for production costs
must be consistent with the goal of affording the public a low-cost means of
television access.



               c.   Access rules.



                  i.   City shall implement rules for
use of any specially designated access channels. The initial access rules and
any amendments thereto shall be maintained on file with city and available
for public inspection during normal business hours.



                  ii.   Prior to the cablecast of any
program on any PEG access channel established herein, city shall require any
person who requests access (public, educational, and government) to the
system to provide written certification in a form and substance acceptable to
grantee and city which releases, indemnifies, and holds harmless city,
grantee and their respective employees, offices, agents, and assigns from any
liability, cost, damages and expenses, including reasonable expenses for
legal fees, arising or connected in any way with the program. If grantee
chooses to enforce a policy regarding obscene programming by commercial users
pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 532(c), city shall assume no responsibility in that
regard.



               d.   Access operating fee. Within 90 days of
the effective date of this franchise, grantee shall commence collecting on
behalf of city a per subscriber fee solely to fund access-related
expenditures (hereinafter "Access Operating Fee") as follows:



                  i.   Year one         .60 per
subscriber per month;



                  ii.   Year two         .80
per subscriber per month; and



                  iii.   Year three and
thereafter   $1.00 per subscriber per month.



For purposes of this section "subscriber" shall include bulk subscribers
equivalents. Commencing at year two, grantee may withhold 10 cents per
subscriber per month in order to reimburse the cost of microwave equipment
provided to the cities , estimated at $70,000 in total, until the actual
out-of-pocket costs of such microwave equipment advanced by grantee, plus
actual carrying charges, have been reimbursed.



            9.   Operation and administration provisions.



               a.   Franchise fee.



                  i.   Grantee shall pay to the city a
franchise fee in an annual amount equal to 3% of its annual gross revenues.



                  ii.   Payments due city under this
provision shall be payable quarterly. The payment shall be made within 90
days of the end of each of grantee's fiscal quarters together with a brief
and itemized report showing the basis for the computation.



                  iii.   All amounts paid shall be
subject to audit and recomputation by the city and acceptance of any payment
shall not be construed as an accord that the amount is in fact the correct
amount.



               b.   Access to records. The city shall have
the right to inspect, upon reasonable notice, at any time during normal
business hours, those records maintained by grantee which relate to system
operations and to gross revenues, subject to the privacy provisions of 47
U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq. Grantee shall make all such books and records
requested by city available at its nearest business office. Grantee shall
maintain its books and records in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles. Grantee shall maintain revenue accounts specific to
the North Mankato system.



               c.   Reports to be filed with city. Grantee
shall prepare and furnish to the city, at the times and in the form
prescribed, such reports with respect to the operations, affairs,
transactions or property, as they relate to the system, which grantee and the
city may agree upon.



            10.   General financial and insurance provisions.



               a.   Indemnification of the city.



                  i.   The city, its officers, boards,
committees, commissions, elected officials, employees and agents shall not be
liable for any loss or damage to any real or personal property of any person,
or for any injury to or death of any person, arising out of or in connection
with the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of, or other
action or event with respect to the system.



                  ii.   Grantee shall indemnify, defend,
and hold harmless the city, its officers, boards, committees, commissions,
elected officials, employees and agents, from and against all liability,
damages, attorneys' fees and penalties which they may legally be required to
pay as a result of the exercise of the franchise, except claims because of
PEG access programming.



                  iii.   Nothing in this franchise
relieves a person from liability arising out of the failure to exercise
reasonable care to avoid injuring the grantee's facilities while performing
work connected with grading, regrading, or changing the line of a street or
public place or with the construction or reconstruction of a sewer or water
system. City shall be liable only for the cost of replacing or repairing any
damage to grantee's property or equipment caused by tortuous acts by the
city, or its officers, boards, commissions, committees, elected officials,
employees, and agents acting within the scope of their employment, consistent
with Minn. Ch. 466 (1996).



                  iv.   In order for city to assert its
rights to be indemnified, defended, and held harmless, city must with respect
to each claim:



                     (a)   Promptly notify grantee in
writing of any claim or legal proceeding which gives rise to such right;



                     (b)   Afford grantee the
opportunity to participate in and fully control any compromise, settlement or
other resolution or disposition of any claim or proceeding; and



                     (c)   Fully cooperate with
reasonable requests of grantee, at grantee's expense, in its participation
in, and control, compromise, settlement or resolution or other disposition of
such claim or proceeding subject to paragraph (ii) above.



               b.   Insurance.



                  i.   As a part of the indemnification
provided in section (a) above, but without limiting the foregoing, grantee
shall file with its acceptance of this franchise, and at all times thereafter
maintain in full force and effect at its sole expense, a comprehensive
general liability insurance policy, including contractual liability coverage,
in protection of the city in its capacity as such, its officers, elected
officials, boards, commissions, agents and employees. The policy or policies
shall name as additional insureds the city, and in their capacity as such,
its officers, agents and employees. The policies of insurance shall be in the
sum of not less than $1,000,000 for personal injury or death of any 1 person,
and $2,000,000 $1,000,000 for personal injury or death of 2 or more persons
in any 1 occurrence, $500,000 for property damage to any 1 person and
$2,000,000 for property damage resulting from any 1 act or occurrence.



                  ii.   A certificate of insurance in a
form and substance acceptable to city, together with written evidence of
payment of required premiums, shall be filed with city at the time of
acceptance of this franchise. The above minimum amounts shall be changed from
time to time by grantee as mutually agreed with city. Grantee shall
immediately give notice to city of any threatened or pending litigation
affecting this insurance.



                  iii.   Neither the provisions of this
section nor any damages recovered by city or any individual shall be
construed to, or shall limit the liability of grantee.



                  iv.   No recovery by city of any sum
by reason of the security fund or bond required in this franchise shall be
any limitation upon the liability of grantee to city under the terms of this
section, except that the sum so received by city from such security fund or
bond shall be deducted from a recovery by city under this section, if for the
same act or occurrence.



                  v.   The policy or policies of
insurance shall be maintained by grantee in full force and effect during the
entire term of the franchise. Each policy of insurance shall contain a
statement on its face that the insurer will not cancel the policy or fail to
renew the policy, whether for nonpayment of premium, or otherwise, and
whether at the request of grantee or for other reasons, except after 30 days'
advance written notice have been provided to the city.



            11.   Bonds and penalties for violation of
franchise.



               a.   Performance bond.



                  i.   At the time the franchise becomes
effective and at all times thereafter, until the grantee has liquidated all
of its obligations with the city, the grantee shall furnish a bond to the
city in the amount of $20,000 in a form and with such sureties as reasonably
acceptable to the city. This bond will be conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the grantee according to the terms of the franchise and upon
the further condition that in the event the grantee shall fail to comply with
any law, ordinance or regulation governing the franchise, there shall be
recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety of the bond
any damages or loss suffered by the city as a result, including the full
amount of any compensation, indemnification or cost of removal or abandonment
of any property of the grantee, indemnification or cost of identification and
resolution of any violations of this franchise, including a reasonable
allowance for attorneys' fees, and further guaranteeing payment by the
grantee of claims, liens and taxes due the city which arise by reason of the
construction, operation, or maintenance of the system. The rights reserved by
the city with respect to the bond are in addition to all other rights the
city may have under the franchise or any other law. The city may, from year
to year, in its sole discretion, reduce the amount of the bond. The amount of
the bond shall not in any way limit the extent of grantee's liability to city.



                  ii.   If at any time grantee
undertakes construction of the system in city, by way of a line extension,
rebuild, upgrade, or otherwise, with a projected cost in excess of $70,000,
grantee shall provide a bond to city in the amount of $150,000 and shall
maintain such bond during the term of the construction. Upon completion of
the construction, grantee shall provide written notice to city. City may then
employ, an engineer or inspector of its choice to inspect the construction
and render an opinion as to whether such construction complies with grantee's
proposal to city regarding such construction. Within 30 day of receipt of
notice of completion of the construction, city shall give written notice to
grantee indicating whether city agrees the construction is complete or
specifying those items of construction which city determines are not
complete. At such time as city and grantee mutually agree that the
construction of the system is substantially complete, grantee shall provide
to city a bond in the amount equal to the bond existing immediately before
the commencement of the additional construction. Nothing herein shall be
construed to require grantee to maintain more than 1 bond with city.



                  iii.   In the event this franchise is
canceled by reason of default of grantee or revoked, city shall be entitled
to collect from the performance bond that amount which is directly
attributable to any damages sustained by the city pursuant to the default or
revocation. Grantee, however, shall be entitled to the return of such
performance bond, or portion thereof, as remains at the expiration of the
term of the franchise.



                  iv.   The rights reserved to the city
with respect to the performance bond are in addition to all other rights of
the city whether reserved by this franchise or authorized by law, and no
action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to the performance
bond shall affect any other right the city may have.



               b.   Procedure for imposition of penalties.



                  i.   Whenever the city finds that
grantee has violated 1 or more material terms, conditions or provisions of
this franchise or federal or state law or regulation, a written notice shall
be given to grantee informing it of such violation or liability. The written
notice shall describe in reasonable detail the specific violation so as to
afford grantee an opportunity to remedy the violation. Grantee shall have 30
days subsequent to receipt of the notice in which to correct the violation.



                  ii.   Whenever a franchise violation
has been alleged pursuant to section (11)(b)(i), grantee may, within 10 days
of local receipt of notice, notify city that there is a dispute as to whether
a violation or failure has, in fact, occurred. Such notice by grantee to city
shall specify with particularity the matters disputed by grantee and shall
toll the running of the cure period provided pursuant to section (11)(b)(i).
City shall hear grantee's dispute at the next regularly scheduled Council
meeting. City shall supplement the Council decision with written findings of
fact.



                  iii.   If grantee fails to cure such
default within 30 days after the giving of such notice, or if such default is
of such a character as to require more than 30 days within which to cure the
same, and grantee fails to commence to cure the same within the 30 day period
and thereafter fails to use reasonable diligence, in city's reasonable
opinion, to cure such default as soon as possible, then and in any event,
such default shall be a substantial breach of this franchise and city, at its
option may elect to either cure the default or terminate and cancel this
franchise and all rights and privileges of this franchise as follows:



                     (a)   City may place the issue
of revocation and termination of the franchise before the Council at a
regular or special meeting of the City Council. If city decides there is
cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed:



                        (1)   City shall provide
grantee with a written notice of city's intention to terminate the franchise
and specifying in detail the reason or cause for proposed termination. City
shall allow grantee a minimum of 30 days subsequent to receipt of the notice
in which to correct the default.



                        (2)   Grantee shall be
provided with an opportunity to be heard at a public hearing prior to any
decision to terminate this franchise.



                        (3)   In the event that
city determines to terminate this franchise, the grantee shall have a period
of 30 days, beginning the date next following written notice to grantee of
such decision, within which to file an appeal with a court of competent
jurisdiction. During such 30 day period and if an appeal is taken, the
franchise shall remain in full force and effect, unless the term thereof
sooner expires.



               c.   Letter of credit.



                  i.   At the time of acceptance of this
franchise, grantee shall provide a continuing irrevocable letter of credit in
the name of city for the sum of $10,000 in a form and from an issuer
acceptable to city. Grantee shall maintain the continuing irrevocable letter
of credit throughout the term of this franchise and until such time as
grantee has liquidated all of its obligations with city. Provisions shall be
made to permit the City's Administrator designated in this franchise to issue
a sight draft against such letter of credit. Grantee shall not use the letter
of credit for other purposes and shall not assign, pledge or otherwise
encumber the security fund as security for another purpose.



                  ii.   In addition to recovery of any
monies owed by grantee to city or damages to city as a result of any acts or
omissions by grantee pursuant to the franchise, city in its sole discretion
may charge to and collect against the letter of credit the following
penalties:



                     (a)   For failure to complete
system construction in accordance with grantee's initial service area plan,
unless city approved the delay, the penalty shall be $250 per day for each
day, or part thereof, such failure occurs or continues.



                     (b)   For failure to provide
data, documents, reports or information or to reasonably cooperate with city
during an application process or system review, the penalty shall be $50 per
day for each day, or part thereof, such failure occurs or continues.



                     (c)   For failure to comply with
any of the provisions of this franchise for which a penalty is not otherwise
specifically provided pursuant to this paragraph (c), the penalty shall be
$50 per day for each day, or part thereof, such failure occurs or continues.



                     (d)   For failure to test,
analyze and report on the performance of the system, the penalty shall be
$50  per day for each day, or part thereof, such failure occurs or continues.



                     (e)   For failure by grantee to
modify the system or to provide additional services within 180 days after
such modification is required by this franchise, the penalty shall be $250
per day for each day, or part thereof, such failure occurs or continues.



                     (f)   Forty-five days following
notice from city of a failure of grantee to comply with construction,
operation or maintenance standards, the penalty shall be $250 per day for
each day, or part thereof, such failure occurs or continues.



                     (g)   For failure to provide the
services grantee has proposed, including but not limited to the activation of
the access channels, the provision of the access operating fund required
herein, the penalty shall be $50 per day for each day, or part thereof, such
failure occurs or continues.



                     (h)   Each violation of any
provision of this franchise shall be considered a separate violation for
which a separate penalty can be imposed.



                  iii.   The city shall comply with
section 11(b) herein in order to draw on the letter of credit or otherwise
impose penalties on grantee pursuant to this section 11(c).



                  iv.   If city draws upon the letter of
credit, in whole or in part, grantee shall replace the same within 15 days.



                  v.   The remedies under this section
11(c) are not exclusive, and at the city's discretion it may collect damages,
monies, or penalties from the letter of credit either in addition to or
instead of other remedies which may be available to the city either under
this franchise or under federal, state, or local law. Any act, or failure to
act, by city pursuant to its rights under the letter of credit shall not be
deemed a waiver of any right of city pursuant to this franchise or otherwise.



            12.   Sale, abandonment, transfer, foreclosure and
receivership of franchise.



               a.   Foreclosure. Upon the foreclosure or
other judicial sale of all or part of the system, grantee shall notify city
of such fact and such notification shall be treated as a notification that a
change in control of grantee has taken place, and the provisions of this
franchise governing the consent to transfer or change in ownership shall
apply.



               b.    Receivership. City shall have the
right to cancel this franchise 120 days after the appointment of a receiver
or trustee to take over and conduct the business of grantee, whether in
receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding,
unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the
expiration of the 120 days, or unless:



                  i.   Within 120 days after election or
appointment, such receiver or trustee shall have fully complied with all the
provisions of this franchise and remedied all defaults hereunder; and



                  ii.   Such receiver or trustee, within
the 120 days, shall have executed an agreement with city duly approved by the
court having jurisdiction in the premises, whereby such receiver or trustee
assumes and agrees to be bound by each and every provision of this franchise.



               c.   Abandonment of service. Grantee may not
abandon the system or any portion thereof without having first given 3 months
written notice to the city. Grantee may not abandon the system or any portion
thereof without compensating the city for damages resulting from the
abandonment. The abandonment of any substantial portion of the system may be
cause for termination of the franchise by city pursuant to the procedures in
section 11(b) herein. Upon final adjudication of abandonment of the system by
grantee and subject to the city's full compliance with 47 U.S.C. § 547
(1993), city shall have the right to declare all right, title, and interest
to the system in city, with all rights of ownership including, but not
limited to, the right to operate the system or transfer the system to another
for operation by it.



               d.   Removal After termination or
forfeiture.  In the event of termination, abandonment, or forfeiture of the
franchise, the city shall have the right to require grantee to remove all or
any portion of the system from all streets and public property within the
city; provided, however, that if grantee is authorized to provide
telecommunications services on the system pursuant to state or federal law,
the city may not order the removal of any portion of the system used to
provide such telecommunications services.



               e.   Sale or transfer of franchise.



                  i.   No sale, transfer, or
"fundamental corporate change" as defined in M.S. § 238.083, of this
franchise or system shall take place until the parties to the sale, transfer,
or fundamental corporate change files a written request with the city for its
approval, provided, however, that the approval shall not be required where
grantee grants a security interest in its franchise and assets to secure an
indebtedness.



                  ii.   The city shall have 30 days from
the time of receipt of the request to reply in writing and indicate approval
of the request or its determination that a public hearing is necessary due to
potential adverse effect on grantee's subscribers resulting from the sale or
transfer. Such approval or determination shall be expressed by Council
Resolution within 30 days of receipt of the request, or the request shall be
deemed approved as a matter of law. If the city fails to render a final
decision pursuant to federal law, the request shall be deemed approved as a
matter of law unless the time for consideration is extended by mutual
agreement of the city and grantee.



                  iii.   If a public hearing is deemed
necessary pursuant to section 12(d)(ii) above, such hearing shall be
commenced within 30 days of such determination and notice of any such hearing
shall be given in accordance with local law or 14 days prior to the hearing
by publishing notice thereof once in a newspaper of general circulation in
city. The notice shall contain the date, time and place of the hearing and
shall briefly state the substance of the action to be considered by city. The
hearing may be continued with the consent of grantee.



                  iv.   Within 30 days after the closing
of the public hearing, the city shall approve or deny in writing the sale or
transfer request. City shall set forth in writing with particularity its
reason(s) for denying approval. City shall not unreasonably withhold its
approval.



                  v.   The parties to the sale or
transfer of the franchise only, without the inclusion of the system in which
substantial construction has commenced, shall establish that the sale or
transfer of only the franchise will be in the public interest.



                  vi.   Any sale or transfer of equity
in grantee so as to create a new controlling interest in the system shall be
subject to the requirements of this section 12(e). The term "controlling
interest" as used herein is not limited to majority stock ownership, but
includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised.



                  vii.   In no event shall a transfer or
assignment of ownership or control be approved without the transferee
becoming a signatory to this franchise and assuming all rights and
obligations thereunder, and assuming all other rights and obligations of the
transferor to the city.



                  viii.   In the event of any proposed
sale or assignment pursuant to paragraph (i) of this section city shall have
the right of first refusal of any bona fide offer to purchase the system.
Bona fide offer, as used in this section, means an offer received by the
grantee which it intends to accept subject to the city's rights under this
section. This written offer must be conveyed to the city along with the
grantee's written acceptance of the offer contingent upon the rights of the
city provided for in this section. City shall be deemed to have waived its
rights under this section in the following circumstances:



                     (a)   If it does not indicate to
grantee in writing, within 30 days of notice of a proposed sale or
assignment, its intention to exercise its right of purchase; or



                     (b)   It approves the assignment
or sale of the franchise as provided within this section.



            13.   Protection of individual rights.



               a.   Discriminatory practices prohibited.
Grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate
against subscribers or general citizens on the basis of race, color,
religion, national origin, sex or age. Grantee shall comply at all times with
all other applicable federal, state, and city laws, and all executive and
administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination.



               b.   Subscriber privacy.



                  i.   No signals including signals of a
Class IV Channel may be transmitted from a subscriber terminal for purposes
of monitoring individual viewing patterns or practices without the express
written permission of the subscriber. The request for such permission shall
be contained in a separate document with a prominent statement that the
subscriber is authorizing the permission in full knowledge of its provisions.
Such written permission shall be for a limited period of time not to exceed 1
year which shall be renewed at the option of the subscriber. No penalty shall
be invoked for a subscriber's failure to provide or renew such authorization.
The authorization shall be revocable at any time by the subscriber without
penalty of any kind whatsoever. Such permission shall be required for each
type or classification of Class IV Channel activity planned for the purpose
of monitoring individual viewing patterns or practices.



                  ii.   No information or data obtained
by monitoring transmission of a signal from a subscriber terminal, or any
other means, including but not limited to lists of the names and addresses of
such subscribers or any lists that identify the viewing habits of subscribers
shall be sold or otherwise made available to any party other than to grantee
and its employees for internal business use, and also to the subscriber
subject of that information, unless grantee has received specific written
authorization from the subscriber to make such data available.



                  iii.   Written permission from the
subscriber shall not be required for the conducting of systemwide or
individually addressed electronic sweeps for the purpose of verifying system
integrity or monitoring for the purpose of billing. Confidentiality of such
information shall be subject to the provision set forth in paragraph (ii) of
this section.



            14.   Unauthorized connections and modifications.



               a.   Unauthorized connections or
modifications prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any firm, person, group,
company, corporation, or governmental body or agency, without the express
consent of the grantee, to make or possess, or assist anybody in making or
possessing, any connection, extension, or division, whether physically,
acoustically, inductively, electronically or otherwise, with or to any
segment of the system.



               b.   Removal or destruction prohibited. It
shall be unlawful for any firm, person, group, company, corporation, or
government body or agency to willfully interfere, tamper, remove, obstruct,
or damage, or assist thereof, any part or segment of the system for any
purpose whatsoever.



               c.   Penalty.  Any firm, person, group,
company, corporation or government body or agency found guilty of violating
this section may be fined not less than $20 and the costs of the action nor
more than $500 and the costs of the action for each and every subsequent
offense. Each continuing day of the violation shall be considered a separate
occurrence.



            15.   Miscellaneous provisions.



               a.   Franchise renewal. Any renewal of this
franchise shall be done in accordance with applicable federal, state and
local laws and regulations.



               b.   Work performed by others. All
provisions of this franchise shall apply to any subcontractor or others
performing any work or services pursuant to the provisions of this franchise.



               c.   Amendment of franchise ordinance.
Grantee and city may agree, from time to time, to amend this franchise. Such
written amendments may be made subsequent to a review session pursuant to
section 14(g) or at any other time if city and grantee agree that such an
amendment will be in the public interest or if such an amendment is required
due to changes in federal, state or local laws. City shall act pursuant to
local law pertaining to the ordinance amendment process.



               d.   Compliance with federal, state and
local laws.



                  i.   If any federal or state law or
regulation shall require or permit city or grantee to perform any service or
act or shall prohibit city or grantee from performing any service or act
which may be in conflict with the terms of this franchise, then as soon as
possible following knowledge thereof, either party shall notify the other of
the point in conflict believed to exist between such law or regulation.
Grantee and city shall conform to state laws and rules regarding cable
communications not later than 1 year after they become effective, unless
otherwise stated, and to conform to federal laws and regulations regarding
cable as they become effective.



                  ii.   If any term, condition or
provision of this franchise or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance shall, to any extent, be held to be invalid or unenforceable,
the remainder hereof and the application of such term, condition or provision
to persons or circumstances other than those as to whom it shall be held
invalid or unenforceable shall not be affected thereby, and this franchise
and all the terms, provisions and conditions hereof shall, in all other
respects, continue to be effective and complied with. In the event such law,
rule or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise
changed so that the provision which had been held invalid or modified is no
longer in conflict with the law, rules and regulations then in effect, said
provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect and shall
thereafter be binding on grantee and the city.



               e.   Nonenforcement by city. Grantee shall
not be relieved of its obligations to comply with any of the provisions of
this franchise by reason of any failure or delay of the city to enforce
prompt compliance. Any waiver by the city of a breach or violation of any
provision of this franchise shall not operate as or be construed to be a
waiver of any subsequent breach or violation.



               f.   Administration of franchise. The City
Administrator or other city designee shall have continuing regulatory
jurisdiction and supervision over the system and the grantee's operation
under the franchise. The city may issue such reasonable rules and regulations
concerning the construction, operation and maintenance of the system as are
consistent with the provisions of the franchise and law.



               g.   Periodic evaluation. The field of cable
communications is a relatively new and rapidly changing one which may see
many regulatory, technical, financial, marketing and legal changes during the
term of this franchise. Therefore, in order to provide for a maximum degree
of flexibility in this franchise, and to help achieve a continued advanced
and modem system, the following evaluation provisions shall apply:



                  i.   The city may require evaluation
sessions to correspond with the fifth and tenth year anniversaries of the
acceptance of this franchise.



                  ii.   All evaluation sessions shall be
open to the public and notice of sessions published in the same say as a
legal notice. Grantee shall notify its subscribers of all evaluation sessions
by announcement on at least 1 basic service channel of the system between the
hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. for 5 consecutive days preceding each
session.



                  iii.   Topics which may be discussed
at any evaluation session may include, but are not limited to, application of
new technologies, system performance, programming offered, access channels,
facilities and support, municipal uses of cable, customer complaints,
amendments to this franchise, judicial rulings, FCC rulings, line extension
policies and any other topics the city and grantee deem relevant.



                  iv.   During a review and evaluation
by city, grantee shall fully cooperate with city and shall provide to the
city such information and documents as Commission may request to reasonably
perform the evaluation.



                  v.   As a result of a periodic review
or evaluation session, the city and Grantee may, in good faith, develop such
changes and modifications to the terms and conditions of the franchise, as
are mutually agreed upon.



               h.   Citizens Advisory Board. The city may
appoint a citizen advisory body to monitor the performance of the grantee
pursuant to the franchise and advise the city of same. As a result of any
periodic evaluation session as promulgated in section (14)(g), the advisory
body may submit a report to the city and grantee assessing the grantee's
performance according to the terms of the franchise and make recommendations
to the city regarding the system's operations.



               i.   Rights cumulative. All rights and
remedies given to city by this franchise shall be in addition to and
cumulative with any and all other rights and remedies, existing or implied,
now or hereafter available to the city, at law or in equity, and such rights
and remedies shall not be exclusive, but each and every right and remedy
specifically given by this franchise or otherwise existing or given may be
exercised from time to time and as often and in such order as may be deemed
expedient by the city and the exercise of one or more rights or remedies
shall not be deemed a waiver of the right to exercise at the same time or
thereafter any other right or remedy.



               j.   Grantee acknowledgment of validity of
franchise. Grantee acknowledges that it has had an opportunity to review the
terms and conditions of this franchise and that under current law grantee
believes that said terms and conditions are not unreasonable or arbitrary,
and that grantee believes the city has the power to make the terms and
conditions contained in this franchise.



            16.   Publication effective date; acceptance and
exhibits.



               a.   Publication effective date.  This
franchise, or a summary thereof, shall be published in accordance with
applicable Minnesota law . The effective date of this franchise shall be the
later of the date of acceptance by grantee in accordance with the provisions
of section 16(b).



               b.   Acceptance.



                  i.   Grantee shall accept this
franchise within 60 days of its enactment by City Council, unless the time
for acceptance is extended by the city. Such acceptance by the grantee shall
be deemed the grant of this franchise for all purposes. In the event
acceptance does not take place, this franchise and any and all rights
previously granted to grantee shall be null and void.



                  ii.   Upon acceptance of this
franchise, grantee shall be bound by all the terms and conditions contained
herein.



                  iii.   Grantee shall accept this
franchise in the following manner:



                     (a)   This franchise will be
properly executed and acknowledged by grantee and delivered to city.



                     (b)   With its acceptance,
grantee shall also deliver any performance bond, outstanding access and
franchise fees, letter of credit, and insurance certificates required herein
that have not previously been delivered.



(Franchise 156, passed 9-16-1996)



§ 33.07  CONTRACTS WITH THE CITY.



   (A)   Contracts to be in writing. All contracts involving the city
for greater than $25,000 shall be written.



   (B)   Signing of contracts. All written contracts for more than
$25,000 shall be signed by the authorized agent designated by the City
Council.



   (C)   Municipal contracts. A contract for the sale, purchase or
rental of supplies, materials or equipment or for the construction,
alteration, repair or maintenance of real or personal property shall be
established in accordance with the following procedures. No provision herein
shall supersede the requirement that all city and departmental expenditures
must be within the parameters of the duly adopted annual budget.



      (1)   Contracts less than $25,000. If the amount of the
contract does not exceed $25,000, the City Administrator is authorized to
directly enter into the contract in the open market without first obtaining
Council approval.



      (2)   Contracts from $25,000 to$175,000. If the amount of the
contract is estimated to exceed $25,000 but not to exceed $175,000, the
contract may be made either upon sealed bids or by direct negotiation, by
obtaining 2 or more quotations for the purchase or sale when possible and
without advertising for bids. All quotations shall be kept on file for at
least 1 year.



      (3)   Contracts over$175,000. If the amount of the contract is
estimated to exceed $175,000, sealed bids shall be solicited by public notice
published.



   (D)   Special rules for assessment contracts. When the Council
determines to make an improvement and to assess the cost of the improvement
against the benefitted property, then the requirements and procedures
concerning creation of the improvement contract shall be in accordance with
the requirements of M.S. § 429.041, as it may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 136, passed 2-22-1994; Am. Ord. 108, 4th series, passed
9-4-2018)CHAPTER 34:  TAXATION



Section



Gambling Tax



   34.01   Charitable gambling tax



Lodging Tax



   34.15   Definitions



   34.16   Imposition of tax



   34.17   Collections



   34.18   Exceptions and exemptions



   34.19   Advertising no tax



   34.20   Payment and returns



   34.21   Examination of return, adjustments, notices and demands



   34.22   Refunds



   34.23   Failure to file a return



   34.24   Penalty



   34.25   Administration of tax



   34.26   Examine records



   34.27   Contract with state



   34.28   Violations



   34.29   Use of proceeds



   34.30   Appeals



Sales and Use Tax



   34.40   Authority



   34.41   Definitions



   34.42   Imposition of tax



   34.43   Separate statement; collection from purchaser; advertising
no tax; minimum uniform tax collection methods



   34.44   Exemption certificates



   34.45   Presumption of purpose of sale



   34.46   Collection at time of sale



   34.47   Agent of retailer



   34.48   Effective date; transitional sales



   34.49   Collection and enforcement



   34.50   Tax clearance issuance of licenses



GAMBLING TAX



§ 34.01 CHARITABLE GAMBLING TAX.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to regulate and
control the conduct of gambling within the city.



   (B)   Provisions of state law adopted.  The provisions of M.S.
Chapter 349, as amended from time to time, relating to the definition of
terms, licensing and restrictions of lawful gambling, are adopted and made a
part of this section as if set out in full.



   (C)   Exempt gambling.  The City of North Mankato will not impose
local regulation upon gambling exempt from licensing by the Charitable
Gambling Control Board and as defined in M.S. § 349.214.



   (D)   Local gambling tax.



      (1)   A tax of 3% shall be imposed upon the gross receipts
generated within the city by licensed organizations from the conduct of
lawful gambling activities. Such 3% tax shall be levied on such gross
receipts less the cost of prizes actually paid out by the organization. Such
tax shall be paid to the city on a monthly basis, not less than 20 days after
the end of the month.



      (2)   Such payment shall be accompanied by a report containing
the following information upon such form as may be required by the City
Finance Director:



         (a)   Total amount of receipts from lawful gambling
activities within the city during the reporting period;



         (b)   The total amount of prizes actually paid out by
the organization during the reporting period from such gross receipts;



         (c)   The signature of the person filing the return; and



         (d)   The period covered by the return.



      (3)   All proceeds from such tax shall be used for the purpose
of regulating charitable gambling.



   (E)   Specific expenditures.



      (1)   A licensed organization shall make specific expenditures
of 10% from its net profits derived from lawful gambling. Such 10%
expenditure shall be levied on gross receipts generated within the city less
prizes actually paid out by the organization and amounts expended for
allowable expenses attributable to such gross receipts. Such specific
expenditure shall be paid monthly towards the lawful purpose established from
time to time by resolution of the Council.



      (2)   At the time that such licensed organization submits to
the city its report in support of the payment of the 3% gambling tax, such
organization shall also submit the following information upon such form as
may be required by the City Finance Director.



         (a)   Total amount of receipts generated within the city
from lawful gambling activities during the reporting period;



         (b)   The total amount of prizes actually paid out
attributable to such gross receipts by the organization during the reporting
period;



         (c)   The total amount of money expended for allowable
expenses attributable to such gross receipts;



         (d)   The amount of net profits derived from lawful
gambling during the reporting period attributable to such gross profits;



         (e)   The identification of the lawful purpose to which
such 10% expenditure was made;



         (f)   The signature of the person filing the report;



         (g)   The period covered by the report; and



         (h)   A receipt from the person or entity representing
the lawful purpose to which such 10% expenditure was made.



   (F)   Leasing liquor establishments.  If an organization licensed
to conduct lawful gambling leases any portion of a premises which are also
subject to a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages within the City of
North Mankato, Minnesota, then such gambling organization shall conform to
the following requirements:



      (1)   Within 30 days of entering into such lease, such
organization shall submit to the City Clerk a copy of the lease as well as a
verified statement that 40% of the active members of such organization are
North Mankato residents and 80% are residents of Minnesota School District
#77.



      (2)   Such lease shall not exceed the term of 1 year.



   (G)   Responsible parties.  The gambling manager or managers of a
licensed gambling organization shall be exclusively responsible for the
timely filing of all returns, reports, or other documents required by this
section. Violation of this section shall be punished as a misdemeanor.
Furthermore, the City Council may pursue such civil remedies as it deems
appropriate, including efforts to revoke such organization's license.



(Ord. 93, passed 5-16-1988)



LODGING TAX



§ 34.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 



   DIRECTOR. The Finance Director of the city.



   LODGER. The person obtaining lodging from an operator.



   LODGING.  The furnishing for a consideration of lodging by a hotel,
motel or rooming house except where such lodging shall be for a continuous
period of 30 days or more to the same lodger(s). The furnishing of rooms by
religious, educational or non-profit organizations shall not constitute
lodging for purposes of this chapter. 



   OPERATOR. A person who provides lodging to others or any officer, agent
or employee of such person.



   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, estate,
receiver, trustee, executor, administrator, assignee, syndicate, or any other
combination of individuals. Whenever the term PERSON is used in any provision
of this chapter prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as applied to a
corporation, association, or partnership, shall mean the officers, or
partners thereof as the case may be. 



   RENT. The total consideration valued in money charged for lodging
whether paid in money or otherwise, but shall not include any charges for
services rendered in connection with furnishing lodging other than the room
charge itself.



(Ord. 35, passed 8-1-1983)



§ 34.16  IMPOSITION OF TAX.



   There is hereby imposed a tax of 3% on the rent charged by an operator
for providing lodging to any person. The tax shall be stated and charged
separately and shall be collected by the operator from the lodger. The tax
collected by the operator shall be a debt owed by the operator to the city
and shall be extinguished only by payment to the city. In no case shall the
tax imposed by this section upon an operator exceed the amount of tax which
the operator is authorized and required by this chapter to collect from a
lodger. 



(Ord. 35, passed 8-1-1983)



§ 34.17  COLLECTIONS.



   Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter at the time
the rent is paid. The tax collections shall be deemed to be held in trust by
the operator for the city. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from
the rent charged for the lodging and those persons paying the tax shall
receive a receipt of payment from the operator.



(Ord. 35, passed 8-1-1983)



§ 34.18  EXCEPTIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Exceptions. No tax shall be imposed on rent for lodging paid
by any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of
express provisions of federal law or international treaty.



   (B)   Exemptions. An exemption shall be granted to any person as to
whom or whose occupancy it is beyond the power of the city to tax. No
exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time the
rent is collected and such a claim shall be made in writing and under penalty
of perjury on forms provided by the city. All such claims shall be forwarded
to the city when the returns and collections are submitted as required by
this chapter.



(Ord. 35, passed 8-1-1983)



§ 34.19  ADVERTISING NO TAX.



   It shall be unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold out or state
to the public or any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any
part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not
be added to the rent or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be
refunded. In computing the tax to be collected, amounts of tax less than one
cent shall be considered an additional cent.



(Ord. 35, passed 8-1-1983)



§ 34.20  PAYMENT AND RETURNS.



   (A)   The taxes imposed by this chapter shall be paid by the
operator to the city monthly not later than 25 days after the end of the
month in which the taxes were collected. At the time of payment the operator
shall submit a return upon such forms and containing such information as the
Director may require. The return shall contain the following minimum
information:



      (1)   The total amount of rent collected for lodging during
the period covered by the return;



      (2)   The amount of tax required to be collected and due for
the period;



      (3)   The signature of the person filing the return or that of
his or her agent duly authorized in writing;



      (4)   The period covered by the return;



      (5)   The amount of uncollectible rental charges subject to
the lodging tax.



   (B)   The operator may offset against the taxes payable with respect
to any reporting period the amount of taxes imposed by this chapter
previously paid as a result of any transaction, the consideration for which
became uncollectible during such reporting period, but only in proportion to
the portion of such consideration which became uncollectible.



(Ord. 35, passed 8-1-1983)



§ 34.21  EXAMINATION OF RETURN, ADJUSTMENTS, NOTICES AND DEMANDS.



   The Director shall, after a return is filed, examine the same and make
any investigation or examination of the records and accounts of the person
making the return deemed necessary for determining its correctness. The tax
computed on the basis of such examination shall be the tax to be paid. If the
tax due is found to be greater than that paid, such excess shall be paid to
the city within 10 days after receipt of a notice thereof given either
personally or sent by registered mail to the address shown on the return. If
the tax paid is greater than the tax found to be due, the excess shall be
refunded to the person who paid the tax to the city within 10 days after
determination of such refund.



(Ord. 35, passed 8-1-1983)



§ 34.22  REFUNDS.



   Any person may apply to the Director for a refund of taxes paid for a
prescribed period in excess of the amount legally due for that period,
provided that no application for refund shall be considered unless filed
within 1 year after such tax was paid, or within 1 year from the filing of
the return, whichever period is the longer. The Director shall examine the
claim and make and file written findings thereon denying or allowing the
claim in whole or in part and shall mail a notice thereof by registered mail
to such person at the address stated upon the return. If such claim is
allowed in whole or in part, the Director shall credit the amount of the
allowance against any taxes due under this chapter from the claimant and the
balance of said allowance, if any, shall be paid by the Director to the
claimant.



(Ord. 35, passed 8-1-1983)



§ 34.23  FAILURE TO FILE A RETURN.



   (A)   If any operator required by this chapter to file a return
shall fail to do so within the time prescribed, or shall make, willfully or
otherwise, an incorrect, false, or fraudulent return, the operator shall,
upon written notice and demand, file such return or corrected return within 5
days of receipt of such written notice and shall at the same time pay any tax
due on the basis thereof. If such person shall fail to file such return or
corrected return, the Director shall make a return or corrected return, for
such person from such knowledge and information as the Director can obtain,
and assess a tax on the basis thereof, which tax (less any payments
theretofore made on account of the tax for the taxable period covered by such
return) shall be paid upon within 5 days of the receipt of written notice and
demand for such payment. Any such return or assessment made by the Director
shall be prima facie correct and valid, and such person shall have the burden
of establishing its incorrectness or invalidity in any action or proceeding
in respect thereto.



   (B)   If any portion of a tax imposed by this chapter, including
penalties thereon, is not paid within 30 days after it is required to be
paid, the City Attorney may institute such legal action as may be necessary
to recover the amount due plus interest, penalties, the costs and
disbursements of any action.



   (C)   Upon a showing of good cause, the Director may grant an
operator one 30-day extension of time within which to file a return and make
payment of taxes as required by this chapter, provided that interest during
such period of extension shall be added to the taxes due at the rate of 10%
per annum.



(Ord. 35, passed 8-1-1983)



§ 34.24  PENALTY.



   (A)   If any tax imposed by this chapter is not paid within the time
herein specified for the payment, or any extension thereof, there shall be
added thereto a specific penalty equal to 10% of the amount remaining unpaid.



   (B)   In case of any failure to make and file a return within the
time prescribed by this chapter, unless it is shown that such failure is not
due to willful neglect, there shall be added to the tax in addition to the
10% specific penalty provided in division (A) above, 10% if the failure is
for not more than 30 days with an additional 5% for each additional 30 days
or fraction thereof during which such failure continues, not exceeding 25% in
the aggregate. If the penalty as computed does not exceed $10, a minimum
penalty of $10 shall be assessed. The amount so added to any tax shall be
collected at the same time and the same manner and as a part of the tax
unless the tax has been paid before the discovery of the negligence, in which
case the amount so added shall be collected in the same manner as the tax.



   (C)   If any person willfully fails to file any return or make any
payment required by this chapter, or willfully files a false or fraudulent
return or willfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat any such a tax
or payment thereof, there shall also be imposed as a penalty an amount equal
to 50% of any tax (less any amounts paid on the basis of such false or
fraudulent return) found due for the period to which such return is related.
The penalty imposed by this subdivision shall be collected as part of the tax
and shall be in addition to any other penalties provided by this chapter.



   (D)   All payments received shall be credited first to penalties,
next to interest, and then to the tax due. 



   (E)   The amount of tax not timely paid, together with any penalty
provided by this section, shall bear interest at the rate of 8% per annum
from the time such tax should have been paid until paid. Any interest and
penalty shall be added to the tax and be collected as part thereof.



(Ord. 35, passed 8-1-1983)



§ 34.25  ADMINISTRATION OF TAX.



   The Director shall administer and enforce the assessment and collection
of the taxes imposed by this chapter. The Director shall cause to be prepared
blank forms for the returns and other documents required by this chapter and
shall distribute the same throughout the city and furnish them on
application, but failure to receive or secure them shall not relieve any
person from any obligation required of him or her under this chapter.



(Ord. 35, passed 8-1-1983)



§ 34.26  EXAMINE RECORDS.



   The Director and those persons acting on behalf of the director
authorized in writing by the Director may examine the books, papers and
records of any operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made,
or if no return was made, to ascertain the tax as provided in this chapter.
Every such operator is directed and required to give to the Director or to
his or her duly authorized agent or employee the means, facilities and
opportunity for such examinations and investigations as are hereby authorized.



(Ord. 35, passed 8-1-1983)



§ 34.27  CONTRACT WITH STATE.



   The City Administrator is authorized to confer with the Minnesota
Commissioner of Taxation to the end that an agreement between the city and
the Commissioner of Taxation may be entered into for the purpose of providing
for the administration and collection of the taxes imposed by this chapter.
Such an agreement shall not become effective until presented to the Council
for its approval and when so approved the tax imposed by this chapter shall
be collected and administered pursuant to the terms of said agreement.



(Ord. 35, passed 8-1-1983)



§ 34.28  VIOLATIONS.



   Any person who shall willfully fail to make a return required by this
chapter; or who shall fail to pay the tax after written demand for payment;
or who shall fail to remit the taxes collected or any penalty or interest
imposed by this chapter after written demand for such payment; or who shall
refuse to permit the Director or any duly authorized agents or employees to
examine the books, records and papers under his or her control; or who shall
willfully make any incomplete, false or fraudulent return shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 35, passed 8-1-1983)



§ 34.29  USE OF PROCEEDS.



   The 95% proceeds obtained from the collection of taxes pursuant to this
chapter shall be used in accordance with M.S. § 469.190, as it may be
amended from time to time, to fund a local convention or tourism bureau for
the purpose of marketing and promoting the city as a tourist or convention
center.



(Ord. 35, passed 8-1-1983)



§ 34.30  APPEALS.



   (A)   Any operator aggrieved by any notice, order or determination
made by the Director under this chapter may file a petition for review of
such notice, order or determination detailing the operator's reasons for
contesting the notice, order or determination. The petition shall contain the
name of the petitioner, the petitioner's address and the location of the
lodging subject to the order, notice or determination.



   (B)   The petition for review shall be filed with the City Clerk
within 10 days after the notice, order or determination for which review is
sought has been mailed or served upon the person requesting review.



   (C)   Upon receipt of the petition the City Administrator, or his or
her designee, shall set a date for a hearing and give the petitioner at least
5 days prior written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing. 



   (D)   At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity
to show cause why the notice, order or determination should be modified or
withdrawn. The petitioner may be represented by counsel of petitioner’s
choosing at petitioner’s own expense.



   (E)   The hearing shall be conducted by the City Administrator or
his or her designee, provided only that the person conducting the hearing
shall not have participated in the drafting of the order, notice or
determination for which review is sought.



   (F)   The person conducting the hearing shall make written findings
of fact and conclusions based upon the applicable sections of this chapter
and the evidence presented. The person conducting the hearing may affirm,
reverse or modify the notice, order or determination made by the Director. 



   (G)   Any decision rendered by the City Administrator pursuant to
this subdivision may be appealed to the City Council. A petitioner seeking to
appeal a decision must file a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk
within 10 days after the decision has been mailed to the petitioner. The
matter will thereupon be placed on the Council agenda as soon as is
practical. The Council shall then review the findings of fact and conclusions
to determine whether they were correct. Upon a determination by the Council
that findings and conclusions were incorrect, the Council may modify, reverse
or affirm the decision of the City Administrator or his or her designee upon
the same standards as set forth in division (F) of this section.



(Ord. 35, passed 8-1-1983)



SALES AND USE TAX



§ 34.40  AUTHORITY.



   The Minnesota Legislature has, by Laws of Minnesota 2008, Chapter 366,
Article 7, Section 20, authorized the city to impose a 0.5% sales and use tax
to assist in funding of approved projects as listed in the statute. The city
approved the act in accordance with applicable law.



(Ord. 18, 4th Series, passed 6-16-2008)



§ 34.41  DEFINITIONS.



   The words, terms and phrases used in this subchapter shall have the
meaning ascribed to them in M.S. Ch. 297A, except where the context clearly
indicates otherwise. In addition, the following definitions shall apply:



   ACT.  Laws of Minnesota 2008, Chapter 366, Article 7, Section 20.



   CITY.  The City of North Mankato, Minnesota.



   COMMISSIONER.  The Commissioner of Revenue for the State of Minnesota,
acting under the authority of an agreement entered into between the city and
the state pursuant to the act, or such other person or entity designated to
administer and collect the sales and use tax.



   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THE CITY OR ANY LIKE
TERM.  Any retailer having or maintaining within the city, directly or by a
subsidiary or an affiliate, an office, place of distribution, sales or sample
room or place, warehouse or other place of business, or having any
representative, including an affiliate, agent, sales person, canvasser or
solicitor operating in the city under the authority of the retailer or its
subsidiary, for any purpose, including the repairing, selling, delivering,
installation or soliciting of orders of the retailer's goods or services, or
the leasing of tangible personal property located in the city, whether the
place of business or agent, representative, affiliate, sales person,
canvasser or solicitor is located in the city permanently or temporarily, or
whether or not the retailer or subsidiary is authorized to do business within
the city.



   SALES AND USE TAX.  The SALES AND USE TAX imposed and collected
pursuant to this subchapter.



   SUBCHAPTER.  Sections 34.40 et seq. in their present form, and as
subsequently codified in the North Mankato City Code.



(Ord. 18, 4th Series, passed 6-16-2008)



§ 34.42  IMPOSITION OF TAX.



   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, there is hereby
imposed an additional excise tax in the amount of 0.5% of the gross receipts
from the sales at retail, and the storage, use, distribution or consumption
of goods or services that are taxable pursuant to M.S. Ch. 297A, and occur
within the city. The imposition, administration, collection and enforcement
of this tax shall be governed by the provisions of M.S. Chs. 297A, 270C and
289A.



(Ord. 18, 4th Series, passed 6-16-2008)



§ 34.43  SEPARATE STATEMENT; COLLECTION FROM PURCHASER; ADVERTISING NO TAX;
MINIMUM UNIFORM TAX COLLECTION METHODS.



   The sales and use tax shall be stated and charged separately from the
sales price or charge for service insofar as practical, and should be a debt
from the purchaser to the seller recoverable at law in the same manner as
other debts. In computing the tax to be collected as a result of any
transaction, any amount of tax less than $0.005 may be disregarded, and
amounts of tax $0.005 or more may be considered an additional cent. If the
sales price of any sale at retail is $0.99 or less, no tax shall be collected.



(Ord. 18, 4th Series, passed 6-16-2008)



§ 34.44  EXEMPTION CERTIFICATES.



   A fully completed exemption certificate taken from a purchaser to the
effect that the property purchased is for resale or that the sale is
otherwise exempt from the application of the tax imposed by this subchapter
will conclusively relieve the retailer from collecting and remitting the tax.
A person who has obtained from the Commissioner an exemption certificate
pursuant to the M.S. Ch. 297A may use such exemption certificate for the
purposes of the sales tax imposed by the city.



(Ord. 18, 4th Series, passed 6-16-2008)



§ 34.45  PRESUMPTION OF PURPOSE OF SALE.



   For the purpose of the proper administration and enforcement of §
34.42, it shall be presumed that all retail sales for delivery in the city
are for storage, use or other consumption in the city until the contrary is
established.



(Ord. 18, 4th Series, passed 6-16-2008)



§ 34.46  COLLECTION AT TIME OF SALE.



   (A)   Any retailer making deliveries within the city, any retailer
maintaining a place of business in the city, or any other retailer otherwise
doing business within the city, upon making sales or any items described in
§ 34.42 that are not exempted from the sales tax imposed under that section,
and that are to be delivered or caused to be delivered within the city to the
purchaser, shall at the time of making such sales and collect the sales and
use tax from the purchaser. The tax collected by such retailer shall be
remitted to the Commissioner on behalf of the city.



   (B)   Any retailer required to collect the sales and use tax, and
remit such tax to the Commissioner pursuant to this section, shall register
with the Commissioner and provide such other information as the Commissioner
may require.



(Ord. 18, 4th Series, passed 6-16-2008)



§ 34.47  AGENT OF RETAILER.



   When, in the opinion of the Commissioner, it is necessary for the
efficient administration of the tax, the Commissioner may regard any
salesman, representative, trucker, peddler or canvasser as the agent of the
dealer, distributor, supervisor, employer or other person under whom such
salesman, representative, trucker, peddler or canvasser operated, or from
whom the tangible property is being sold is obtained, and may regard the
dealer, distributor, supervisor, employer or other person as a retailer for
the purposes of this subchapter.



(Ord. 18, 4th Series, passed 6-16-2008)



§ 34.48  EFFECTIVE DATE; TRANSITIONAL SALES.



   Except as otherwise provided herein, the sales and use tax authorized
by this subchapter shall apply to sales made on or after October 1, 2008, and
shall be in addition to all other taxes now in effect. The sales and use tax
shall not apply to the following:



   (A)   The gross receipts from the purchase or lease of tangible
personal property made under an enforceable contract entered into before
October 1, 2008, provided that delivery or possession of items is taken on or
before December 31, 2008.



   (B)   The gross receipts from the purchase of taxable services made
under an enforceable contract entered into before October 1, 2008, and for
which payment was made before October 1, 2008, provided that the services
were provided before December 31, 2008.



   (C)   The gross receipts from the purchase of construction materials
used to complete a lump sum or fixed price construction contract that was
signed and enforceable before October 1, 2008, and that does not provide for
an allocation of future taxes, provided that the construction materials are
used exclusively in performing the contract and the materials are delivered
before March 31, 2009.



   (D)   The gross receipts from the purchase of utility services if
the utility bill includes charges for services furnished before October 1,
2008; however, the sales and use tax shall apply to all utility bills for
periods beginning October 1, 2008.



(Ord. 18, 4th Series, passed 6-16-2008)



§ 34.49  COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   The sales and use tax imposed by the city pursuant to this subchapter
shall be subject to the same interests, penalties and other rules as are
applicable to the state general sales tax imposed by M.S. Chs. 289A and 297A.
The sales and use tax imposed by the city pursuant to this subchapter may be
collected by the state on behalf of the city as provided by an appropriate
agreement with the Minnesota Commissioner of Revenue.



(Ord. 18, 4th Series, passed 6-16-2008)



§ 34.50  TAX CLEARANCE ISSUANCE OF LICENSES.



   The city may not issue or renew a license for the conduct of trade or
business in the city if the Commissioner notifies the city that the applicant
for such license owes delinquent sales and use taxes as provided in this
subchapter, or penalties or interest due on such taxes.



   (A)   For the purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:



      APPLICANT.  An individual if the license is issued to, or in the
name of, an individual; or a corporation, partnership or other entity, if the
license is issued to or in the name of a corporation, partnership or other
entity.



      DELINQUENT TAXES.  Do not include a tax liability if:



         (a)   An administrative or court action that contests
the amount of validity or the liability has been filed or served;



         (b)   The appeal period to contest tax liability has not
expired; or



         (c)   The applicant has entered into a payment agreement
and is current with the payments.



      PENALTIES AND INTEREST.  PENALTIES AND INTEREST due on taxes
included in the following definition.



      SALES AND USE TAXES.  Include sales and use tax as provided in
this subchapter.



   (B)   A copy of the notice of delinquent taxes given to the city
shall also be sent to the applicant taxpayer. In the case of renewal of a
license, if the applicant requests a hearing in writing, within 30 days of
the receipt of the notice of delinquent taxes, then a contested case hearing
shall be held by the Commissioner under the same procedures as provided in
M.S. § 270C.72 for the state sales and use tax imposed under M.S. Ch. 
297A, provided that if a hearing must be held on the state sales and use tax,
hearings may be combined.



(Ord. 18, 4th Series, passed 6-16-2008)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS




      Chapter





         50.   GENERAL UTILITIES





         51.   REFUSE COLLECTION





         52.   WATER SERVICE





         53.   SEWERAGE SERVICE





         54.   STORMWATER





         55.   RECYCLING COLLECTION FACILITIES




CHAPTER 50:  GENERAL UTILITIES



Section



   50.01   Definitions



   50.02   Fixing rates and charges for municipal utilities



   50.03   Contractual contents



   50.04   Rules and regulations relating to municipal utilities



   50.05   Connection or tapping prohibited; delinquent assessments or
charges



   50.06   Disconnection



   50.98   Violations



§ 50.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMPANY, GRANTEE and FRANCHISEE. Any private utility system to which a
franchise has been granted by the city.



   CONSUMER and CUSTOMER. Any user of a utility.



   MULTI-UNIT DWELLING.  All buildings that contain 4 or more units for
residential occupancy.



   MUNICIPAL UTILITY. Any municipally-owned utility system, including, but
not by way of limitation, water, sewerage and refuse service.



   SERVICE.  Providing a particular utility to a customer or consumer.



   UTILITY.  All utility services, whether the same be public
municipally-owned facilities or furnished by private utility companies.



(1975 Code, § 3.01)



§ 50.02  FIXING RATES AND CHARGES FOR MUNICIPAL UTILITIES.



   All rates and charges for municipal utilities, including, but not by
way of limitation, rates for service, connection and meter reading fees,
disconnection fees, reconnection fees, including penalties for nonpayment if
any, shall be fixed, determined and amended by the Council and adopted by
resolution. Such resolution, containing the effective date thereof, shall be
kept on file and open to inspection in the office of the City Clerk and shall
be uniformly enforced.



(1975 Code, § 3.02)



§ 50.03  CONTRACTUAL CONTENTS.



   Provisions of this chapter relating to municipal utilities shall
constitute portions of the contract between the city and all consumers of
municipal utility services, and every such consumer shall be deemed to assent
to the same. All contracts between franchisees and consumers of utility
services other than municipal shall be in strict accord with the provisions
of this chapter.



(1975 Code, § 3.03)



§ 50.04  RULES AND REGULATIONS RELATING TO MUNICIPAL UTILITIES.



   (A)   Billing, payment and penalty. All municipal utilities shall be
billed at established intervals, except that such billing period may be
shortened or lengthened to adjust for a read-out or new connection period, as
the case may be, and a utility statement shall be mailed to each consumer.
Property owners are responsible for all municipal utilities; however, utility
statements can be placed in the tenant’s name if the tenant is set-up with
ACH billing and the property owner receives’ copies of the bill. Such
billing may be based upon rules and regulations established by the City
Administrator for self-reading of utility meters when such rules and
regulations have been mailed or otherwise deliver to each consumer. All
municipal utility charges shall be delinquent if they are unpaid at the close
of business on the tenth day following such billing, provided, that if the
tenth day shall fall on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the time shall
be extended to the close of business on the next succeeding day on which
business is normally transacted. A penalty of 10% thereof shall be added to,
and become part of, all delinquent utility bills. If service is suspended due
to delinquency, it shall not be restored at that location until a
disconnection and reconnection fee have been paid in attention to the amounts
due and owing for service, other fees and charges, and penalties and
submission of meter reading, if needed.



   (B)   Application, connection and sale of service. Application for
municipal utility services shall be made upon forms supplied by the city, and
strictly in accordance therewith. No connection shall be made until consent
has been received from the city to make the same. All municipal utilities
shall be sold and delivered to consumers under the then applicable rate
applied to the amount of such utilities taken as metered or ascertained in
connection with such rates.



   (C)   Discontinuance of service. All municipal utilities may be shut
off or discontinued whenever it is found that:



      (1)   The owner or occupant of the premises served, or any
person working on any connection with the municipal utility systems, has
violated any requirement of the City Code relative thereto, or any connection
therewith; or



      (2)   Any charge for a municipal utility service, or any fees
or charges in connection therewith, imposed on the present owner or occupant
of the premises served, remains delinquent after notice and an opportunity to
be heard as provided in § 50.06; or



      (3)   There is fraud or misrepresentation by the owner or
occupant in connection with any application for service or delivery or
charges therefor.



   (D)   Ownership of municipal utilities. Ownership of all municipal
utilities, plants, lines, mains, extensions and appurtenances thereto shall
be held by the city, and remain in the city, except for the service line from
the structure to the city main which shall be the property owner’s
responsibility. Provided, however, that private facilities and appurtenances
constructed on private property are not intended to be included in municipal
ownership.



   (E)   Right of entry. The city has the right to enter in and upon
private property, including buildings and dwelling houses, in or upon which
is installed a municipal utility, or connection therewith, at all times
reasonable under the circumstances, for the purpose of reading utility
meters, for the purpose of inspection and repair of meters or a utility
system, or any part thereof, and for the purpose of connecting and
disconnecting service.



   (F)   (Reserved).



   (G)   Unlawful acts.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to wilfully or carelessly
break, injure, mar, deface, disturb, or in any way interfere with any
buildings, attachments, machinery, apparatus, equipment, fixture, or
appurtenance of any municipal utility or municipal utility system, or commit
any act tending to obstruct or impair the use of any municipal utility.



      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to make any connection
with any municipal utility system without first having applied for and
received permission from the city to make the same.



      (3)   It is unlawful for any person to turn on or connect a
utility when the same has been turned off or disconnected by the city for
non-payment of a bill, or for any other reason, without first having obtained
a permit to do so from the city.



      (4)   It is unlawful for any person to "jumper," or by any
means or device fully or partially circumvent a municipal utility meter, or
to knowingly use or consume unmetered utilities or use the services of any
utility system, the use of which the proper billing authorities have no
knowledge.



   (H)   Municipal utility charges a lien.



      (1)   The utility services and charges provided for in this
section shall be the primary responsibility of the owner of the premises
served and shall be billed to him or her unless otherwise authorized in
writing. The city may collect the same in a civil action or, in the
alternative and at the option of the city, as otherwise provided in this
division.



      (2)   Each such charge is hereby made a lien upon the premises
served. All charges which are more than 30 days past due may be certified by
the City Clerk to the County Auditor, and the City Clerk in so certifying
such charges to the County Auditor shall specify the amount thereof, the
description of the premises served, and the name of the owner thereof. The
amount so certified shall be extended by the Auditor on the tax rolls against
such premises in the same manner as other taxes, and collected by the County
Treasurer, and paid to the city along with other taxes.



   (I)   Damage to municipal utility equipment. It is unlawful for any
person to intentionally cause any damage to any municipal utility equipment
or appurtenance, including, but not limited to, meters, street lights, water
hydrants and curb cocks. Anyone intentionally causing such damage shall pay
the reasonable value thereof to the city, including labor for renewal and
installation of any equipment and shall be, in effect, an insurer of any
equipment in his or her possession or with which he or she comes in contact.



   (J)   Municipal utility service outside the city.  Premises located
outside the city shall not be connected to or served by any municipal
utility, except such premises as are publicly owned or presently served.
Persons needing municipal utility service whose property is located outside
the corporate limits must initiate and complete annexation proceedings in
advance prior to being provided with such service or services.



(1975 Code, § 3.04) (Am. Ord. 63, 4th Series, passed 1-5-2015; Am. Ord. 66,
4th Series, passed 5-18-2015; Am. Ord. 86, 4th Series, passed 4-3-2017) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.05  CONNECTION OR TAPPING PROHIBITED; DELINQUENT ASSESSMENTS OR
CHARGES.



   No permit shall be granted to tap or connect with sewer or water mains
when any assessment or connection charge for such sewer or water main against
the property to be connected is in default or delinquent. If such assessment
or connection charges are payable in installments, no permit shall be granted
unless all installments then due and payable have been paid.



(1975 Code, § 3.05)



§ 50.06  DISCONNECTION FOR LATE PAYMENT.



   (A)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills and/or failure to provide the city
with meter readings only after notice and a meaningful opportunity to be
heard.  The city’s form for application for utility service and all bills
shall contain, in addition to the title, address, room number, and telephone
number of the official in charge of billing, clearly visible and easily
readable provisions to the effect:



      (1)   That the bills are due and payable on or before the date
set forth on the bill;



      (2)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a
second bill will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not
paid within 10 days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be
discontinued for nonpayment; and



      (3)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his or
her bill shall have a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be
represented in person and by counsel or any other person of his or her
choosing and may present orally or in writing his or her complaint and
contentions to the city official in charge of utility billing.  The official
shall be authorized to order that the customer’s service not be
discontinued and shall have the authority to make a final determination of
the customer’s complaint.



   (B)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be
entertained; only questions of proper and correct billing will be
considered.  In the absence of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the
hearing procedure provided herein, service will be discontinued at the time
specified, but in no event until the charges have been due and unpaid for at
least 30 days.



   (C)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility
service to a customer for nonpayment of bills or failure to report monthly
meter readings, service will be reinstated only after all bills for service
then due have been paid, along with a turn-on charge in an amount set by City
Council and a meter reading has been submitted.



(Am. Ord. 63, 4th Series, passed 1-5-2015)



§ 50.98  VIOLATIONS.



   Every person who violates a section, division, subsection or provision
of this title when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor
except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.



(1975 Code, § 3.99)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 51:  REFUSE COLLECTION



Section



   51.01   Definitions



   51.02   Storage and transporting refuse



   51.03   Containers



   51.04   Collection and disposal of refuse



   51.05   Property of the city



   51.06   Disposal of solid wastes



   51.07   Service charges



   51.08   Recycling



§ 51.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MULTI-UNIT DWELLING.  All buildings that contain 4 or more units for
residential occupancy.



   REFUSE.  Includes all organic material resulting from the preparation
of food and spoiled or decayed food from any source, cans, bottles, glassware
and paper or paper products.



   RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE.  Solid waste resulting from the maintenance
and operation of single family dwellings, two family dwellings, three family
dwellings, town houses, condominiums and all multi-unit dwellings that
exercise the option to contract or otherwise obtain sanitation services from
the city.



(1975 Code, § 3.70, Subd. 1) (Am. Ord. 47, passed 7-2-1984)



§ 51.02  STORING AND TRANSPORTING REFUSE.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to store refuse except as herein
provided.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to transport refuse over any
street, for hire, except by special permit from the Council, or acting within
the course and scope of a written contract with the city.



(1975 Code, § 3.70, Subd. 2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.03  CONTAINERS.



   (A)   All refuse shall be stored in rust-resistant, water-tight,
non-absorbent and washable closed containers, approved for the purpose by the
city.



   (B)   All containers shall not be stored in any front yard building
setback except the day of scheduled pickup and the day previous.



(1975 Code, § 3.70, Subd. 3)  (Am. Ord. 107, 4th series, passed 9-4-2018)



§ 51.04  COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF REFUSE.



   The city shall provide for collection and disposal of all refuse in a
sanitary manner to insure the health, safety and general welfare of its
residents, under such terms and conditions as the city may from time to time
deem appropriate.



(1975 Code, § 3.70, Subd. 4)



§ 51.05  PROPERTY OF THE CITY.



   All materials at public disposal sites are the property of the city. It
is unlawful for any person to separate, collect, carry off or dispose of such
materials except by direction of the city.



(1975 Code, § 3.70, Subd. 5)



§ 51.06  DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTES.



   It is unlawful for any person to dispose of tires, used motor oil,
motor vehicle batteries, hazardous materials or any other prohibited item by
placing the same into any solid waste container. It is further unlawful for
any solid waste collector to knowingly collect or transport such solid waste.



(Am. Ord. 101, passed 1-17-1989)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.07  SERVICE CHARGES.



   Pursuant to § 50.02, there is imposed, for the collection of
residential solid waste, and for the improvement of the general public health
and environment, a service charge for each single-family dwelling (attached
and detached), each two-family dwelling, each three-family dwelling, each
townhouse and each condominium. Multi-unit dwellings may exercise the option
to contract or otherwise obtain sanitation services from the city.



(Am. Ord. 47, passed 7-2-1984)



§ 51.08  RECYCLING.



   The city shall provide for the collection of recyclable material under
such terms and conditions as the city may from time to time deem
appropriate.  A curbside program is imposed for each single-family dwellings
(attached and detached), each two-family dwelling, each three-family
dwelling, each townhouse and each condominium.  Multi-unit dwellings may
exercise the option to contract or otherwise obtain sanitation services from
the city.  Common interest communities and all other residential dwellings
must provide recycling service to each dwelling unit.



CHAPTER 52:  WATER SERVICE



Section



   52.01   Connection with city water system



   52.02   Deficiency of water and shutting off water



   52.03   Repair of service line



   52.04   Abandoned services penalties



   52.05   Water service lines



   52.06   Private water supplies



   52.07   Water meters



   52.08   Restricted hours for sprinkling



   52.09   Private fire hose connections



   52.10   Opening hydrants



   52.11   Obstructing and screening of fire hydrants



   52.12   Single service and multiple units metered separately for
water



§ 52.01  CONNECTION WITH CITY WATER SYSTEM.



   (A)   Mandatory connection with water main.



      (1)   General rule. The owner of a building constructed for
human occupancy abutting on or adjacent to any street or other right-of-way
in which a water main is located shall be required, at the owner's expense,
to immediately install a suitable service connection to such water main in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter once the water main becomes
operational.  Upon connection to the municipal system, the property owner
shall abandon and seal all wells pursuant to applicable rules.



      (2)   Annexed lands. In the case where such a building has
been annexed into the city, then the owner shall be required to make such a
service connection within 1 year after the date of annexation or within 90
days of the date the water main becomes operational, whichever is later.
However, if such owner’s private water supply requires repairs or other
maintenance to meet state codes and standards which exceeds $1500, then such
owner shall immediately connect with the city water system. Furthermore, a
building constructed after the date of annexation shall not be subject to the
above time limitations and the owner shall be required to immediately connect
to such water main.



      (3)   Unsafe private water system. If a building, annexed or
otherwise, is serviced by a private water supply which, upon inspection,
reveals that the water is unsafe for human consumption, then the owner of
such building shall immediately connect with the city water system.



   (B)   Failure to connect. If water service connections are not made
pursuant to this section, an official 30 day notice shall be served upon the
property owner instructing that such connections are to be made in accordance
with this chapter. If the owner fails to make such connection, following the
expiration of such 30 days, then the city may provide for the connection to
such water system and may charge such cost against the property as a special
assessment. If the property owner fails to grant access to such building for
the purpose of making such connection, the city may seek an appropriate court
order compelling that such connection be made. The actual expenses incurred
by the city in obtaining such court order, including legal fees, shall be
added to the cost to be charged against the property as a special assessment.



   (C)   Private water systems. All private water supply systems shall
be designed, constructed, maintained and updated so as to be in full
accordance with all applicable federal, state, county or city standards and
regulations during all times when the water from such systems is used for
human consumption. The owners of such private water systems shall provide for
access to the same for purposes of inspection. If a private water system is
found not to be in accordance with such regulations or standards, then water
from such system shall not be utilized for  human consumption.



(Am. Ord. 88, passed 5-18-1987; Am. Ord. 48, 4th Series, passed 1-22-2013)



§ 52.02  DEFICIENCY OF WATER AND SHUTTING OFF WATER.



   (A)   The city is not liable for any deficiency or failure in the
supply of water to customers whether occasioned by shutting the water off for
the purpose of making repairs or connections or by any other cause whatever.
In case of fire, or alarm of fire, water may be shut off temporarily to
certain areas of the city in order to insure an adequate supply of water for
fire fighting. In making repairs or construction of new works, water may be
shut off at any time and kept off so long as may be necessary.



   (B)   The city shall be held harmless in case of problems arising
from shutting off water, changing meter, and the like.



(1975 Code, § 3.70, Subd. 1)



§ 52.03  REPAIR OF SERVICE LINE.



   (A)   It is the responsibility of the consumer or owner to maintain
the service pipe from the main into the house or other building. In case of
failure upon the part of any consumer or owner to repair any leak occurring
in his or her service pipe within 24 hours after oral or written notice has
been given the owner or occupant of the premises, the water may be shut off
and will not be turned on until a reconnection charge has been paid and the
water service has been repaired. When the waste of water is great or when
damage is likely to result from the leak, the water supply will be turned off
if the repair is not undertaken immediately.



   (B)   Water usage credit for repair of frozen service line.



      (1)   All credits are subject to the approval of the Public
Works Director.



      (2)   The total amount of any credit shall be approved by the
Finance Director.



      (3)   To receive a credit for excess use of water as a result
of a frozen water line, a customer shall submit proof that work has been
completed to open a frozen water service line.



      (4)   All claims a frozen water line has occurred shall be
verified by a city employee designated by the Public Works Director.



      (5)   Any credit issued shall only apply for charges during
the at-risk period as determined by the Public Works Director not to exceed 4
months.



      (6)   Total gallons credited shall not reduce total water
consumption to less than the comparable period average for that property, or
a comparable property.



      (7)   Gallons credited per day may not exceed 300.



      (8)   Credits may only be given for 2 consecutive years.



(1975 Code, § 3.70, Subd. 2)  (Am. Ord. 56, 4th Series, passed 3-17-2014)



§ 52.04  ABANDONED SERVICE PENALTIES.



   All service installations connected to the water system that have been
abandoned or, for any reason, have become useless for further service shall
be disconnected at the main by means of a solid sleeve repair clamp or other
city approved device. The owner of the premises, served by this service,
shall pay the cost of the disconnection. When new buildings are erected on
the site of old ones, and it is desired to replace the old water service, a
new permit shall be taken out and the regular tapping charge shall be made as
if this were a new service. It is unlawful for any person to cause or allow
any service pipe to be hammered or squeezed together at the ends to stop the
flow of water, or to save expense in properly removing such pipe from the
main. Also, such improper disposition thereof shall be corrected by the city
and the cost incurred shall be borne by the person causing or allowing such
work to be performed.



(1975 Code, § 3.70, Subd. 3)



§ 52.05  WATER SERVICE LINES.



   (A)   Water service lines refer to the water line servicing or
having the potential to service a parcel of land. This includes, but is not
limited to, any apparatus used to connect to the public water supply,
including tees, saddles, and corporations. The service line shall not be laid
less than 7 feet below grade and shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with the Minnesota State Plumbing Code. One-inch diameter shall be
the minimum size water service line allowed.  The water service line from
the structure to the city main shall be the property owner’s responsibility
to repair and maintain.



   (B)   Flared fitting and joints must have a pipe joint compound
applied to the back side of the flare as well as the front side and the tube
must be reamed to the full bored of the tube.



   (C)   Heavy duty compression fittings meeting AWWA standards may
also be used.  The tube they are installed on must be reamed to the full
bore of the tube.



   (D)   A tracer wire shall be installed on all non-conductive water
lines when installing a new water service or modifying an existing water
line. Tracer wires shall conform to the following requirements:



      (1)   Twelve gauge minimum solid copper wire coated for
underground use. The coating shall be blue in color.



      (2)   The tracer wire shall be laid in the trench alongside
the water line. If splicing is necessary, a direct bury connection is
required.



      (3)   The tracer wire shall daylight at the point of entry at
the foundation of the building through PVC conduit and a blank box as a
future contact point to locate the service line.



      (4)   Tracer wire shall be installed on new water main
installations in a manner approved by the city.



      (5)   Tracer wire shall be tested for continuity. If the
tracer wire is found to be not continuous, it must be repaired or replaced.



(1975 Code, § 3.70, Subd. 4)  (Am. Ord. 17, 4th Series, passed 1-17-2008;
Am. Ord. 30, 4th Series, passed 1-4-2010; Am. Ord. 63, 4th Series, passed
1-5-2015)



§ 52.06  PRIVATE WATER SUPPLIES.



   No water pipe of the city water system shall be connected with any
pump, well, pipe, tank or any device that is connected with any other source
of water supply and when such are found, the city shall notify the owner or
occupant to disconnect the same and, if not immediately done, the city water
shall be turned off. Before any new connections to the city system are
permitted, the city shall ascertain that no cross-connections will exist when
the new connection is made. When a building is connected to "City Water" the
private water supply may be used only for such purposes as the city may allow.



(1975 Code, § 3.70, Subd. 5)



§ 52.07  WATER METERS.



   As part of the new construction of any new residential, commercial or
industrial building, the use of two water meters is required. One water meter
shall meter the inside water usage and one water meter shall meter the
outside water usage. If there are no outside water connections, an outside
water meter is not required. The outside meter shall meter water that is not
being returned to the city sanitary sewer system. The meters become the
property of the property owner who is responsible for all repair and
maintenance.



(Ord. 30, 4th series, passed 1-4-2010; Am. Ord. 102, 4th series, passed
4-2-2018)



§ 52.08  RESTRICTED HOURS FOR SPRINKLING.



   Whenever the city shall determine that a shortage of water threatens
the city, it may limit the times and hours during which water may be used
from the city water system for lawn and garden sprinkling, irrigation, car
washing, air conditioning, and other uses, or either or any of them. It is
unlawful for any water consumer to cause or permit water to be used in
violation of such determination after public announcement thereof has been
made through the news media specifically indicating the restrictions thereof.



(1975 Code, § 3.70, Subd. 6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.09  PRIVATE FIRE HOSE CONNECTIONS.



   Owners of structures with self-contained fire protection systems may
apply for and obtain permission to connect the street mains with hydrants,
large pipes, and hose couplings, for use in case of fire only, at their own
installation expense and at such rates as the Council may adopt by resolution
as herein provided.



(1975 Code, § 3.70, Subd. 7)



§ 52.10 OPENING HYDRANTS.



   It is unlawful for any person, other than members of the Fire
Department or other person duly authorized by the city, in pursuance of
lawful purpose, to open any fire hydrant or attempt to draw water from the
same or in any manner interfere therewith. It is also unlawful for any person
so authorized to deliver or suffer to be delivered  to any other person any
hydrant key or wrench, except for the purposes strictly pertaining to their
lawful use.



(1975 Code, § 3.70, Subd. 8)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.11 OBSTRUCTING AND SCREENING OF FIRE HYDRANTS.



   (A)   No property owner or tenant shall plant any shrub, tree or
other cultivar or construct any landscape structure that serves to screen any
fire hydrant from view or to limit access to the fire hydrant for maintenance
or fire suppression use.



   (B)   Upon written notice, a property owner shall have 10 calendar
days to remove any screening that the Public Works Director has determined to
be unlawful.  Such determinations are made at the sole discretion of the
city.



§ 52.12  SINGLE SERVICE AND MULTIPLE UNITS METERED SEPARATELY FOR WATER.



   The termination of the main water line may be on any floor of the
building, as long as it terminates 12 inches above the floor with the main
building valve immediately installed.  At this juncture, in order to
individually meter each unit, a manifold must be installed with individual
valves and supplies to each unit.  Meters may be installed at this juncture
or in individual units with shut-off valves to each unit. 



The manifold shall be in an area not controlled by the individual tenants.



(Ord. 34, 4th Series, passed 1-18-11)



CHAPTER 53:  SEWERAGE SERVICE



Section



General Provisions



   53.01   Definitions



   53.02   Control by Utilities Superintendent



Regulations



   53.20   Prohibited discharges



   53.21   Private wastewater disposal



   53.22   Building sewer and connectors



   53.23   Use of public services



   53.24   Assessments



   53.25   User rate schedule



Sewer Service Charge



   53.40   Definitions



   53.41   Sewer service charge system



   53.42   Capital improvements program



   53.43   User rate schedule of charges



Administration



   53.55   Powers and authority of inspectors



   53.56   Wastewater discharge permits



   53.57   Legal action



   53.58   Costs of damage



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 53.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT.  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also referred to as the
Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.



   ASTM.  American Society for Testing Materials.



   AUTHORITY.  The City of North Mankato, Minnesota, or its
representative thereof.



   BOD5 or BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND. The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in 5 days at 20 degrees Centigrade in terms of milligrams per liter
(mg/l).



   BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning immediately outside the building wall.



   BUILDING SEWER.  The extension of the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal, also referred to as a house connection or
service connection.



   CITY. The area within the corporate boundaries of the City of North
Mankato as presently established or as amended by ordinance or other legal
actions at a future time. The term CITY when used herein may also be used to
refer to the City Council or its duly authorized representatives.



   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD).  The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
chemical oxidation of an organic matter as determined by standard laboratory
procedures, and as expressed in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l).



   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Biochemical oxygen demand, total suspended
solids, pH, and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants
identified in the NPDES/SDS Permit, if the treatment facilities are designed
to treat such pollutants to a degree which complies with effluent
concentration limits imposed by the permit.



   CONTROL MANHOLE.  A structure specifically constructed for the purpose
of measuring flow and sampling of wastes.



   DEBT SERVICE.  Debt service revenue to be used solely for retirement
of outstanding debts of the city’s wastewater collection and treatment
system.



   EASEMENT.  An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned
by others.



   EXTRA STRENGTH WASTE.  Wastewater having a BOD and/or total suspended
solids greater than normal domestic strength waste and not otherwise
classified as an incompatible waste.



   FECAL COLIFORM. Any number of organisms common to the intestinal tract
of man and warm blooded animals whose presence in sanitary sewage is an
indicator of pollution.



   FLOATABLE OIL.  Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state, such that it
will separate by gravity from wastewater.



   GARBAGE.  Animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, and serving of food.



   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT.  Any pollutant that is not defined as a
compatible pollutant, including non-biodegradable dissolved solids.



   INDUSTRY. Any nongovernmental or nonresidential user of a publicly
owned treatment works which is identified in the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, latest edition, which is categorized in Divisions A,
B, D, E and I.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Gaseous, liquid, and solid wastes resulting from
industrial or manufacturing processes, trade or business, or from the
development, recovery, and processing of natural resources, as distinct from
residential or domestic strength wastes.



   INFILTRATION.  Water entering the sewage system (including building
drains and pipes) from the ground through such means as defective pipes, pipe
joints, connections, and manhole walls.



   INFILTRATION/INFLOW (I/I).  The total quantity of water from both
infiltration and inflow.



   INFLOW.  Water other than wastewater that enters a sewer system
(including building drains) from sources such as, but not limited to, roof
leaders, cellar drains, yard and area drains, foundation drains, drains from
springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections from storm
sewers, catch basins, surface runoff, street wash waters or drainage.



   INDUSTRIAL USER. A facility which discharges to the city’s wastewater
treatment system liquid waste resulting from the processes employed in
industrial, manufacturing, trade, or business establishments, or from the
development of any natural resource.



   INTERFERENCE. The inhibition or disruption of the city’s wastewater
disposal system processes or operations which causes or significantly
contributes to a violation of any requirement of the city’s NPDES and/or
SDS Permit. The term includes sewage sludge use or disposal by the city in
accordance with published regulations providing guidelines under § 405 of
the Act or any regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal
Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or more stringent
state criteria applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the
city.



   MPCA.  Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.  Federal regulations
establishing pretreatment standards for the introduction of pollutants into
publicly-owned wastewater treatment facilities which are determined to be not
amenable to treatment by such treatment facilities or would interfere with
the operation of such treatment facilities, pursuant to Section 307(b) of the
Act.



   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT.  Any
permit or requirements issued by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
(MPCA) pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, for
the purpose of regulating the discharge of wastewater, industrial wastes, or
other wastes under the authority of Section 402 of the Act.



   NATURAL OUTLET.  Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined
sewers, which overflows into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body
of surface water or ground water.



   NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER.  The water discharged from any use such as
air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or during which the only
pollutant added is heat.



   NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTE.  Wastewater that is primarily
introduced by residential users with a BOD5 concentration not greater than
260 mg/l and a total suspended solids (TSS) concentration not greater than
280 mg/l.



   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.  Those variable expenditures and costs
which are directly attributable to the operation and maintenance of a waste
treatment collection system. The term O AND M includes replacement.



   PERSON.  The state or any agency or institution thereof, any
municipality, governmental subdivision, public or private corporation,
individual, partnership, or other entity, including, but not limited to,
association, commission, or any interstate body, including any officer or
governing or managing body of any municipality, governmental subdivision, or
public or private corporation, or other entity.



   pH. The logarithm base 10 of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.



   PRETREATMENT.  The process of reducing the amount of pollutants,
eliminating pollutants, or altering the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to introducing such pollutants into
the city’s wastewater system. The reduction, elimination, or alteration may
be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes or
other means, except as prohibited by this chapter.



   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27
cm) in any dimension.



   REPLACEMENT.  Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of
the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance of the treatment
facility for which it was designed and constructed.



   SEWAGE.  The spent water of a community. The preferred term is
WASTEWATER.



   SEWER SERVICE CHARGE SYSTEM. The system of charges by which revenue is
generated to offset the cost of operation and maintenance, plus replacement,
administration, and debt service.



   SEWER.  A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.



      (1)   COLLECTION SEWER.  A sewer whose primary purpose is to
collect wastewater from individual point source discharges and connections.



      (2)   COMBINED SEWER.  A sewer intended to serve as a
sanitary sewer and a storm sewer.



      (3)   FORCE MAIN.  A pipe in which wastewater is carried
under pressure.



      (4)   INTERCEPTOR SEWER.  A sewer whose primary purpose is to
transport wastewater from collection sewers to a treatment facility.



      (5)   PRIVATE SEWER.  A sewer which is not owned and
maintained by a public authority.



      (6)   PUBLIC SEWER.  A sewer owned, maintained, and
controlled by a public authority.



      (7)   SANITARY SEWER.  A sewer intended to carry only liquid
and water carried waste from residences, commercial buildings, industrial
plants, and institutions, together with minor quantities of ground, storm,
and surface waters which are not admitted intentionally.



      (8)   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN. A drain or sewer intended to
carry storm waters, surface runoff, ground water, subsurface water, street
wash water, drainage, and unpolluted water from any source.



   SHALL; MAY.  SHALL is mandatory; MAY is permissive.



   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER. Any industrial user of the city’s
wastewater treatment system which:



      (1)   Has a discharge flow of 50,000 gallons or more per
average work day; or



      (2)   Has in its wastes toxic pollutants at significant levels
as defined pursuant to Section 307 of the Act, or Minnesota Statutes and
Rules; or



      (3)   Has a significant impact, either singly or in
combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater treatment
system, the quality of sludge, the systems effluent quality, or emission
generated by the system.



   SLUG.  Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of
any given constituent, or in quantity of flow, exceeds 4 times the average 24
hour concentration of flow during normal operation.



   STATE DISPOSAL SYSTEM (SDS) PERMIT.  Any permit (including any terms,
conditions and requirements thereof) issued by the MPCA pursuant to M.S. §
115.07, as it may be amended from time to time,  for a disposal system as
defined by M.S. § 115.01, as it may be amended from time to time.



   STORM WATER.  Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting  therefrom.



   SUPERINTENDENT.  The Utilities Superintendent or a deputy agent or
representative thereof.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) or TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS).  The total
suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water,
wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by a standard glass fiber
filter.



   TOXIC POLLUTANT.  The concentration of any pollutant or combination of
pollutants which, upon exposure to or assimilation into any organism will
cause adverse effects as defined in standards issued pursuant to Section
307A(a) or the Act.



   UNPOLLUTED WATER.  Water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of
receiving water quality standards, and would not be benefitted by discharge
to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities. (See NON-CONTACT
COOLING WATER).



   USER.  Any person who discharges or causes or permits the discharge of
wastewater into the city’s wastewater disposal system.



   USER CHARGE.  A charge levied on users of the treatment system for the
operation and maintenance of such system.



      (1)   RESIDENTIAL.  A principal family residence or
habitation classed as a single family, multi family, or apartment dwelling
that discharges domestic sanitary wastewater having characteristics of not
more than 260 mg/l of BOD and 280 mg/l of suspended solids into the public
wastewater treatment system, works, and facility.



      (2)   COMMERCIAL.  Retail or wholesale type establishments,
i.e. restaurants, hotels, motels, stores, filling stations, commercial
laundries, and the like that discharge wastewater into the public wastewater
treatment system, works, and facility.



      (3)   GOVERNMENTAL/INSTITUTIONAL.  Hospitals, nursing homes,
schools, city, county, state or federal buildings, or facilities that
discharge wastewater into the public wastewater treatment system, works, and
facility.



      (4)   INDUSTRIAL.  An industry, as defined elsewhere in this
section, which discharges wastewater into the public wastewater treatment
system, works, and facility.



   WASTEWATER.  The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and
institutions, together with any ground water, surface water, and storm water
that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is discharged into
or permitted to enter the city’s wastewater treatment system.



   WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM or SYSTEM.  Any devices, facilities,
structures, equipment or works owned or used by the city for the purpose of
the transmission, storage, or treatment of industrial and domestic
wastewater, including intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, wastewater
collection systems, pumping and other equipment, and their appurtenances,
extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions, and alterations thereof, and
any works, including land that will be an integral part of the treatment
process or is used for ultimate disposal of the residues resulting from such
treatment.



   WATERS OF THE STATE.  All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, aquifers,
irrigation systems, drainage systems of all other bodies or accumulations of
water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private,
which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any
portion thereof.



   WATER COURSE.  A natural or artificial channel for the passage of
water, either continuously or intermittently.



   WPCF.  The Water Pollution Control Federation.



(Ord. 72, passed 3-3-1986)



§ 53.02  CONTROL BY UTILITIES SUPERINTENDENT.



   The Utilities Superintendent or his or her representative shall have
control and general supervision of all public sewers and service connections
in the city and shall be responsible for administering the provisions of this
section to the end that a proper and efficient public sewer is maintained.



(Ord. 72, passed 3-3-1986)



REGULATIONS



§ 53.20  PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or
permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property
within the city, or in any area under its jurisdiction, any human or animal
excrement, garbage, or objectionable waste.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet, any
wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been
provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this section and the
city’s NPDES/SDS Permit.



   (C)   Except as provided hereinafter, it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic  tank, cesspool, or
other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.



   (D)   The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for
human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes from which
wastewater is discharged, and which is situated within the city and adjacent
to any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may
in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city, shall be
required at the owner’s expense to install a suitable service connection to
the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90
days of the date the public sewer is operational, provided the public sewer
is within 200 feet of the structure generating the wastewater. All future
buildings constructed on property adjacent to the public sewer shall be
required to immediately connect to the public sewer.  If sewer connections
are not made pursuant to this section, an official 30 day notice shall be
served instructing the  affected property owner to make the connection.



   (E)   In the event an owner shall fail to connect to a public sewer
in compliance with a notice given under subsection (D) of this section, the
city may undertake to have the connection made and shall assess the cost
thereof against the benefitted property.



(Ord. 72, passed 3-3-1986)



§ 53.21  PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL.



   (A)   Where a public sewer is not available under the provisions of
§ 53.20(D), the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater
disposal system complying with the provisions of this subsection.



   (B)   Prior to commencement of construction of a private wastewater
disposal system, the owner(s) shall first obtain a written permit signed by
the city. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished
by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans,
specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the city.



   (C)   A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not
become effective until the installation is  completed to the satisfaction of
the city or its authorized representative. The city or its representative
shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any
event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the city when work is ready
for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The
inspection shall be made within 72 hours of the receipt of notice.



   (D)   The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private
wastewater disposal system shall comply with all  requirements of 6 MCAR
4.8040, entitled, "Individual Sewage Treatment System Standards." No septic
tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.



   (E)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property
serviced by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall
be made to the public sewer within 90 days in compliance with this section
and within 180 days, any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private
wastewater disposal systems shall  be cleaned of sludge. The bottoms shall
be broken to permit drainage and the tank or pit filled with suitable
material.



   (F)   The owner(s) shall operate and maintain the private wastewater
disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the
city.



   (G)   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed
to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the MPCA
or the Department of Health of the State of Minnesota.



(Ord. 72, passed 3-3-1986)



§ 53.22  BUILDING SEWER AND CONNECTORS.



   (A)   Any new connection(s) to the sanitary sewer system shall be
prohibited unless sufficient capacity is available in all downstream
facilities, including, but not limited to, capacity for flow, BOD5, and
suspended solids, as determined by the Utilities Superintendent or his or her
representative.



   (B)   No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections
with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city.



   (C)   Applications for permits shall be made by the master plumber
employed to do the work and shall state the location, name of owner, street
number of the building to be connected, and how occupied. No person shall
extend any private building drain beyond the limits of the building or
property for which the service connection permit has been given.



   (D)   There shall be 2 classes of building sewer permits:  for
residential and commercial service; and for service to establishments
producing industrial wastes. In either case, the application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications or any other information considered
pertinent in the judgment of the city. The industry, as a condition of permit
authorization, must provide information describing its wastewater
constituents, characteristics, and type of activity.



   (E)   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and
connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s)
shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may be directly or
indirectly occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.



   (F)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided
for every building.



   (G)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new
buildings only when they are found, on examination and tests by the Utilities
Superintendent or his or her representative, to meet all requirements of this
section.



   (H)   The size, slopes, alignment, materials or construction of a
building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the
pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling of the trench, shall all conform to
the requirements of the State of Minnesota Building and Plumbing Code or
other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code
provisions or in the application thereof, the materials and procedures set
forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice
No. 9 shall apply.



   (I)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which
any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved
means and discharged to the building sewer.



   (J)   (1)   It is unlawful to discharge storm water or other
unpolluted drainage anywhere other than a specifically designed storm sewer
or a natural outlet approved by the city and other regulatory agencies. No
person(s) shall make connection of roof down spouts, foundation drains,
areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a
building sewer or indirectly to the waste water disposal system.



      (2)   Any property owner in violation of this section and upon
receiving notice of said violation shall disconnect the conductor from the
sanitary sewer system by September 1, 1998.



      (3)   Any property owner in violation of this section after
September 1, 1998, shall be assessed a monthly surcharge, the amount of which
will be established by resolution of the City Council, for each month that
the conductor is not permanently disconnected. Failure to permanently
disconnect the conductor or reconnection of a disconnected conductor may
result in the suspension of water and sanitary sewer service.



      (4)   Prior to the change in ownership of any building within
the city, the seller shall disclose to the buyer, in writing, whether or not
the property is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The seller
shall also provide a copy of said disclosure to the city within 5 days of the
date of sale of the property.



      (5)   Any property found where a reconnection of a
disconnected conductor has occurred shall be assessed a surcharge of $100 per
month. The surcharge shall be calculated from the date of inspection until
disconnection has been reestablished. Failure to permanently disconnect the
conductor shall result in the suspension of water and sanitary sewer service.



   (K)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer
shall conform to the requirements of the State of Minnesota Building and
Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city or the
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF
Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and
watertight and verified by proper testing to prevent the inclusion of
infiltration/inflow. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the city prior to installation.



   (L)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
city when the building sewer is ready for  inspection and connection to the
public sewer. The connection and inspection shall be made under the
supervision of the Utilities Superintendent or his or her representative.



   (M)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public
from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the city.



   (N)   No person shall make a service connection to any public sewer
unless that person is a licensed master  plumber in accordance with the
State of Minnesota Plumbing Code or a plumber under the direct supervision of
a master plumber. A plumbing permit shall be obtained from the city for all
service connections.



   (O)   A tracer wire shall be installed on all non-conductive sewer
lines when installing a new sewer service or modifying an existing sewer
line. Tracer wires shall conform to the following requirements:



      (1)   Twelve gauge minimum solid copper wire coated for
underground use. The coating shall be green in color.



      (2)   The tracer wire shall be laid in the trench alongside
the sewer line. If splicing is necessary, a direct bury connection is
required.



      (3)   The tracer wire shall daylight at the point of entry at
the foundation of the building through PVC conduit and a blank box as a
future contact point to locate the service line.



      (4)   Tracer wire shall be installed on new sewer main
installations in a manner approved by the city.



      (5)   Tracer wire shall be tested for continuity. If the
tracer wire is found to be not continuous, it must be repaired or replaced.



(Ord. 72, passed 3-3-1986)  (Am. Ord. 159, passed 3-17-1997; Am. Ord. 63,
4th Series, passed 1-5-2015)



§ 53.23  USE OF PUBLIC SERVICES.



   (A)   No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
unpolluted water such as stormwater, ground water, roof runoff, surface
drainage, or non-contact cooling water to any sanitary sewer.



   (B)   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to such sewers as are specifically designed as storm sewers or to
a natural outlet approved by the city and other regulatory agencies.
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged to a
storm sewer or natural outlet on approval of the city and upon approval and
the issuance of a discharge permit by the MPCA.



   (C)   No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of
the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:



      (1)   Any liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their
nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient  either alone or by
interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious
in any other way to the wastewater disposal system or to the operation of the
system. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline,
kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones,
aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides,
and sulfides;



      (2)   Solid or viscous substances which will or may cause
obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation
of the wastewater treatment facilities, such as, but not limited to, grease,
garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal
guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails,
whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble
dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains,
spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastic, asphalt residues, residues from
refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or
polishing wastes;



      (3)   Any wastewater having a pH of less than 6.0 or greater
than 10.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment, or personnel of the wastewater disposal
system;



      (4)   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient
quantity, either singly or by interaction with  other pollutants, to inhibit
or disrupt any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, or create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the wastewater
disposal system. A toxic pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any
pollutant identified pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act.



   (D)   The following described substances, materials, water, or
wastes shall be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations
or quantities which will not harm either sewers, the wastewater treatment
works, treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the
receiving stream and/or soil, vegetation and ground water, or will not
otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance.
The Utilities Superintendent or his or her representative may set limitations
lower than limitations established in the regulations below if, in his or her
opinion, such more stringent limitations are necessary to meet the above
objectives. In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability of wastes,
the Utilities Superintendent or his or her representative will give
consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to
flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers,
nature of the sewage treatment process, the city’s NPDES and/or SDS Permit,
capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of the wastes
in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The following
limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or
wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer shall not be violated without
the approval of the Utilities Superintendent or his or her designee:



      (1)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150
degrees Fahrenheit (65.6 degrees Centigrade) or causing, individually or in
combination with other wastewater, the influent at the wastewater treatment
plant to have a temperature exceeding 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees
Centigrade), or having heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity
in the wastewater treatment works resulting in interference therein;



      (2)   Any wastewater containing fats, wax, grease, or oils,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of 50 mg/l or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscus at temperatures between 32 degrees
Fahrenheit and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0 degrees Centigrade and 65.6 degrees
Centigrade); and any wastewater containing oil and grease concentrations of
mineral origin of greater than 50 mg/l, whether emulsified or not;



      (3)   Any quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which
constitute a slug as defined herein;



      (4)   Any garbage not properly shredded, as defined herein.
Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels,
institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar
places where garbage originates from the preparation of food on the premises
or when served by caterers;



      (5)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids
which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are capable of
creating a public nuisance or hazard to life, or are sufficient to prevent
entry into the sewers for their maintenance and repair;



      (6)   Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in
the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions;



      (7)   Non-contact cooling water or unpolluted storm, drainage,
or ground water;



      (8)   Wastewater containing inert suspended solids (such as,
but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate) in such quantities that would cause disruption within the wastewater
disposal system;



      (9)   Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such a half-life or
concentration that they are in noncompliance with standards issued by the
appropriate authority having control over their use and which will or are
likely to cause damage or hazards to the city’s wastewater treatment system
or personnel;



      (10)   Wastewater containing the following substances in
excess of the limits shown herein:



 

Toxic Pollutant
 
Discharge Limitation




Cadmium (Cd)
 
1.03 mg/l


Chromium total (Cr)
 
5.23 mg/l


Copper (Cu)
 
2.86 mg/l


Cyanide (Cn)
 
1.09 mg/l


Lead (Pb)
 
1.05 mg/l


Mercury (Hg)
 
0.01 mg/l


Nickel (Ni)
 
3.65 mg/l


Silver (Ag)
 
2.14 mg/l


Zinc (Zn)
 
8.10 mg/l




 



      (11)   Any wastewater which creates conditions at or near the
wastewater disposal system which violates any statute, rule, regulations, or
ordinance of any regulatory agency, or state or federal regulatory body;



      (12)   Any waters or wastes containing BOD5 in excess of 260
mg/l or total suspended solids in excess of 280 mg/l, except as may be
permitted by specific written agreement subject to the provisions of this
section.



   (E)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers which contain substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in division (D) of this section, and/or which in
the judgment of the Utilities Superintendent or his or her representative may
have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater treatment facilities,
processes, or equipment; receiving waters and/or soil, vegetation, and ground
water; or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public
nuisance, the city may;



      (1)    Reject the wastes;



      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers, pursuant to Section 307(b) of the Act and all
addendums thereof;



      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge; and/or



      (4)   Require payment to defray the added costs of handling,
treating, and disposing of wastes not defined, treating, and disposing of
wastes not defrayed by existing taxes or sewer service charges.  If the city
permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design,
installation, and maintenance of the facilities and equipment shall be made
at the owners’ expense and shall be subject to the review and approval of
the city pursuant to the requirements of the MPCA.



   (F)   No user shall increase the use of process water or, in any
manner, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in
divisions (C) and (D) of this section, or contained in the National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any state requirements.



   (G)   Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided
or required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously
in satisfactory and effective operation at the expense of the owner(s).



   (H)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in
the opinion of the Utilities Superintendent or his or her representative,
they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing
floatable grease in excessive amounts, as specified in subsection (D)(2) any
flammable wastes as specified in subsection (C)(1), sand or other harmful
ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private
living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of the type to
be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the
maintaining of these interceptors, the owner(s) shall be responsible for the
proper removal and disposal of the captured materials by appropriate means,
and shall maintain a record of dates and means of disposal which are subject
to review by the Utilities Superintendent or his or her representative. Any
removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by the owner’s
personnel must be performed by a currently licensed waste disposal firm.



   (I)   Where required by the city, the owner of any property serviced
by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
structure, or control manhole, with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and
measurement of wastes. Such structure shall be accessible and safely located
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city. The
structure shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense and shall be
maintained by the owner to be safe and accessible at all times.



   (J)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer
carrying industrial wastes may, at the discretion  of the city, be required
to provide laboratory measurements, tests, or analyses of waters or wastes to
illustrate compliance with this section and any special condition for
discharge established by the city or regulatory agencies having jurisdiction
over the discharge. The number, type, and frequency of sampling and
laboratory analyses to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by
the city. The industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of
the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with federal, state, and
local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of
measurements and laboratory analyses to the city at such times and in such
manner as prescribed by the city. The owner shall bear the expense of all
measurements, analyses, and reporting requirements by the city. At such times
as deemed necessary, the city reserves the right to take measurements and
samples for analysis by an independent laboratory.



   (K)   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics
of waters and wastes to which reference is  made in this section shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association. Sampling methods, location, times, duration, and frequencies are
to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the Utilities
Superintendent or his or her representative.



   (L)   Where required by the city, the owner of any property serviced
by a sanitary sewer shall provide protection from an accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this section. Where
necessary, facilities to prevent accidental discharges of prohibited
materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner’s expense. Detailed
plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection
shall be submitted to the Utilities Superintendent or his or her
representative for review and approval  prior to the construction of the
facility. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall
not relieve any user from the responsibility to modify the user’s facility
as necessary to meet the requirements of this section. Users shall notify the
Utilities Superintendent or his or her representative immediately upon having
a slug or accidental discharge of substances in the wastewater in violation
of this section to enable counter measures to be taken by the Utilities
Superintendent or his or her representative to minimize damage to the
wastewater treatment system. Such notification will not relieve any user of
any liability for any expense, loss or damage to the  wastewater treatment
system or treatment process, or any fines imposed upon the city on account
thereof under any state or federal law. Users shall insure that all employees
who may cause or discover such a discharge are advised of the emergency
notification procedure.



   (M)   No person, having charge of any building or other premises
which drains into the public sewer shall permit any substance or matter which
may form a deposit or obstruction to flow or pass into the public sewer.
Within 30 days after receipt of written notice from the city, the owner shall
install suitable and sufficient catch basin or waste trap, or if one already
exists, shall clean out, repair or alter the same, and perform such other
work as the Utilities Superintendent or his or her representative may deem
necessary. Upon the owner’s refusal or neglect to install a catch basin or
waste trap or to clean out, repair, or alter the same, after the period of 30
days, the Utilities Superintendent or his or her representative may cause
such work to be completed at the expense of the owner or representative
thereof.



   (N)   Whenever any service connection becomes clogged, obstructed,
broken or out of order, or detrimental to the use of the public sewer, or
unfit for the purpose of drainage, the owner shall repair or cause such work
to be done as the Utilities Superintendent or his or her representative may
direct. Each day after 10 days that a person neglects or fails to so act
shall constitute a separate violation of this section, and the Utilities
Superintendent or his or her representative may then cause the work to be
done, and recover from such owner or agent the expense thereof by an action
in the name of the city.



   (O)   The owner or operator of any motor vehicle washing or
servicing facility shall provide and maintain in serviceable condition at all
times a catch basin or waste trap in the building drain system to prevent
grease, oil, dirt or any mineral deposit from entering the public sewer
system.



   (P)   In addition to any penalties that may be imposed for violation
of any provision of this chapter, the city  may assess against any person
the cost of repairing or restoring sewers or associated facilities damaged as
a result of the discharge of prohibited wastes by said person and may collect
such assessment as an additional charge for the use of the public sewer
system or in any other manner deemed appropriate by the city.



   (Q)   No statement contained in this division shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or  arrangement between the city and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or 
character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment
therefore by the industrial concern, providing that National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards and the city’s NPDES and/or state disposal system
permit limitations are not violated.



   (R)   Limitations on wastewater strength:



      (1)   National Categorical Pretreatment Standards promulgated
by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the Act shall
be met by all users which are subject to such standards in any instances
where they are more stringent than the limitations in this section, except as
the MPCA has approved modifications of the specific limits in the National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards;



      (2)   State requirements and limitations of discharges shall
be met by all users which are subject to such standards in any instance in
which they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or
those in this section.



(Ord. 72, passed 3-3-1986)



§ 53.24  ASSESSMENTS.



   (A)   Assessment.  The cost of any connection, repair, or
restoration as provided for in any division of this chapter shall be assessed
to the affected property. After the work has been completed, the Clerk shall
serve a written notice by first class mail of the assessment upon the owner
or his or her representative directing him or her to pay the assessment to
the Treasurer within 30 days after the service of the notice. If the
assessment is not paid within 30 days, the Clerk shall certify the amount to
the County Auditor for collection in the same manner as other special
assessments. The Council may by resolution spread the assessment over a
maximum of 3 years.



   (B)   Notice.  All notices required under this chapter shall be
served by first class mail to the address of  record of the property owner.



(Ord. 72, passed 3-3-1986)



§ 53.25  USER RATE SCHEDULE.



   Each user of sewer service shall pay the charges applicable to the type
of service, and in accordance with the provisions set forth in §§ 53.40et
seq.



(Ord. 72, passed 3-3-1986)



SEWER SERVICE CHARGES



§ 53.40  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of
terms used in this subchapter shall have the meanings hereinafter designated,
and all definitions found in § 53.01 shall have the same meanings in this
section.



   ADMINISTRATION.  Those costs attributable to administration of the
wastewater treatment system, including billing and customer service costs.



   COMMODITY CHARGE.  The amount billed to the user in addition to the
minimum charge, which has been determined by formulas to adequately recover
the cost of service.



   MAY.  Permissive.



   MINIMUM CHARGE.  There will be a minimum charge to each user of the
system. The minimum charge will be determined utilizing the formulas in §
53.43(F). This MINIMUM CHARGE may include a minimum usage.



   NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTE.  Wastewater that is primarily
introduced by residential users with a BOD5 concentration not greater than
260 mg/l and a total suspended solids (TSS) concentration not greater than
280 mg/l.



   REPLACEMENT.  Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of
the treatment facility to maintain the capacity and performance of the
treatment facility for which it was designed and constructed.



   SEWER SERVICE CHARGE SYSTEM.  The system of charges by which revenue
is generated to offset the cost of operation and maintenance plus
replacement, administration, and debt service.



   SEWER FUND.  The depository for the sewer service charge system for
all revenues collected from the user charges and rate schedules and in some
instances interest collected. The monies in the fund shall be transferred to
their respective accounts on a timely basis and used to pay the operating and
maintenance costs, equipment replacement costs, and annual debt service
retirement payments.



   SHALL.  Mandatory.



   USER CLASSES.



      (1)   RESIDENTIAL.  A principal family residence or
habitation classified as a single family, multi-family or apartment dwelling
that discharges domestic sanitary wastewater having characteristics of 260
mg/l BOD and 280 mg/l SS into the public wastewater treatment system, works,
and facility.



      (2)   COMMERCIAL.  Retail or wholesale business
establishments that discharge wastewater into the public wastewater treatment
system, works and facility.



      (3)   INSTITUTIONAL/GOVERNMENTAL.  Hospitals, nursing homes,
schools, city, county, state or federal buildings or facilities that
discharge wastewater into the public wastewater treatment system, works, and
facility.



      (4)   INDUSTRIAL.  An industry, as defined in § 53.01, which
discharges wastewater into the public wastewater treatment system, works, and
facility.



   USER RATE SCHEDULE.  A published schedule pursuant to a resolution of
the City Council which fixes the fees, rates, and terms of utility service.



(Ord. 73, passed 3-3-1986)



§ 53.41  SEWER SERVICE CHARGE SYSTEM.



   (A)   The city establishes a Sewer Service Charge System whereby all
revenues collected from users will be  used to offset all expenditures
incurred for operations and maintenance, equipment replacement,
administrative, extra-strength treatment and the annual debt service payment
of the wastewater treatment works, its facilities and equipment, and related
sewage systems.



   (B)   The city establishes a Sewer Fund into which revenue collected
from users, as established in § 53.40, will be deposited for the purpose of
funding all expenditures of operating, maintaining, and administering the
wastewater treatment works, plant and facilities. This includes
extra-strength treatment of wastewater above the normal domestic strength
wastewater and repairs and maintenance to the sewage system to maintain
operations.



   (C)   The city establishes a Capital Facilities and Equipment
Replacement Fund for the purposes of providing funds to purchase capital
equipment and replacements in a timely and orderly fashion.



   (D)   The city establishes a Debt Service Retirement Fund for the
purpose of providing funds to be used  solely for the retirement of
outstanding debts of the city’s wastewater treatment works. Annually the
city shall transfer the amount of funds required by the debt service
retirement schedule for that year.



   (E)   There will be 4 classes of users:



      (1)   Residential;



      (2)   Commercial;



      (3)   Institutional/governmental;



      (4)   Industrial.



   (F)   (1)   There will be an extra-strength charge for users who
discharge extra-strength waste. Extra-strength waste is defined as waste
having either a BOD5 concentration greater than 260 mg/l or a TSS
concentration greater than 280 mg/l or both BOD5 and TSS concentrations
greater than specified. The following formula will be used to compute the
extra-strength charge. This charge will be computed for each user based on
the B and S factors as established. Residential, commercial and
institutional/governmental users will be exempt from this extra-strength
charge.



CET($)   =   [VS (1,000 gal.)  x  .001 x 8.34]  [(B) (CBOD5) + (S) 
(CTSS)]



   Where:



      CET      =   Extra-strength treatment charge for BOD5
strength 260 mg/l and/or TSS strength 280 mg/l base rate.



      VS      =   Billable water flow to an individual
connection.



      B      =   Measured discharge BOD5 –  260 mg/l.



      CBOD5    =   Unit cost of operation, maintenance, and
replacement which is BOD5 related.



      S      =   Measured discharge TSS –  280 mg/l.



      CTSS   =   Unit cost of operation, maintenance, and
replacement which is TSS related.



      (2)   Negative values will not be credited against the
billing. Establishments not providing automatic waste monitoring equipment
will be assessed on the basis of BOD5 and TSS, as determined by analysis of a
24-hour composite sample collected annually by the Superintendent. The waste
producer may be required to provide a  suitable point for metering and
sample collection and shall cooperate in every way with the Superintendent.
Where it is not feasible to obtain a single representative sample, the
Superintendent may compute a theoretical waste strength based upon similar
establishments. Where it is evident that a constituent of the waste
significantly inhibits the standard analysis for BOD5, the charges may be
assessed on the basis of the TOC analysis. For the purposes of computation,
the BOD5 shall be assumed to be equivalent to 1.8 times the TOC.



   (G)   If any lot, parcel of land, or premises which discharges
sewage into the sanitary sewer system, either directly or indirectly, obtains
part or all of the water used thereon from sources other than the Public
Utility Department, and the water so obtained is not measured by a meter in a
manner which is acceptable to the Superintendent, then in such case the city
shall permit the discharge of sewage into its sanitary sewer system only when
the owner of such a lot, parcel of land or premises, or some other interested
party shall at their expense install and maintain a water meter which shall
be satisfactory to the Superintendent. Such water meter shall be installed so
as to measure all water received on such lot, parcel of land, or premises and
the current charges and rates shall be applied to the quantity of water
received as measured by such meter. However, if it shall be deemed
impractical by the Superintendent to measure the water used on any lot,
parcel of land, or premises, a flat charge may be made in accordance with the
estimated use of water on such lot, parcel of land, or premises.



   (H)   If:



      (1)   A lot, parcel of land, or premises discharges sewage
into the sanitary sewer system either directly or indirectly; and



      (2)   The Superintendent is satisfied that a portion of the
water measured by the meter or meters does not and cannot enter the sanitary
sewer system, the Superintendent or his or her designee is authorized to
determine, in such manner and by such method as he or she may deem
practicable, the percentage of the water measured by the meter which enters
the sanitary sewer system. In such a case, the charges and rates shall be
based upon the percentage of the metered water as determined by the
Superintendent. In the alternative in any such case, the Superintendent is
authorized to require or to permit the installation of other or additional
meters in such a manner that the quantity of water which actually enters the
sanitary sewer system may be determined.  In such a case, the charges or
rates shall be based upon the volume of water so shown to actually enter the
sanitary sewer system.



   (I)   The charges and rates for the use and services of the sanitary
sewer system to be made against any lot, parcel of land, or premises situated
outside the corporate limits of the city, which shall have any active
connection with the sanitary sewer system or which shall otherwise discharge
sewage either directly or indirectly into the sewer system shall be
determined as provided in this section, and the charge or rate shall be those
established by resolution of the City Council, pursuant to division (D) of
this section.



   (J)   (1)   The utility services and charges shall be the primary
responsibility of the owner of the premises served and shall be billed to him
or her unless otherwise authorized in writing. The city may collect the same
in a civil action, or in the alternative and at the option of the city, as
otherwise provided in this section.



      (2)   Each such charge is hereby made a lien upon the premises
served. All such charges, which are 30 days past due or more, may be
certified by the City Clerk to the County Auditor, and the City Clerk in so
certifying such charges to the County Auditor shall specify the amount
thereof, description of the premises served, and the name of the owner
thereof. The amount so certified shall be extended by the Auditor on the tax
rolls against such premises in the same manner as other taxes, collected by
the County Treasurer, and paid to the city along with other taxes.



   (K)   Each meter shall be considered a separate billing unit in
applying all charges and rates, except that any contribution into the
sanitary sewer system, whose water supply at a particular location is
received through more than 1 meter, may be billed on the basis of the
combined readings of the several meters.



   (L)   Bills for the charges for the use and service of the sanitary
sewer system shall be made out by the Public Utility Department, in
accordance with its usual and customary practices. The time of making such
bills and the period covered thereby shall be in accordance with the meter
reading practices of the Public Utility Department. All bills shall be
payable to the City of North Mankato Public Utilities.



   (M)   The revenues derived from the rates and charges shall be
deposited by the City Treasurer in the Sewer Fund.



   (N)   The city will review annually and not less than biannually the
wastewater contribution applicable to each  user and user class, the total
operation and maintenance costs of the wastewater treatment system and works,
and the current approved sewer service charge system, and the charges in
effect pursuant to § 53.43. The intent of such review is to:



      (1)   Maintain a proportionate distribution of the O & M costs
among all users and user classes;



      (2)   To generate sufficient revenues to fund all O & M/R
costs of the wastewater treatment system and works; and



      (3)   Apply excess revenues collected through the user rate
schedule of charges, attributable to the operations and maintenance portion
of the charges, and adjust that portion of the charges the following year for
all classes of users, applying any excess revenues to the user class or
classes generating such surplus.



   (O)   In accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 35.929(2)(f), each user will
be notified annually at the beginning of each calendar year, either by mail
or with their regular bill, of the user charge rates per user class, the
extra-strength charge and other charges attributable to the wastewater
treatment services.



   (P)   In accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 929-3, the City Clerk will be
responsible to maintain all records necessary to document compliance with the
sewer service system adopted.



(Ord. 73, passed 3-3-1986)



§ 53.42  CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM.



   (A)   The city establishes a Capital Improvements Program. The
purpose of said program is to establish an orderly program of capital
equipment replacement based on the replacement costs, service and life
expectancy of such equipment. The Capital Improvement Program will be
established under the following conditions:



      (1)   That the program be set up on a 5-year schedule and
budgeted to anticipate an orderly replacement of capital equipment;



      (2)   That the data for this program will be the basic
equipment and maintenance records of the public utility;



      (3)   That the program be reviewed annually, as part of the
Sewer Service Charge System, to ensure that the program schedule and budget
is coordinated and adjusted in accordance with subsection (1);



      (4)   That the estimated annual equipment replacement costs,
to be established by Council resolution, will be transferred from the Sewer
Rental Fund to the Capital Facilities and Equipment Replacement Fund.



(Ord. 73, passed 3-3-1986)



§ 53.43  USER RATE SCHEDULE OF CHARGES.



   (A)   All classes of users will be charged on the rates established
pursuant to division (D) of this section.



   (B)   All users shall be charged monthly for sewer services
according to the respective monthly water meter readings.



   (C)   A user minimum charge per month will be established for any
user of the sanitary sewer service system.



   (D)   All rates and charges for municipal utilities, including, but
not by way of limitation, rates for service, connection and meter reading
fees, disconnection fees, and reconnection fees, including penalties for
nonpayment, if any, shall be fixed, determined and amended by the Council and
adopted by resolution. Such resolution, containing the effective date
thereof, shall be kept on file and open to inspection in the office of the
City Clerk and shall be uniformly enforced.



      (1)   A minimum charge per month for users of the sanitary
sewer service shall be established by Council resolution;



      (2)   A commodity charge for each 1,000 gallons of water used
shall be established by Council resolution;



      (3)   The charge for treatment of extra-strength wastewater
for all users, excluding residential, commercial and
institutional/governmental users, will be based on extra-strength waste in
excess of 260 mg/l for BOD5 at the rate per pound established by Council
resolution, and 280 mg/l for TSS at the rate per pound established by Council
resolution.



   (E)   The user rate schedule of charges shall be reviewed annually
and distributed to all users at the beginning of each calendar year.



   (F)   The formulas for the determination of the monthly sewer
service charge are:



CSS/NM   =   CDNT + CAD + (CDET + CUT/NM) (FNM) (VS) + (CDC/NM +
CUC/NM) (VS)



   Where:



      CSS/NM   =   Monthly sewer service charge for sewer users
in North Mankato



      CDNT      =   Debt service charge for new equalization
basin facility (per connection for billing period)



      CAD      =   User charge for administration, billing and
customer service (per connection for billing period)



      CDET      =   Debt service charge for existing treatment
facility (flow)



      CUT/NM   =   User charge for administration, operation,
maintenance and replacement for  treatment for North Mankato (flow)



      CDC/NM   =   Debt service charge for collection system
(flow)



      CUC/NM   =   User charge for operation, maintenance and
replacement for collection system (flow)



      FNM      =   Ratio of North Mankato measured wastewater
flow volume to North Mankato billable water flow



      VS      =   Billable water flow to an individual
connection



   Treatment  –  Determination of User Charges for the City of North
Mankato



               The user charge is levied on users of the
treatment works for the user's proportionate share of the cost of operation
and maintenance (including replacement) of such treatment works. User charges
shall be levied in accordance with the following formula:



CUT/NM($)   =   (COMRTFlow) (VNM)  +  (COMRTBOD)  (BODNM)  +
(COMRTTSS)  (TSSNM)



   Where:



      CUT/NM   =   User charge for administration, operation,
maintenance, and replacement for treatment - City of North Mankato ($)



      COMRTFlow   =   Unit cost of operation, maintenance, and
replacement which is flow related ($/1000 gal.)



      COMRTBOD   =   Unit cost of operation, maintenance and
replacement which is BOD related ($/#)



      COMRTTSS   =   Unit cost of operation, maintenance and
replacement which is TSS related ($/#)



      VNM      =   Wastewater flow volume from North Mankato 
(Includes I/I) (1000 gal.)



      BODNM   =   BOD loading from North Mankato  (#)



      TSSNM   =   TSS loading from North Mankato  (#)



Determination of Sewer Service Charges for the City of North Mankato for
treatment.



Sewer service charges shall be levied in accordance with the following
formula:



CSS/NM($)   =   CUT/NM + (CDNT) (NC/NM) + CDET/NM



CDET/NM($)   =   (VNM) (CDETFlow) + (BODNM) (CDETBOD) + (TSSNM)
(CDETTSS)



   Where:



      CSS/NM($)   =   Sewer service charge for sewer users in
North Mankato  ($)



      CUT/NM   =   User charge for operation, maintenance, and
replacement for treatment  –  City of North Mankato ($)



      CDNT      =   Debt service charge for new equalization
basin facility (per connection for billing period) ($/conn.)



      NC/NM   =   Number of sanitary sewer service connections in
North Mankato



      CDET/NM   =   Charge for debt service on existing treatment
facility to North Mankato ($).



      VNM      =   Wastewater flow volume from North Mankato 
(Includes I/I) (1000 gal.)



      BODNM   =   BOD loading from North Mankato  (#)



      TSSNM   =   TSS loading from North Mankato  (#)



      CDETFlow   =   Unit cost of existing debt service which is
flow related ($/1000 gal.)



      CDETBOD   =   Unit cost of existing debt service which is
BOD related ($/#)



      CDETTSS   =   Unit cost of existing debt service which is
TSS related  ($/#)



(Ord. 73, passed 3-3-1986)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 53.55  POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.



   (A)   The Utilities Superintendent or his or her representative,
bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter
all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, and testing pertinent to the discharges to the city’s sewer
system in accordance with the provisions of this section.



   (B)   The Utilities Superintendent or his or her representative is
authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a
direct bearing on the type and source of discharge to the wastewater
collection system. An industry may withhold information considered
confidential; however, the industry must establish that the revelation to the
public of the information in question might result in an advantage to
competitors.



   (C)   While performing necessary work on private properties, the
Utilities Superintendent or his or her representative shall observe all
safety rules applicable to the premises established by the owner.



   (D)   The Utilities Superintendent or his or her representative
shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city
holds a duly negotiated easement for the purpose of, but not limited to,
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of
any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within said easement. All
entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the easement pertaining to the private property
involved.



(Ord. 72, passed 3-3-1986)



§ 53.56  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS.



   (A)   Mandatory permits.  All industrial users proposing to connect
or to commence a new discharge to the wastewater treatment system shall
obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting to or discharging into
the wastewater treatment system if the discharge would result in the industry
being classified as a significant industrial user. All existing significant
industrial users or industrial users subject to National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards under Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act connected to
or discharging into the wastewater treatment system shall obtain a wastewater
discharge permit within 180 days after the effective date of this chapter.



   (B)   Permit application.  Users required to obtain a wastewater
discharge permit shall complete and file with the city an application in the
form prescribed by the city. Existing users shall apply for a wastewater
discharge  permit within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter,
and proposed new users shall apply at least 90 days prior to connecting or
discharging to the wastewater treatment system.  In support of the
application, the user shall  submit the information required by the city for
the issuance of such a permit.



(Ord. 72, passed 3-3-1986)



§ 53.57  LEGAL ACTION.



   (A)   If a person negligently violates any provision of this title
or negligently fails to comply with any order issued by the city in
accordance with this chapter, then the City Attorney may seek to enforce this
chapter by appropriate legal action.  Such action may include, but shall not
be limited to, making a claim for monetary damages or obtaining injunctive
relief, including the termination of service to such person’s property.



   (B)   If a person willfully violates any provision of this chapter
or, in so violating this chapter, performs acts which show willful
indifference to the rights or safety of others, such person is guilty of
committing a misdemeanor. In addition, all the above powers provided for the
enforcement of this chapter shall be applicable, including the making of a
claim for punitive damages.



(Ord. 72, passed 3-3-1986)



§ 53.58  COSTS OF DAMAGE.



   (A)   If the city prevails, in whole or in part, in an action
brought against the person pursuant to the provisions of either § 53.57, or
in accordance with some other remedy allowed by law, then such person shall
be liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage caused by such person.
Such liability may include, but shall not be limited to, any of the following:



      (1)   Actual costs of repairing, cleaning or otherwise
correcting the city’s wastewater treatment system, including the wages paid
to city employees and the cost of parts and materials;



      (2)   Actual costs incurred by the city to enforce this
chapter against such person, including but not  limited to, fees or
compensation paid to city employees or others hired by the city, attorney’s
fees, and court costs;



      (3)   Punitive damages, if such person willfully violated this
chapter, or, in violating this chapter performed acts which indicate a
willful indifference to the rights or safety of others;



      (4)   Sewer service charges or such other user charges as such
person should have paid, but for the fact that such person violated the
reporting requirements of this chapter;



      (5)   General damages in the sum of at least $100 per day for
each day that the violation existed.



   (B)   The damages established hereunder may be collected by the city
in a fashion similar to any other judgment arising out of District Court. The
city may also assess such damages against the real property owned by such
person as a special assessment.



(Ord. 72, passed 3-3-1986)



CHAPTER 54:  STORMWATER



Section



   54.01   Stormwater utility



   54.02   Fixing rates and charges



   54.03   Administration



   54.04   Exemption



   54.05   Purpose, scope and definitions



   54.06   Erosion prevention and sediment control plan



   54.07   Review of plan



   54.08   Modification of plan



   54.09   Permanent stormwater BMPs



   54.10   Remedial action



   54.11   Emergency action



   54.12   Notification of failure of the plan



   54.13   Illicit discharge prohibited



   54.14   Connection of sanitary sewer prohibited



   54.15   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   54.16   Back yard drains



 



   54.98   Enforcement response procedure



§ 54.01  STORMWATER UTILITY.



   A stormwater utility is hereby established pursuant to M.S. § 444.075
and shall operate as an Enterprise Fund of the city subject to all applicable
statutory requirements. The stormwater utility shall provide for the
acquisition, construction, expansion, repair and maintenance of stormwater
facilities in the city. The operation of the system shall include the
collection, management, detention, pumping and discharge of stormwater as
necessary to promote efficient operation of the system.



(Am. Ord. 82, 4th Series, passed 12-5-2016)



§ 54.02  FIXING RATES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   The monthly charge to a typical single-family residential
parcel shall be the stormwater utility rate as established by the then
current resolution of the City Council. For purposes of this section, each
unit of a duplex, each townhome and each condominium unit shall be considered
a single-family residential parcel. All other parcels of 10,000 square feet
or less shall pay the stormwater utility rate. All other parcels of 10,000
square feet or more shall pay the rate times the number of 10,000 square foot
increments comprising the parcel. A 20,000 square foot parcel shall pay 2
times the rate. A 25,000 square foot parcel shall pay 2.5 times the rate.



   (B)   Rates and charges for operation of the stormwater utility
shall be established pursuant to § 50.02.



(Am. Ord. 82, 4th Series, passed 12-5-2016)



§ 54.03  ADMINISTRATION.



   The City Administrator or his or her designee shall have administrative
control of the stormwater utility. The City Administrator shall, from
time-to-time, make recommendations to the City Council for the efficient and
orderly operation of the stormwater system. The Administrator shall make
recommendations to the City Council for inclusion in the Five-Year Capital
Improvement Plan regarding the maintenance and improvement of the stormwater
system.



(Am. Ord. 82, 4th Series, passed 12-5-2016)



§ 54.04  EXEMPTION.



   Public rights-of-way shall be exempt from stormwater utility fees.



(Am. Ord. 82, 4th Series, passed 12-5-2016)



§ 54.05  PURPOSE, SCOPE AND DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards
and requirements for conservation practices and planning activities designed
to control or reduce point and non-point source stormwater pollution, soil
erosion, sedimentation, and illicit discharges that may occur within the city.



   (B)   Scope. Any person, business entity, state agency, or political
subdivision proposing a land disturbance activity within the city shall apply
to the city for the approval of the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan
(SWPPP). No land shall be disturbed until the plan is approved by the city
and conforms to the standards set forth herein. This chapter also develops
regulations to manage illicit stormwater discharge within the city.



   (C)   Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or
phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the same
meaning as they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most
reasonable application. For the purpose of this chapter, the words "must" and
"shall" are mandatory and not permissive.



      BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS). Erosion and sediment control
and water quality management practices that are the most effective and
practicable means of controlling, preventing and minimizing degradation of
surface water, including avoidance of impacts, construction-phasing,
minimizing the length of time soil areas are exposed, prohibitions and other
management practices published by state or designated area-wide planning
agencies. Acceptable BMPs are identified in the current version of The
Minnesota Stormwater Manual. BMPs must be adapted to the site and can be
adopted from other sources. However, they must be similar in purpose and at
least as effective.



      CITY. Any city official with authority, such as but not limited
to, administration, City Council, City Engineer, Inspections Department, law
enforcement and public works officials.



      CONTAMINATED. Containing a harmful quantity of any substance.



      CONTAMINATION. The presence of or entry of any substance which
may be deleterious to the public health and/or the quality of the water into
the public stormwater system, waters of the state, or waters of the United
States.



      COSMETIC CLEANING. Cleaning done for cosmetic purposes to the
exterior of buildings, motorized vehicles, parking lots, recreational
vehicles or similar activity, it does not include industrial cleaning,
cleaning associated with manufacturing activities, hazardous or toxic waste
cleaning, or any cleaning otherwise regulated under federal, state, or local
laws.



      DEVELOPER. Any person, business entity, state agency, or
political subdivision thereof, engaged in a land disturbance activity.



      DEVELOPMENT. Any land disturbance activity that changes the
site's runoff characteristics in conjunction with residential, commercial,
industrial or institutional construction or alteration.



      EROSION. Any process that wears away the surface of the land by
the action of water, wind, ice or gravity.



      EROSION PREVENTION. Measures employed to prevent erosion.



      EXPOSED SOIL AREAS. All areas of the construction site where the
vegetation (trees, shrubs, brush, grasses, etc.) or impervious surface has
been removed, thus rendering the soil more prone to erosion. This includes
topsoil stockpile areas, borrow areas and disposal areas within the
construction site, it does not include temporary stockpiles or surcharge
areas of clean sand, gravel, concrete or bituminous, which have less
stringent protection. Once soil is exposed, it is considered "exposed soil,"
until it meets the definition of "final stabilization."



      FINAL STABILIZATION. All soil disturbing activities at the site
have been completed, and a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a minimum
density of 70% has been established on all unpaved areas and areas not
covered by permanent structures, or equivalent permanent stabilization
measures have been employed.



      HARMFUL QUANTITY. The amount of any substance that will cause
pollution of waters of the city, state or nation that will cause lethal or
sub-lethal adverse effects on the representative, sensitive aquatic
monitoring organisms residing in waters.



      ILLICIT DISCHARGE. A discharge to the MS4 that is not composed
entirely of stormwater, except for those discharges exempted under § 54.12.



      LAND DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY. Any land change that may result in
soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into or upon
waters or lands within this government's jurisdiction, including
construction, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, transporting and
filling of land. Within the context of this rule, land disturbance activity
does not mean:



         (a)   Minor land disturbance activities, such as home
gardens, tilling, planting or harvesting of agricultural and horticultural
crops, repairs and maintenance work, unless such activity requires a permit.



         (b)   Emergency work to protect life or property, and
emergency repairs. If such a plan would have been required, then the
disturbed land area shall be shaped and stabilized in accordance with the
city's requirements as soon as possible.



         (c)   Tilling, planting, or harvesting of agricultural,
horticultural, or silvicultural (forestry) crops.



      MOBILE COMMERCIAL COSMETIC CLEANING. Power washing, steam
cleaning and any other mobile cosmetic cleaning operation of vehicles and/or
exterior surfaces engaged for commercial purposes.



      MS4 PERMIT. The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) permit
issued to the city for monitoring and maintaining water quality in its MS4.
The Environmental Protection Agency has promulgated the National Pollution
Discharge Elimination System, Phase II stormwater rules. The MPCA has
delegated the responsibility to administer the National Pollution Discharge
Elimination System, Phase II stormwater permit system to MS4 communities,
Pollution Discharge Elimination System, Phase II stormwater rules. The MPCA
has delegated the responsibility to administer the National Pollution
Discharge Elimination System, Phase II stormwater permit system to MS4
communities.



      MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). The system of
conveyances, including sidewalks, municipal streets, driveways, curb and
gutter, ditches, channels, retention basins, catch basins or similar
stormwater inlets, and/or any other conveyance delivering water to the public
storm sewer collection and delivery system.



      NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES). The
program for issuing, modifying, revoking, reissuing, terminating, monitoring,
and enforcing permits under the Clean Water Act (§§ 301, 318, 402 and 405)
and 33 U.S.C. §§ 1317, 1328, 1342 and 1345.



      OWNER. The person or party possessing the title of the property
on which the land disturbing activities will occur; or if the land disturbing
activities is for a lease holder, the party or individual identified as the
lease holder; or the contracting government agency responsible for the land
disturbing activities.



      PERMITTEE. A person or persons, firm, or governmental agency or
other institution that signs the application submitted, and is responsible
for compliance with the terms and conditions of this permit.



      POLLUTION. The alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or
biological quality of, or the contamination of, any waters of the state or
the MS4, that renders the water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to humans,
animal life, vegetation, or property, or to the public health, safety, or
welfare, or impairs the usefulness or the public enjoyment of the water for
any lawful or reasonable purpose.



      REDEVELOPMENT. Any construction activity where, prior to the
start of construction, the areas to be disturbed have 15% or more of
impervious surface(s).



      SEDIMENT. The product of an erosion process; solid material, both
mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been
moved by water, wind or ice, and has come to rest on the earth's surface,
either above or below water level.



      SEDIMENT CONTROL. Methods employed to prevent sediment from
leaving the site.



      SEDIMENTATION. The process or action of depositing sediment.



      STABILIZED. The exposed ground surface has been covered by
appropriate materials that prevent erosion from occurring. Grass seeding is
not stabilization until it's established.



      STORMWATER. Precipitation runoff, stormwater runoff, snow melt
runoff, and any other surface runoff and drainage.



      STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP). A plan for
stormwater discharge that includes erosion prevention measures and sediment
controls that, when implemented, will decrease soil erosion on a parcel of
land and decrease off-site, non-point pollution.



      WATERS OF THE STATE. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, that are
contained within, flow through, or border upon the state, or any portion
thereof.



      WETLAND or WETLANDS. Those areas that are inundated or saturated
by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions.



(Ord. 35, 4th Series, passed 2-22-2011; Am. Ord. 48, 4th Series, passed
1-22-2013; Am. Ord. 82, 4th Series, passed 12-5-2016)



§ 54.06  EROSION PREVENTION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN.



   All plans shall be consistent with National Pollution Discharge
Elimination Permit (NPDES) requirements, and the filing or approval
requirements of relevant watershed districts, watershed management
organizations, ditch authorities, soil and water conservation districts, or
other regulatory bodies.



   (A)   Required. Every applicant for a building permit, excavation
permit, plumbing permit or subdivision approval that involves any land
disturbing activities within the city shall submit an erosion prevention and
sediment control plan to the city. No land shall be disturbed until the plan
is approved by the city and conforms to the standards set forth herein.



   (B)   General criteria for Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. An
Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall be required for any land disturbing
activity and shall meet the following criteria:



      (1)   Implement best management practices.



      (2)   Protect storm sewers from sediment.



      (3)   Prevent sediment damage to adjacent properties and other
designated areas.



      (4)   Protect paved roads from vehicle tracking.



      (5)   Engineer the construction of steep slopes.



      (6)   Stabilize all exposed soils and soil stockpiles.



      (7)   Stabilize all waterways and outlets.



      (8)   When working in or crossing water bodies, take
precautions to contain sediment.



      (9)   Maintain all temporary and permanent erosion and
sediment control practices.



      (10)   Establish permanent vegetation.



      (11)   Dispose of temporary erosion and sediment control
measures following final stabilization.



   (C)   Contents of plan. The erosion and sediment control plan shall
include the following:



      (1)   Project description. The nature and purpose of the land
disturbing activity.



      (2)   Project schedule. A projected timeline for completion of
all site activities.



      (3)   Existing site conditions. Elevations, vegetation,
utilities and drainage.



      (4)   Adjacent areas. Properties, bodies of water, roads, and
the like, which may be affected by the land disturbing activity.



      (5)   Erosion and sediment control measures. Methods to be
used to control erosion and sedimentation on the site before, during and
after the construction process.



      (6)   Maintenance. Schedule of regular inspections and repair
of erosion and sediment control structures.



      (7)   Permanent stabilization. How the site will be stabilized
after construction is completed.



      (8)   Dewatering. The plan must include provisions for
dewatering. Water may not be discharged in a manner that causes erosion or
flooding of the site or of receiving channels or a wetland. Water pumped from
the site shall be treated by 1 of the following processes: temporary
sedimentation basins, grit chambers, sand filters, up flow chambers,
hydrocyclones, swirl concentrators, or other controls as approved by the
Director of Public Works or his/her designee.



      (9)   Temporary sedimentation basins. Temporary sedimentation
basins shall be installed when required by the version of the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency's NPDES Construction Permit Requirements in place at
the time of application. All temporary and permanent basins shall be designed
in accordance with the MN Stormwater Manual.



   (D)   NPDES Construction Site Permit. Any construction activity that
disturbs 1 or more acres is required to obtain a separate NPDES Construction
Site Permit from the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA). A copy of
this permit and erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted to the
city.



(Ord. 35, 4th Series, passed 2-22-2011; Am. Ord. 82, 4th Series, passed
12-5-2016) 



§ 54.07  REVIEW OF PLAN.



   (A)   Site plans for new development and redevelopment of any kind
will be assessed for stormwater quantity control and stormwater quality
management. No permits shall be issued until a site plan meeting the
requirements of this section has been submitted by the applicant.



   (B)   The applicant shall submit information adequate for the city
to evaluate if the plans meet the requirements of the section.



   (C)   The city shall complete a review of the erosion and sediment
control plan within 14 calendar days of receiving the plan from the developer.



      (1)   Permit required. If it determines that the plan meets
the requirements of this chapter, the city shall issue the appropriate permit
valid for a specified period of time that authorizes the land disturbance
activity contingent on the implementation and completion of the plan.



      (2)   Denial. If it determines that the plan does not meet the
requirements of this chapter, the city shall not issue a permit for the land
disturbance activity.



   (D)   City inspections and enforcement. The city shall conduct
inspections on a regular basis to ensure that the plan is properly installed
and maintained. In all cases, the inspectors will attempt to work with the
developer to maintain proper erosion and sediment control at all sites. In
cases where cooperation is withheld, enforcement action(s) shall be taken by
the city until erosion and sediment control measures meet the requirements of
this chapter. An inspection may be needed before work can commence.
Inspections are required as follows:



      (1)   Before any land disturbing activity begins.



      (2)   As necessary or required during construction.



      (3)   At the completion of the project.



   (E)   The city reserves the right to conduct other random
inspections during the course of the project to ensure compliance with the
plan.



   (F)   Owner inspections. Unless otherwise authorized by the city,
all construction sites shall be inspected by the owner or the owner's
representative at least once per 7 calendar days and within 24 hours after a
rainfall event greater than 0.5 inches in a 24-hour period.



      (1)   Records of each inspection shall be kept at the project
site. The records shall clearly show the following information:



         (a)   Date and time of inspection;



         (b)   Date and amount of any rainfall greater than 0.5
inches in a 24 hour period;



         (c)   Name of inspector;



         (d)   Findings of the inspection; and



         (e)   Documentation of corrective actions required and
the actions taken.



      (2)   The owner shall make these records available to the city
upon request.



(Ord. 35, 4th Series, passed 2-22-2011; Am. Ord. 82, 4th Series, passed
12-5-2016)



§ 54.08  MODIFICATION OF PLAN.



   (A)   The applicant must amend the erosion and sediment control plan
as necessary to include added requirements such as additional or modified
best management practices designed to correct problems identified.



   (B)   All nonfunctional BMPs must be repaired, replaced, or
supplemented with functional BMPs by the end of the next business day after
discovery, or as soon as field conditions allow access. Perimeter control
devices and sedimentation basins shall be considered nonfunctional when 1/2
of depth is full of sediment.



(Ord. 35, 4th Series, passed 2-22-2011; Am. Ord. 82, 4th Series, passed
12-5-2016)



§ 54.09  PERMANENT STORMWATER BMPS.



   (A)   The applicant shall install or construct, on or for the
proposed land disturbing or development activity, all stormwater management
facilities necessary to manage:



      (1)   Storm peak discharge rates to pre-project rates for the
2.0-yr, 10-yr, and 100-yr 24-hour storm events.



      (2)   Volume, Total Suspended Solids (TSS), Total Phosphorus
(TP) such that there is no net increase from pre-project conditions on an
annual average basis for new developments and such that there is a net
reduction from pre-project conditions on an annual average basis for
redevelopment projects.



         (a)   For projects where site constraints limit the
ability to provide the required control practices within the project
boundary; the project shall provide for downstream improvements for that
portion that cannot be treated within project boundaries. Such projects may
include:



            1.   Linear projects where reasonable effort has
been made to obtain sufficient right-of-way to install required control
practices and said efforts have been unsuccessful;



            2.   Sites where infiltration is prohibited; or



            3.   Other locations as determined by the Director
of Public Works or his/her designee.



   (B)   Investigation of practices. The following stormwater
management practices shall be investigated in developing a Stormwater
Management Plan in the following descending order of preference:



      (1)   Infiltration of runoff on site, if suitable soil
conditions are available for use except that infiltration shall be prohibited
where:



         (a)   Industrial facilities are not authorized to
infiltrate industrial stormwater under an NPDES/SDS Industrial Stormwater
Permit issued by the MPCA.



         (b)   Vehicle fueling and maintenance occur.



         (c)   Less than 3 feet of separation distance from the
bottom of the infiltration system to the elevation of the seasonally
saturated soils or the top of bedrock can be achieved.



         (d)   High levels of contaminants in soil or groundwater
will be mobilized by the infiltrating stormwater.



         (e)   Soil infiltration rates are more than 8.3 inches
per hour.



         (f)   Soils are predominately Hydrologic Soil Group D
(clay), except where soil amendment will allow for appropriate infiltration.



      (2)   Flow attenuation by use of open vegetated swales and
natural depressions;



      (3)   Stormwater retention facilities; and



      (4)   Stormwater detention facilities.



   (C)   Projects must include creation of new or retrofit existing
structural stormwater Best Management Practices or utilize properly designed
regional structural stormwater Best Management Practices. Routine maintenance
of existing structural stormwater Best Management Practices does not meet the
requirement to provide stormwater management under division (D). Projects
that have made reasonable effort but been unable to fully meet volume, TSS
and TP requirements within the project limits may upon authorization by the
Director of Public Works or his/her designee utilize the following methods to
meet that portion not met onsite:



      (1)   Provide treatment that yields the same benefits in an
offsite location to the same receiving water that receives runoff from the
project site. If this is not feasible then;



      (2)   Provide treatment that yields the same benefits in an
offsite location within the same Minnesota Department of Natural Resources
catchment area as the project site, if this is not feasible then;



      (3)   Provide treatment that yields the same benefits in an
offsite location within an adjacent Minnesota Department of Natural Resources
catchment area up-stream of the project site. If this is not feasible then;



      (4)   Provide treatment that yields the same benefits at a
site approved by the city.



   (D)   Applicants shall provide documentation showing compliance with
divisions (A), (B), and (C) above. Acceptable options shall be:



      (1)   For Rate and Volume:



         (a)   Select from the Modeling Tool Section of the MPCA
Stormwater Manual; or



         (b)   Other method approved by the Director of Public
Works or his/her designee.



      (2)   For TSS and TP:



         (a)   Minimal Impact Design Standards (MIDS) Calculator
available on the MPCA website; or



         (b)   Other method approved by the Director of Public
Works or his/her designee.



   (E)   Performance security. Prior to approval of permits for
construction, the applicant may be required to submit an agreement to
construct such required physical improvements, to dedicate property or
easements, to provide performance security (letter of credit or performance
bond), and to comply with such conditions as may have been agreed to.



   (F)   Failure to complete. If the applicant fails to complete the
required stormwater improvements within 24-months of beginning construction
of the project they are intended to mitigate, the city may make provisions to
complete the required stormwater improvements or to provide equivalent
downstream treatment. The city shall use any performance security held for
the work or may utilize special assessments as provided in M.S. § 429 to
reimburse itself for costs associated with this work.



   (G)   Where the City Council authorizes the construction of private
stormwater management facilities, the applicant shall designate the
responsible party for inspection and maintenance of all private stormwater
management facilities in an agreement to be recorded against the properties
being developed. In addition, the agreement shall provide for:



      (1)   Description of anticipated maintenance activities and
frequency.



      (2)   Access in perpetuity for inspection of the facilities by
the Director of Public Works or his/her designee.



      (3)   Access in perpetuity for maintenance of the facilities
should the Director of Public Works or his/her designee find that stormwater
facility maintenance is required and upon written notice the property owners
fail to take corrective action with the cost of such maintenance to be paid
by the property owner.



      (4)   If the expense is not paid, the expense will be made a
special assessment against the property concerned in accordance with M.S. §
429.061 and other pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor
and collection along with the current taxes the following year or in annual
installments, as the City Council may determine in each case.



   (H)   Removal or alteration of Structural Stormwater Best Management
Practices. Structural Stormwater Best Management Practices installed to
fulfill the requirements of this chapter shall be maintained in compliance
with the approved maintenance plan. Where no plan is in place they shall be
maintained in compliance with accepted Industry Standard and Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency recommendations. No Structural Stormwater Best
Management Practices shall be removed or altered in such a way to decrease
structural Stormwater Best Management Practices effectiveness without:



      (1)   Authorization of the Director of Public Works or his/her
designee; and



      (2)   Providing new or improved Structural Stormwater Best
Management Practices providing or exceeding that amount lost due to the
alteration or removal.



(Ord. 82, 4th Series, passed 12-5-2016)



§ 54.10  REMEDIAL ACTION.



   The city may take remedial action if any of the conditions listed below
exist. The applicant shall reimburse the city for all direct costs incurred
in the process of remedial work, including attorney's fees.



   (A)   Abandonment. The developer ceases land disturbing activities
and/or filling and abandons the work site prior to completion of the grading
plan.



   (B)   Failure to implement plan. The developer fails to conform to
the erosion and sediment control plan as approved by the city.



(Ord. 35, 4th Series, passed 2-22-2011; Am. Ord. 82, 4th Series, passed
12-5-2016)  Penalty, see § 54.98



§ 54.11  EMERGENCY ACTION.



   If circumstances exist such that noncompliance with this chapter poses
an immediate danger to the public health, safety and welfare, as determined
by the city, the city may take emergency preventative action. The city shall
also take every reasonable action possible to contact and direct the
applicant to take any necessary action.



(Ord. 35, 4th Series, passed 2-22-2011; Am. Ord. 82, 4th Series, passed
12-5-2016)  Penalty, see § 54.98



§ 54.12  NOTIFICATION OF FAILURE OF THE PLAN.



   The city shall notify the permit holder of the failure of the erosion
prevention and sediment control plan's measures.



   (A)   Initial contact. The initial contact will be with the party or
parties listed on the application and/or the plan's contacts. Twenty-four
hours after notification, the city, at its discretion, may begin corrective
work as necessary. The city shall first attempt to provide notification in
writing. If initial notification is verbal, it shall immediately be followed
by a written notification. It is the responsibility of the permit holder to
have a designated person available at all times for purposes of notification
within the above-stated, 24-hour period.



   (B)   Erosion off-site. If sediment breaches the perimeter of the
site, the permittee shall immediately develop and implement a cleanup and
restoration plan within 24-hours of obtaining the adjoining property owner's
permission. If, after making a good-faith effort to notify the adjoining
property owner, the developer has been unable to establish contact, the
responsible party may proceed with corrective work. If, at the discretion of
the city, the permit holder does not repair the damage caused by the erosion,
the city may do the remedial work required. When restoration to wetlands and
other resources are required, the applicant shall be required to work with
the appropriate agency to ensure that the work is done properly.



   (C)   Erosion into streets, wetlands or water bodies. If eroded soil
(including tracked soils from construction activities) enters streets,
wetlands or other water bodies, cleanup and repair shall be immediate. The
applicant shall provide all traffic control and flagging required to protect
the traveling public during the cleanup operations.



   (D)   Failure to do corrective work. When an applicant fails to
conform to any provision of this chapter within the time stipulated, the city
may take the following actions, but are not limited to:



      (1)   Issuing a stop-work order, withholding the scheduling of
inspections, and/or the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.



      (2)   Revoking any permit issued by the city to the applicant
for the site in question or any other of the applicant's sites within the
city's jurisdiction.



      (3)   Correcting the deficiency or hiring a contractor to
correct the deficiency.



      (4)   Requiring reimbursement to the city for all costs
incurred in correcting stormwater pollution control deficiencies. If payment
is not made within 30 days after the city incurs costs, the city will halt
all work on the project site and assess any reimbursement costs to the
property. As a condition of the permit, the owner shall waive notice of any
assessment hearing to be conducted by the city, concur that the benefit to
the property exceeds the amount of the proposed assessment, and waive all
rights by virtue of M.S. § 429.081 to challenge the amount or validity of
assessment.



(Ord. 35, 4th Series, passed 2-22-2011; Am. Ord. 82, 4th Series, passed
12-5-2016) Penalty, see § 54.98



§ 54.13  ILLICIT DISCHARGE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   A person commits a violation if the person introduces or
causes to be introduced into the MS4 any discharge that is not composed
entirely of stormwater.



   (B)   A person commits a violation if the person introduces or
causes to be introduced into the MS4 any harmful quantity of any substance.



   (C)   The following are considered exempt discharge activities from
enforcement action for a violation:



      (1)   A discharge authorized by, and in full compliance with a
site specific NPDES permit such as a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan
Permit for construction activities;



      (2)   A discharge or flow resulting from fire fighting by the
Fire Department;



      (3)   Agricultural stormwater runoff;



      (4)   A discharge or flow from water line flushing or
disinfection that contains no harmful quantity of total residual chlorine or
any other chemical used in line disinfection;



      (5)   A discharge or flow from lawn watering, or landscape
irrigation;



      (6)   A discharge or flow from a diverted stream flow or
natural spring;



      (7)   A discharge or flow from uncontaminated pumped
groundwater or rising groundwater;



      (8)   Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration;



      (9)   Uncontaminated discharge or flow from a foundation
drain, sump pump, or footing drain;



      (10)   A discharge or flow from a potable water source not
containing any harmful substance or material from the cleaning or draining of
a storage tank or other container;



      (11)   A discharge or flow from air conditioning condensation
that is unmixed with water from a cooling tower, emissions scrubber,
emissions filter, or any other source of pollution;



      (12)   A discharge or flow from a riparian habitat or wetland;



      (13)   A discharge or flow from water used in street washing
or cosmetic cleaning that is not a contaminated soap, detergent, degreaser,
solvent, emulsifier, dispersant, or any other harmful cleaning substance; or



      (14)   Drainage from a private residential swimming pool
containing no harmful quantities of chlorine or other chemicals. Drainage
from swimming pool filter backwash is prohibited.



   (D)   No exemption shall be allowed if:



      (1)   The discharge or flow in question has been determined by
the city to be a source of a pollutant or pollutants to the waters of the
state or to the MS4;



      (2)   Written notice of the determination has been provided to
the discharger; and



      (3)   The discharge has continued after the expiration of the
time given in the notice to cease the discharge.



(Ord. 48, 4th Series, passed 1-22-2013; Am. Ord. 82, 4th Series, passed
12-5-2016)



§ 54.14  CONNECTION OF SANITARY SEWER PROHIBITED.



   A person commits an offense if the person connects a sanitary sewer
line conveying or discharging a harmful quantity of pollutant to the MS4, or
allows such a connection to continue.



(Ord. 48, 4th Series, passed 1-22-2013; Am. Ord. 82, 4th Series, passed
12-5-2016)



§ 54.15  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.
All other ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to
the extent of the inconsistency only.



(Ord. 35, 4th Series, passed 2-22-2011; Am. Ord. 48, 4th Series, passed
1-22-2013; Am. Ord. 82, 4th Series, passed 12-5-2016)



§ 54.16  BACK YARD DRAINS.



   Purpose. The city finds that it is necessary to allow the drainage of
water from some back yards to prevent pooling and other effects of standing
water. The purpose of this section is to regulate the maintenance of these
drains.



   (A)   Drains installed as part of a new street construction or by
the city. If a back yard drain was  installed as a part of a new street
project, or was installed by the city to alleviate ponding issues, the city
shall have an easement to enter the property in order to maintain the drain,
make changes to the drain, or repair the drain. The easement area shall
include the area necessary to maintain the structure and the piping.



   (B)   Drains installed by citizens or parties other than the city.
If the drain and piping is installed by  any entity other than the city, the
property owner in which the structure and pipes are located shall assume
responsibility for the maintenance and functionality of the structure and
subsequent piping, this shall include the point of connection in to the city
utility service. The property owner shall submit a construction plan to the
city for review and approval, showing the size and location of any new
private back yard drain. The property owner agrees to hold harmless the city
for any damage that the structure, piping or connection to city utilities may
have on any other property, or the city's utility that are the result of the
actions or inactions of the property in the installation, maintenance, lack
of maintenance, of the structure, piping and connection.



(Ord. 112, 4th series, passed 1-22-2019)



§ 54.98  ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE PROCEDURE.



   Enforcement Response Procedure. The city has adopted an Enforcement
Response Procedure Document that includes penalties for Illicit Discharges of
Pollutants which is hereby referenced as part of this chapter.



(Ord. 82, 4th Series, passed 12-5-2016)



CHAPTER 55:  RECYCLING COLLECTION FACILITIES



Section



   55.01   Legislative intent



   55.02   Objectives



   55.03   Definitions



   55.04   Criteria and standards



   55.05   Administration and enforcement



§ 55.01  LEGISLATIVE INTENT.



   This chapter is enacted to promote the health, safety, morals, comfort,
convenience, prosperity, general welfare, and order within the city through
the establishment of comprehensive and uniform standards relating to
recycling collection facilities.



(Ord. 120, passed 1-22-1991; Am. Ord. 8, 4th Series, passed 1-16-2007)



§ 55.02  OBJECTIVES.



   It shall be the intent of the provisions of this chapter to achieve the
following objectives:



   (A)   To establish standards which would permit recycling collection
facilities within the city.



   (B)   To establish standards for the collection and storage of
recyclables within the city.



   (C)   To protect the land and environment (water, soil, landscape,
and the like) around recycling collection facilities.



(Ord. 120, passed 1-22-1991; Am. Ord. 8, 4th Series, passed 1-16-2007)



§ 55.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Materials that are separated from mixed municipal
solid waste for the purpose of recycling, including paper, glass, metals,
automobile oil, batteries and other specifically allowed items. Refuse
derived material or other material that is destroyed by incineration is not a
recyclable material.



   RECYCLING FACILITY. A recycling facility is a center for the
collection, processing or repair of recyclable materials for reuse in their
original form or use in manufacturing processes. Recycling facilities may
include the following.



      (1)   DESIGNATED FACILITY. A recycling facility, which has
complied with the permitted rules of the Pollution Control Agency and is open
a minimum of 12 operating hours each week, 12 months each year and accepts
for recycling at least four different materials such as paper, glass, plastic
and metal.



      (2)   COLLECTION FACILITY. A collection facility is a place
where the public may donate, redeem, or purchase, recyclable materials.
COLLECTION FACILITIES may include vending machines, mobile units, unattended
containers placed for the donation of recyclable materials and permanent
structures.



      (3)   REVERSE VENDING MACHINES. A reverse vending machine is
an automated mechanical device which accepts at least 1 or more types of
empty beverage containers, including, but not limited to, aluminum cans,
glass and plastic bottles, and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit
slip. A reverse vending machine may sort and process containers mechanically
provided that the entire process is enclosed within the machine.



      (4)   MOBILE RECYCLING UNIT. A mobile recycling unit means an
automobile, truck, trailer or van which is used for the collection of
recyclable materials. A mobile recycling unit also means the bins, boxes or
containers transported by trucks, vans, or trailers, and used for the
collection of recyclable materials.



   NOXIOUS MATTER. Any solid, liquid, or gaseous material, including, but
not limited to, gases, vapors, odor, dusts, mists, or combinations thereof,
that in the opinion of the Council, the emission of which is/could be
detrimental to or endangers the public health, safety, comfort or general
welfare or causes/could cause damage to property.



(Ord. 120, passed 1-22-1991; Am. Ord. 8, 4th Series, passed 1-16-2007)



§ 55.04  CRITERIA AND STANDARDS.



   (A)   Reverse vending machine (much like a pop machine but bigger).
A reverse vending machine would be a permitted use in any industrial or
commercial district and would not require additional parking spaces. They may
be allowed provided they comply with the following standards:



      (1)   Shall be established in conjunction with a commercial
use which is in compliance with this chapter and the building and fire codes;



      (2)   Shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation
and be located in an easily accessible area;



      (3)   Shall not occupy parking spaces required by the primary
use;



      (4)   Shall occupy no more than 50 square feet of floor space
per installation, including any protective enclosure, and shall be no more
than 8 feet in height. Any business or industry may have 1 vending machine
for each material recycled;



      (5)   Operating hours shall be at least the operating hours of
the host use;



      (6)   Shall be sufficiently anchored or restrained to prevent
tipping or other vandalism;



      (7)   Shall give the identity and phone number of the operator
or responsible person to call if the machine is inoperative.



   (B)   Small collection facilities.  Small collection facilities are
facilities of 500 square feet or less. Such facilities should be treated as a
conditional use in a commercial district and other areas deemed appropriate
by the Council, and a permitted use in an industrial district subject to the
following conditions: (If treated as a permissible use, the following
standards would serve as performance standards prior to issuing any permits.)



      (1)   Shall be established in conjunction with an existing
commercial use which is in compliance with the  zoning, building and fire
code;



      (2)   Shall be no larger than 500 square feet and occupy no
more than 5 parking spaces not including space that will be periodically
needed for removal of materials or exchange of containers;



      (3)   Shall have a minimum setback of 15 feet from any street
right-of-way and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation;



      (4)   Shall not use power-driven processing equipment except
for reverse vending machines;



      (5)   Attended facilities located within 100 feet of
residentially zoned property shall operate only during the hours between 9:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m.;



      (6)   Containers for the 24-hour donation of materials shall
be at least 125 feet from any residential use unless there is acoustical
shielding between the containers and the residential use in which case the
setback may be reduced to 75 feet;



      (7)   No additional parking spaces will be required for
customers of a small collection facility located at the established parking
lot of a host use;



      (8)   Mobile recycling units shall have an area clearly marked
to prohibit other vehicular parking during hours when the mobile unit is
scheduled to be present.



   (C)   Large collection facilities. A large collection facility is
one that is 501 square feet in size or larger. It may include a permanent
building and be located on property separate from a host use. It would be
considered a conditional use in industrial districts provided it complies
with certain performance standards set by the Council. Standards for
consideration include:



      (1)   The facility does not abut a property used or zoned for
residential or public use; or



      (2)   The facility will be screened from the public
right-of-way by operating in an enclosed building or:



         (a)   Within an area enclosed by an opaque fence at
least 6 feet in height with landscaping;



         (b)   At least 150 feet from property used or zoned for
residential or public use;



      (3)   Other setback and landscape requirements shall be the
same as those for the zoning district in which the facility will be located
except that all nonimpervious surfaces other than planting beds shall be
sodded;



      (4)   Space will be provided on site for 6 vehicles or the
anticipated peak customer load, whichever is higher, to circulate and to
deposit recyclable materials except where the Zoning Administrator determines
that allowing overflow traffic above 6 vehicles is compatible with
surrounding businesses and public safety;



      (5)   One off-street parking space will be provided for each
commercial vehicle operated by the recycling facility;



      (6)   If the facility is located within 500 feet of property
zoned or used for residential use, it shall only be in operation between 8:00
a.m. and 8:00 p.m.;



      (7)   Any containers provided for after-hours donation of
recyclable materials will be at least 150 feet from any property zoned or
used for residential or public use, shall be of sturdy, rustproof
construction, shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials
collected, and shall be secure from unauthorized entry or removal of
materials;



      (8)   Power-driven processing, including aluminum foil and can
compacting, baling, plastic shredding, or other light processing activities
necessary for efficient temporary storage and shipment of material, may be
approved if the facility meets noise and other conditions mentioned within
this chapter;



      (9)   The proximity to other large recycling collection
facilities will be taken into consideration by the Council before approval of
any facilities.



   (D)   Standards for all recycling collection facilities.



      (1)   The facility must meet PCA requirements for recycling
facilities (currently specified in Minn. Rules, part 7035.2845);



      (2)   Shall accept only glass, metals, plastic containers,
papers, motor oil, batteries and other specifically allowed items;



      (3)   Shall be illuminated to ensure comfortable and safe
operation if operating hours are between dusk and dawn;



      (4)   Shall store all recyclable material in containers or in
a mobile unit vehicle;



      (5)   Shall use containers that are constructed and maintained
with durable waterproof and rust-resistant  material, covered when site is
not attended, secured from unauthorized entry or removal of material, and
shall be of a capacity sufficient to accommodate materials collected and
collection schedule. Storage containers for containment of flammable material
shall be constructed of non-flammable material. No storage containers, except
truck trailers, will be allowed above a height of 8 feet;



      (6)   Containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type
of material which may be deposited and any operating instructions;



      (7)   Shall have sign area of a maximum of 4 square feet per
container, exclusive of operating instructions. The sign shall be part of the
container as a whole and shall not extend beyond the edges of the container;



      (8)   Shall, when accepting used motor oil, have an attendant
on duty at all times and meet PCA requirements for registration and
permitting as specified in Minn. Rules part 7100;



      (9)   All used motor oil recycling facilities or components of
recycling facilities accepting such products must meet standards for used oil
as specified in the Uniform Fire Code under Minn. Rules part 7510 and
approval of the appropriate local fire official;



      (10)   The facility will be clearly marked with the name and
phone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation shall
display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling
enclosure or containers. Identification and information signs shall meet
requirements of the zoning district; directional signs may be erected upon
payment of a fee to the Department of Transportation or the local road
authority and with the approval of the Zoning Administrator;



      (11)   Noise levels shall not exceed 60 decibels as measured
at the property line of property zoned for residential or public use, and
otherwise shall not exceed 70 decibels in other zoning districts. It shall be
the responsibility of the owner/applicant to provide noise testing
information as reasonably required by the Zoning Administration;



      (12)   Site shall be maintained in such a manner as to not
create noxious matter. Mobile facilities from which trucks or containers are
removed at the end of each collection day shall be swept at the end of each
collection day;



      (13)   A pest control plan shall be submitted that is
acceptable to the local sanitarian or other appropriate official including,
but not limited to, a contract with a licensed pest control operator for
regular service;



      (14)   The operator of the facility shall comply with a
regular inspection schedule as approved by the sanitarian or other
appropriate local official.



(Ord. 120, passed 1-22-1991; Am. Ord. 8, 4th Series, passed 1-16-2007)



§ 55.05  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   Violations of state or federal requirements for recycling facilities
discovered by the city shall be forwarded to the appropriate agency for
action.



(Ord. 120, passed 1-22-1991; Am. Ord. 8, 4th Series, passed 1-16-2007)



TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE




      Chapter





         70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS





         71.   PARKING REGULATIONS





         72.   SNOWMOBILES





         73.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES





         74.   BICYCLES, ROLLER BLADES, ROLLER SKATES, ROLLER
SKIS AND SKATEBOARDS




CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   70.01   State highway traffic regulations adopted by reference



   70.02   Trucks prohibited on certain streets



   70.03   Stop intersections



   70.04   Through streets and one-way streets



   70.05   Turning restrictions



   70.06   U-turns restricted



   70.07   Excessive noise



   70.08   Exhibition driving prohibited



   70.09   Cruising prohibited



   70.10   Motor vehicle noise



Parades



   70.20   Definitions



   70.21   Permit required



   70.22   Application for permit



   70.23   Standards for issuance of permit



   70.24   Notice of rejection of permit application



   70.25   Appeal procedure when permit denied



   70.26   Alternative permit



   70.27   Notice to city and other officials when permit issued



   70.28   Contents of permit



   70.29   Duties of permittee



   70.30   Public conduct during parades



   70.31   Revocation of permit



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 70.01  STATE HIGHWAY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   The Highway Traffic Regulations Act is hereby adopted by
reference.  The regulatory provisions of M.S. Chapter 169, as it may be
amended from time to time, are hereby adopted as a traffic ordinance
regulating the use of highways, streets and alleys within the city and are
hereby incorporated in and made a part of this section as completely as if
set out in full herein.



   (B)   The penalty for violation of the provisions of state statutes
adopted by reference in this section shall be identical with the penalty
provided for in the statutes for the same offense.



§ 70.02  TRUCKS PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS.



   (A)   The City Council by resolution may designate streets on which
travel by commercial vehicles in excess of 10,000 pounds axle weight is
prohibited.  The Chief of Police shall cause appropriate signs to be erected
on those streets.  No person shall operate a commercial vehicle on posted
streets in violation of the restrictions posted.



   (B)   The weight restrictions established in division (A) shall not
apply to city or emergency vehicles, public school buses or to garbage and
refuse trucks making regular collections and are under contract with the
city, nor shall the weight restrictions in division (A) apply if a commercial
vehicle must use the particular street in question for the purpose of local
pick-up or delivery.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.03  STOP INTERSECTIONS.



   The city may designate intersections as a stop intersection and require
all vehicles to stop at one or more entrances to those intersections.  The
city shall post signs at those designated intersections, giving notice of the
designation as a stop intersection.  It shall be unlawful for any person to
fail to obey the markings or signs posted under this section.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.04  THROUGH STREETS AND ONE-WAY STREETS.



   The City Council by resolution may designate any street or portion of a
street as a through street or one-way street where necessary to preserve the
free flow of traffic or to prevent accidents.  No trunk highway shall be so
designated unless the consent of the Commissioner of Transportation to the
designation is first secured.  The city shall cause appropriate signs to be
posted at the entrance to designated streets.  It shall be unlawful for any
person to fail to obey the markings or signs posted under this section.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.05  TURNING RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   The City Council by resolution may, whenever
necessary to preserve a free flow of traffic or to prevent accidents,
designate any intersection as one where turning of vehicles to the left or to
the right, or both, is to be restricted at all times or during specified
hours.  No intersection on a trunk highway shall be so designated until the
consent of the Commissioner of Transportation to the designation is first
obtained.



      (2)   The city shall mark by appropriate signs any
intersection so designated.



      (3)   No person shall turn a vehicle at any intersection
contrary to the direction on those signs.



   (B)   Except at intersections, and then only if not posted
otherwise, it shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle on
any street to cross the center of the street for the purpose of parking on
the side of the street opposite the original direction of travel.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle
on any street to back up or drive from a parked position and commence travel
in the opposite direction from which the motor vehicle faced when parked.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.06  U-TURNS RESTRICTED.



   No person shall turn a vehicle so as to reverse its direction on any
street in the business district or at any intersection where traffic is
regulated by a traffic control signal.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.07  EXCESSIVE NOISE.



   (A)   As used in this section, LIGHT-MOTOR VEHICLES means any
automobile, van, motorcycle, motor-driven cycle, motor scooter, go-cart,
minibike, trail bike, or truck with a gross vehicular weight of less than
10,000 pounds.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or cause to
operate, or use a light-motor vehicle in a manner as to cause, or allow to be
caused, excessive noise levels as a result of unreasonable rapid
accelerations, deceleration, revving of engine, squealing of tires, honking
of horns, or as a result of the operation of audio devices including but not
limited to radios, phonograph, tape players, compact disc players or any
other sound-amplifying device on or from the light-motor vehicle.



   (C)   No person shall operate, or cause to operate, or use a
light-motor vehicle in violation of the noise standards contained in Minn.
Rules parts 7030.1050 and 7030.1060, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (D)   No person shall operate, or cause to operate, or use a
light-motor vehicle that discharges its exhaust other than through a muffler
or other device that effectively prevents loud or explosive noises. No person
shall operate, or cause to operate, or use a light-motor vehicle whose
exhaust system has been modified, altered, or repaired in any way, including
the use of a muffler cut-out or by-pass, that amplifies or otherwise
increases noise above that emitted by the light-motor vehicle as originally
equipped.



   (E)   The following are exempted from the provisions of this section:



      (1)   Sound emitted from sirens of authorized emergency
vehicles;



      (2)   Burglar alarms on light-motor vehicles of the electronic
signaling type which also transmit an audible signal to a receiver which can
be carried by the owner or operator of the vehicle; and



      (3)   Celebrations on Halloween and other legal holidays and
celebrations in connection with duly authorized parades.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.08  EXHIBITION DRIVING PROHIBITED.



   No person shall turn, accelerate, decelerate or otherwise operate a
motor vehicle within the city in a manner which causes unnecessary engine
noise or backfire, squealing tires, skidding, sliding, swaying, throwing of
sand or gravel, or in a manner simulating a race.  Unreasonable squealing or
screeching sounds emitted by tires or the unreasonable throwing of sand or
gravel by the tires is prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.09  CRUISING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   As used in this section, CRUISINGmeans the operation of a
motor vehicle as defined in M.S. § 169.01, Subd. 3, as it may be amended
from time to time, past a traffic control point as determined by a peace
officer on a street in an area designated "No Cruising Zone" by City Council
resolution four or more times between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 3:30 a.m.



   (B)   The passing of a traffic control point under the conditions
previously stated, shall constitute unnecessary repetitive driving and is a
violation of this section.



   (C)   The following use of vehicles shall constitute valid
exceptions to this prohibition: taxicabs for hire, buses, authorized
emergency vehicle, vehicles use used by or under contract with any
governmental jurisdiction, any vehicle being used to conduct legitimate
business activities.



   (D)   This section may be enforced only in an area that has been
posted as a " No Cruising Zone. "   Signs shall be posted at the beginning
and the end of any public street, alley or highway, or portion thereof which
is a no cruising zone.



§ 70.10  MOTOR VEHICLE NOISE.



   (A)   For the purposes of this section, the following phrases are
defined as follows:



      ABNORMAL OR EXCESSIVE NOISE.



         (a)   Distinct and loudly audible noise that
unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort and repose
of any person or precludes their enjoyment of property or affects their
property's value;



         (b)   Noise in excess of that permitted by M.S. §
169.69, as it may be amended from time to time, which requires every motor
vehicle to be equipped with a muffler in good working order; or



         (c)   Noise in excess of that permitted by M.S. §
169.693 and Minn. Rules parts 7030.1000 through 7030.1050, as this statute
and these rules may be amended from time to time, which establish motor
vehicle noise standards.



      ENGINE-RETARDING BRAKE.  A dynamic brake, jake brake, Jacobs
brake, C-brake, Paccar brake, transmission brake or other similar
engine-retarding brake system which alters the normal compression of the
engine and subsequently releases that compression.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge the exhaust
or permit the discharge of the exhaust from any motor vehicle except through
a muffler that effectively prevents abnormal or excessive noise and complies
with all applicable state laws and regulations.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any truck to
intentionally use an engine-retarding brake on any public highway, street,
parking lot or alley within the city which causes abnormal or excessive noise
from the engine because of an illegally modified or defective exhaust system,
except in an emergency.



   (D)   Minnesota Statutes §§ 169.69 and 169.693 (motor vehicle
noise limits) and Minn. Rules parts 7030.1000 through 7030.1050, as these
statutes and rules may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by
reference.



   (E)   Signs stating " VEHICLE NOISE LAWS ENFORCED " may be installed
at locations deemed appropriate by the City Council to advise motorists of
the prohibitions contained in this section, except that no sign stating "
VEHICLE NOISE LAWS ENFORCED " shall be installed on a state highway without a
permit from the Minnesota Department of Transportation. The provisions of
this section are in full force and effect even if no signs are installed.



PARADES



§ 70.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PARADE.  Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, or
procession of any kind, or any similar display in or on any street, sidewalk,
park, or other public place in the city.



   PARADE PERMIT.  A permit required by this subchapter.



   PARKING LOT.  Any paved or unpaved area used by a place of business or
shopping center for the parking of vehicles of their customers, but shall not
include those operated for hire.



§ 70.21  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person or persons shall engage or participate in, aid, form
or start any parade unless a parade permit has been obtained from the City
Clerk or other authorized city official.



   (B)   This subchapter shall not apply to:



      (1)   Funeral processions;



      (2)   Students going to and from school classes or
participating in educational activities; provided, that the conduct is under
the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities;



      (3)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its
functions.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.22  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   (A)   Generally.  A person seeking issuance of a parade permit
shall file an application with the City Clerk.



   (B)   Filing period.  The application for a parade permit shall be
filed not less than 72 hours but not more than 60 days before the date on
which it is proposed to conduct the parade.  Failure to file an application
72 hours in advance will not result in automatic denial of the permit;
provided, that the applicant shows reasonable grounds why the application
could not be filed 72 hours in advance.



   (C)   Required information.  The application for a parade permit
shall set forth the following information:



      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person
seeking to conduct the parade;



      (2)   If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf
of, or by an organization, the name, address, and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads
of the organization;



      (3)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person
who will be the parade chairperson and who will be responsible for its
conduct;



      (4)   The date when the parade is to be conducted;



      (5)   The route to be traveled, the starting point, and the
termination point;



      (6)   The approximate number of persons, animals, and vehicles
which will constitute the parade, the type of animals, if any, and the
description of the vehicles;



      (7)   The hours when the parade will start and terminate;



      (8)   A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or
only a portion of the width of the streets, sidewalk, park or other public
place proposed to be traversed;



      (9)   The location by street of any assembly area for the
parade;



      (10)   The time at which units of the parade will begin to
assemble at any assembly area or areas;



      (11)   The interval of space to be maintained between units of
the parade;



      (12)   If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf
of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for the permit
shall file a communication in writing from the person authorizing the
applicant to apply for the permit on his or her behalf;



      (13)   Any additional information reasonably necessary to a
fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued.



   (D)   There shall be paid at the time of filing an application for a
parade permit a fee in an amount as established in the Ordinance Establishing
Fees and Charges pursuant to § 30.11 of this code, as it may be amended from
time to time.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.23  STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   The City Clerk shall issue a permit when, from a consideration of the
application and from other information obtained, he or she finds that:



   (A)   The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the
safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;



   (B)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so
great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of
movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police
protection to the city;



   (C)   The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly
points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police
protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to the assembly
areas;



   (D)   The conduct of the parade will not interfere with the movement
of firefighting equipment en route to a fire;



   (E)   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to
its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en
route.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.24  NOTICE OF REJECTION OF PERMIT APPLICATION.



   If the City Clerk disapproves the application, he or she shall mail to
the applicant within the three regular business days after the date on which
the application was filed a notice of his or her action stating the reasons
for his or her denial of the permit.



§ 70.25  APPEAL PROCEDURE WHEN PERMIT DENIED.



   Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a
parade permit to the City Council.  The appeal shall be taken within 30 days
after notice of denial.  The City Council shall act on the appeal within 30
days after its receipt.



§ 70.26  ALTERNATIVE PERMIT.



   The City Clerk or other authorized city official, in denying an
application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct
of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different than that named
by the applicant.  An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall
file a written notice of his or her acceptance.  An alternate parade permit
shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade
permit under this subchapter.



§ 70.27  NOTICE TO CITY AND OTHER OFFICIALS WHEN PERMIT ISSUED.



   Immediately on the issuance of a parade permit, a copy thereof shall be
sent to the Police Chief and the Fire Chief.



§ 70.28  CONTENTS OF PERMIT.



   Each parade permit shall state the following information:



   (A)   Starting time;



   (B)   Minimum speed;



   (C)   Maximum speed;



   (D)   Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units
of the parade;



   (E)   The portions of the street, sidewalk, park or other public
place to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade;



   (F)   The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof;



   (G)   Other information as is reasonably necessary to the
enforcement of this subchapter.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.29  DUTIES OF PERMITTEE.



   A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances.  The parade
chairperson or other person heading or leading the activity shall carry the
parade permit on his or her person during the conduct of the parade.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.30  PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING PARADES.



   (A)   Interference.  No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct,
impede or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person,
vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade.



   (B)   Driving through parades.  No driver of a vehicle except a
police car or other emergency vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or
persons comprising a parade when the vehicles or persons are in motion and
are conspicuously designated as a parade.



   (C)   Parking on parade route.  The Police Chief or other
authorized city official shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary,
to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or other
public thoroughfare or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a
parade.  Signs shall be posted to the effect, and it shall be unlawful for
any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof.  No
person shall be liable for parking on a street or other public thoroughfare
unless signs have been posted in accordance with this section.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.31  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   The city shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued
hereunder on application of the standards for issuance as herein set forth.



CHAPTER 71: PARKING REGULATIONS



Section



   71.01   Presumption



   71.02   General parking prohibitions



   71.03   No parking where posted



   71.04   Limited parking



   71.05   Other parking restrictions



   71.06   Declaration of snow emergency; parking prohibited



   71.07   Parking certain semi-trailers or tractors on public streets
prohibited



   71.08   Overnight parking



   71.09   Repairing of vehicles



   71.10   Prohibiting parking areas in front yards in residential zones



   71.11   Impoundment



   71.12   Prima facie violation



Cross-reference:



   Abandoned vehicles, see Chapter 90



§ 71.01  PRESUMPTION.



   Any vehicle parking in violation of this chapter, when the driver
thereof is not present, it shall be presumed that the owner parked the same,
or that the driver was not acting as the agent of the owner.



(1975 Code, § 9.01)



§ 71.02  GENERAL PARKING PROHIBITIONS.



   It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle except
when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
specific directions of a police officer or traffic-control device in any of
the following places:  on a sidewalk; in front of a public or private
driveway; within an intersection; within 10 feet of a fire hydrant; on a
crosswalk; within 20 feet of a crosswalk at any intersection; in a
sign-posted fire lane; within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing
beacon, stop sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; within 20 feet of
the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street
opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance when
properly sign-posted; alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a
street; upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street; at any
place where official signs prohibit or restrict stopping, parking or both; in
any alley, except for loading or unloading and then only so long as
reasonably necessary for such loading and unloading to or from adjacent
premises; or on any boulevard which has been curbed.



(1975 Code, § 9.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.03  NO PARKING WHERE POSTED.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon the public streets
of the city at any place where official signs or where appropriate devices,
marks, or painting, either upon the surface of the street or the curb
immediately adjacent thereto, prohibit these acts.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.04  LIMITED PARKING.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon the public streets
of the city where official signs are erected limiting the parking time
thereon, for a period of time in excess of the time as designated by the
official signs.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.05  OTHER PARKING RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   The City Council may order the placing of signs, devices or
marks, or the painting of streets or curbs prohibiting or restricting the
stopping, standing or parking of vehicles on any street where, in its
opinion, as evidenced by a finding in its official minutes, the stopping,
standing or parking is dangerous to those using the highway, or where the
stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would unduly interfere with the
free movement of traffic.  The signs, devices, marks or painting shall be
official signs, devices, marks or painting, and no person shall stop, stand
or park any vehicle in violation of the restrictions thereon or as indicated
thereby.



   (B)   " No parking " signs may be placed by city employees on any
street of the city to permit construction, repair, snow removal, street
cleaning or similar temporary activities.  While the signs are in place, it
shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on the streets or portion thereof so
posted.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for a person to park in an area
designated by Council action posted as a fire lane.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for a person to park a vehicle or permit
it to stand, whether attended or unattended, on an alley within the city,
provided that this does not prohibit the parking of vehicles for less than
one hour on an alley for the purpose of access to abutting property for
loading or unloading merchandise or other material when parking on the
property itself is not available.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for a person to park a motor vehicle in
an area designated by posted signs pursuant to Council resolution for certain
types of vehicles, unless the motor vehicle is one of the types of vehicles
specifically permitted.



   (F)   Every vehicle parked upon any street with a curb shall be
parked parallel to the curb, unless angle parking is designated by
appropriate signs or markings. On streets with a curb, the right-hand wheels
of any vehicle parked shall be within one foot of the curb. On streets
without a curb, the vehicle shall be parked to the right of the main traveled
portion of the street and parallel to it and in such a manner as not to
interfere with the free flow of traffic, unless angle parking is designated
by appropriate signs or markings.



   (G)   It is unlawful to store, maintain or display vehicles " For
Sale " on property not owned by the property owner or rental tenant.



   (H)   It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on any street
for the purpose of displaying it for sale.  It is also unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle on any street for the purpose of selling merchandise
thereon or therein, or advertising any merchandise for sale or a forthcoming
event, for a period longer than 15 minutes.



(1975 Code, § 9.06) 



   (I)   It is unlawful for any person to leave a or park a house
trailer, mobile home, camping trailer, bus or other similar recreational
vehicle on or within the limits of any street or right-of-way, except where
signs are erected designating the place as a campsite, for more than 24
consecutive hours.



(1975 Code, § 9.04) 



   (J)   Parking on streets shall be limited as follows:



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to stop, park or leave
standing any vehicle, boat, trailer, camper or recreational vehicle  upon
any street for a continuous period in excess of 24 hours. After 24 continuous
hours of no movement, they are required to be relocated a minimum of 100 feet
from their original location.



      (2)   The City Administrator may prohibit or restrict parking
on certain streets, blocks or portions of streets.



(1975 Code, § 9.10) (Am. Ord. 106, 4th series, passed 8-20-2018)



   (K)   It is unlawful to park in any school parking zone when the
same has been sign-posted and duly designated by the Chief of Police. 
School loading zones shall be limited to streets adjacent to an educational
institution for the purpose of facilitating and expediting the safe and
efficient transportation of students in attendance at such facilities.



(1975 Code, § 9.13) 



   (L)   In municipally-owned parking lots, the Council may limit the
sizes and types of motor vehicle to be parked thereon, hours of parking, and
prescribed method of parking, provided that such limitations and restrictions
are sign-posted or metered-posted thereon.  It is unlawful to park or leave
standing any vehicle backed into a parking place, to drive in a direction
opposite the flow of traffic marked by " one-way " signs or arrows, or to
park any vehicle in any municipally-owned parking lot contrary to the
restrictions or limitations sign-posted or metered-posted therein.



(1975 Code, § 9.20)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.06  DECLARATION OF SNOW EMERGENCY; PARKING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The City Administrator or other designated official may
declare a snow emergency in the city.  The emergency shall continue in
effect for a period of 24 hours or until the snow has been removed from the
city's streets or until the snow emergency has been rescinded by action of
the City Administrator or other designated officer.



   (B)   Notice of the declaration of a snow emergency shall be given
by notifying the local news media; however, the notification shall be a
service aid only and not a duty on the part of the officials.



   (C)   During a declared snow emergency, no motor vehicle shall be
left parked on any street or public way in the city.



   (D)   During a declared snow emergency, any police officer who finds
a motor vehicle in violation of this section is authorized to have the
vehicle removed at the owner’s expense.



(Am. Ord. 30, 4th Series, passed 1-4-2010)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.07  PARKING CERTAIN SEMI-TRAILERS OR TRACTORS ON PUBLIC STREETS
PROHIBITED.



   No person shall park a semi-tractor or trailer, or any truck rated with
a gross vehicle weight in excess of 10,000 pounds, in any area of the city
zoned for residential use or other area designated by City Council resolution
except when the vehicle is parked in a completely enclosed garage.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.08  OVERNIGHT PARKING.



   The following vehicles shall not be allowed to park on city streets
overnight: repair, delivery, rented vehicles with commercial plates and
refuse and recycling haulers or any other vehicle not registered as a
passenger vehicle.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.09  REPAIRING OF VEHICLES.



   Repairs to any vehicle are not permitted on any city street.



§ 71.10  PROHIBITING PARKING AREAS IN FRONT YARDS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES.



   (A)   The constructing, operating or maintaining of a parking area,
either paved or unpaved, in the front yard of any lot is prohibited in any
area zoned for residential use.  For the purpose of this section, FRONT YARD
shall mean and include that area between the sidewalk, or street line in the
event there is no sidewalk, and the front line of the principal building,
extending in both directions to the side lot lines.



   (B)   Use of any portion of a vacant lot for parking in an area
zoned for residential use is prohibited.



   (C)   Driveways in any area zoned for residential use shall conform
to the requirements of § 156.035 of this code.



   (D)   The front part of any lot shall not be used for the parking of
an automobile, truck, trailer, tractor, recreational vehicle, camper, travel
trailer, camper top, tent, wagon, boat, boat trailer or motor home unless
stored on a driveway which conforms to the requirements of § 156.035 of this
code.



   (E)   No person, being the owner or having control of any building,
shall violate or fail to conform to any provision of this section, or fail to
obey any lawful order of an officer charged with its enforcement.  Each and
every day on which any person continues to violate the provisions of this
section, after having been notified of the violation, shall constitute a
separate offense.  This conviction shall not relieve any person from
thereafter complying with the provisions of this section, and shall be
sufficient cause to refuse further building or land use permits to the
offender until a time as the orders have been complied with.



(Am. Ord. 17, 4th Series, passed 1-17-2008)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.11  IMPOUNDMENT.



   Any police officer may order the removal of a vehicle from a street to
a garage or other place of safety when the vehicle is left unattended and
constitutes an obstruction to traffic or hinders snow removal, street
improvements or maintenance operations.  The vehicle shall not be released
until the fees for towing and storage are paid in addition to any fine
imposed for violation of this chapter.



§ 71.12  PRIMA FACIE VIOLATIONS.



   The presence of any motor vehicle on any street when standing or parked
in violation of this chapter is prima facie evidence that the registered
owner of the vehicle committed or authorized the commission of the violation.



CHAPTER 72: SNOWMOBILES



Section



   72.01   Intent



   72.02   Definitions



   72.03   Application of traffic ordinances



   72.04   Restrictions



   72.05   Stopping and yielding



   72.06   Persons under 18



   72.07   Equipment



   72.08   Unattended snowmobiles



   72.09   Emergency operation permitted



§ 72.01  INTENT.



   It is the intent of this chapter to supplement M.S. §§ 84.81 to
84.91, and M.S. Ch. 169, as these statutes may be amended from time to time
and Minn. Rules parts 6100.5000 through 6100.6000, as these rules may be
amended from time to time, with respect to the operation of snowmobiles. 
These statutes and rules are incorporated herein by reference.  This section
is not intended to allow what the state statutes and rules prohibit, nor to
prohibit what the state statutes and rules allow.



§ 72.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DEADMAN THROTTLE or SAFETY THROTTLE.  A device which, when pressure is
removed from the engine accelerator or throttle, causes the motor to be
disengaged from the driving mechanism.



   OPERATE.  To ride in or on and control the operation of a snowmobile.



   OPERATOR.  Every person who operates or is in actual physical control
of a snowmobile.



   OWNER.  A person, other than a lien holder having the property in or
title to a snowmobile, or entitled to the use or possession thereof.



   PERSON.  Includes an individual, partnership, corporation, the state
and its agencies and subdivision, and any body of persons, whether
incorporated or not.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The entire strip of land traversed by a highway or
street in which the public owns the fee or an easement for roadway purposes.



   ROADWAY.  That portion of a highway or street improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel.



   SNOWMOBILE.  A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or
ice, steered by skis or runners.



   STREET.  A public thoroughfare, roadway, alley or trail used for motor
vehicular traffic which is not an interstate, trunk, county-state aid, or
county highway.



§ 72.03  APPLICATION OF TRAFFIC ORDINANCES.



   The provisions of Ch. 70 of this code shall apply to the operation of
snowmobiles upon streets and highways, except for those relating to required
equipment, and except those which by their nature have no application.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.04  RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to enter, operate or stop a
snowmobile within the limits of the city:



      (1)   On the roadway of any street, except the most right hand
lane then available for traffic or as close as practicable to right hand curb
or edge of the roadway, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle
stopped in the lane or proceeding in the same direction, or in making a left
turn.  Snowmobiles may also be operated upon the outside slope of trunk,
county-state aid and county highways where the highways are so configured
within the corporate limits.



      (2)   On a public sidewalk provided for pedestrian travel.



      (3)   On boulevards within any public right-of-way.



      (4)   On private property of another without specific
permission of the owner or person in control of the property.



      (5)   Upon any school grounds, except as permission is
expressly obtained from responsible school authorities.



      (6)   On public property, playgrounds and recreation areas,
except areas previously listed or authorized for the use by resolution of the
City Council, in which case the use shall be lawful, and snowmobiles may be
driven in and out of those areas by the shortest route.



      (7)   On streets as permitted by this chapter at a speed
exceeding 10 miles per hour.



      (8)   During the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., Sunday
through Thursday, and 12:01 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. on other days closer than 100
feet from any residence.  This provision is not intended to prohibit
snowmobiles from operating on city streets during the hours specified herein.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile within
the limits of the city:



      (1)   So as to tow any person or thing in a public street or
highway except through use of a rigid tow bar attached to the rear of the
snowmobile; provided, that a disabled snowmobile may be towed to a private
residence or a place of business where snowmobiles are repaired without the
use of a rigid tow bar.



      (2)   Within 100 feet of any fisherman, pedestrian, skating
rink or sliding area where the operation would conflict with use or endanger
other persons or operation.



      (3)   To intentionally drive, chase, run over or kill any
animal.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.05  STOPPING AND YIELDING.



   No snowmobile shall enter any uncontrolled intersection without making
a complete stop.  The operator shall then yield the right-of-way to any
vehicles or pedestrians at the intersection, or so close to the intersection
as to constitute an immediate hazard.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.06  PERSONS UNDER 18.



   (A)   No person under 14 years of age shall operate on streets or
make a direct crossing of a city street as the operator of a snowmobile.  A
person 14 years of age or older, but less than 18 years of age, may operate a
snowmobile on streets as permitted under this chapter and make a direct
crossing of those streets only if he or she has in his or her immediate
possession a valid snowmobile safety certificate issued pursuant to M.S. §
84.872, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   It is unlawful for the owner of a snowmobile to permit the
snowmobile to be operated contrary to the provision of this section.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.07  EQUIPMENT.



   It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile any place within
the limits of the city unless it is equipped with the following:



   (A)   Standard mufflers which are properly attached and which reduce
the noise of operation of the motor to the minimum necessary for operation. 
No person shall use a muffler cutout, by-pass straight pipe or similar device
on a snowmobile motor.



   (B)   Brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and
hold the snowmobile under any condition of operation.



   (C)   A safety or so called deadman throttle in operating condition.



   (D)   When operated between the hours of one-half hour after sunset
to one-half hour before sunrise, or at times of reduced visibility, at least
one clear lamp attached to the front, with sufficient intensity to reveal
persons and vehicles at a distance of at least 100 feet ahead during the
hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions.  The head lamp shall
be so aimed that glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of an oncoming
snowmobile operator.  It shall also be equipped with at least one red light
plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear during hours of
darkness under normal atmospheric conditions.



   (E)   Snowmobiles shall fly a pennant flag or red or blaze material,
of a size not less than 12 inches by 9 inches, at a height of not less than
six feet from ground level at any time when the vehicle is operated on public
streets.



   (F)   Reflective material at least 16 square inches on each side,
forward of the handlebars and at the highest practical point on any towed
object, so as to reflect lights at a 90 degree angle.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.08  UNATTENDED SNOWMOBILES.



   Every person leaving a snowmobile on a public place shall lock the
ignition, remove the key and take the same with him or her.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.09  EMERGENCY OPERATION PERMITTED.



   Notwithstanding any prohibitions in this chapter, a snowmobile may be
operated on a public thoroughfare in an emergency during the period of time
and at locations where snow upon the roadway renders travel by automobile
impractical.



CHAPTER 73: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES



Section



   73.01   Purpose and intent



   73.02   Definition



   73.03   Operation requirements



   73.04   Street crossings



   73.05   Hours of operation



   73.06   Minimum equipment requirements



   73.07   Designation of public areas for use



   73.08   Motorized golf carts



   73.09   Specialized vehicles: utility-terrain vehicles and
mini-trucks



§ 73.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   (1)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide reasonable
regulations for the use of recreational motor vehicles on public and private
property in the city.



      (2)   This chapter is not intended to allow what the Minnesota
Statutes prohibit nor to prohibit what the Minnesota Statutes expressly allow.



   (B)   It is intended to ensure the public safety and prevent a
public nuisance.



§ 73.02  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLE.  Any self-propelled vehicle and any
vehicle propelled or drawn by a self-propelled vehicle used for recreational
purposes including, but not limited to trail bike, off-highway motorcycle, as
defined by M.S. § 84.787, Subd. 7, as it may be amended from time to time,
or other all-terrain vehicle as defined by M.S. § 84.92, Subd. 8, it may be
amended from time to time, motorized go-carts, hovercraft or motor vehicle
licensed for highway operation which is being used for off-road recreational
purposes.



§ 73.03  OPERATION REQUIREMENTS.



   It is unlawful for any person to operate a recreational motor vehicle:



   (A)   On private property of another without specific written
permission of the owner of the property; (Written permission may be given by
a posted notice of any kind or description, so long as it specifies the kind
of vehicles allowed, that the owner, occupant or lessee prefers, such as by
saying " Recreational Vehicles Allowed, "" Trail Bikes Allowed, ""
All-Terrain Vehicles Allowed " or words substantially similar.)



   (B)   On publicly-owned land, including school, park property,
playgrounds, recreation areas and golf courses, except where permitted by
this chapter;



   (C)   In a manner so as to create a loud, unnecessary or unusual
noise which disturbs, annoys or interferes with the peace and quiet of other
persons;



   (D)   On a public sidewalk or walkway provided or used for
pedestrian travel;



   (E)   At a place while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or
narcotics or habit-forming drugs;



   (F)   At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under all
the surrounding circumstances;



   (G)   At any place in a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as
to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property or to cause
injury or damage thereto;



   (H)   On any public street, highway or right-of-way unless licensed
pursuant to Minnesota law;



   (I)   To intentionally drive, chase, run over or kill any animal,
wild or domestic;



   (J)   By halting any recreational motor vehicle carelessly or
heedlessly in disregard of the rights or the safety of others or in a manner
so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property or in
excess of 25 miles per hour on publicly-owned lands; and/or



   (K)   Within 150 yards of any public recreational area or gathering
of people. This provision does not apply to the occasional use of
recreational motor vehicles on private property for the purpose of loading or
unloading it from a trailer or for mechanically checking it.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 73.04  STREET CROSSINGS.



   No person under 14 years of age operating the vehicles regulated herein
shall make a direct crossing of any street, highway or public right-of-way.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 73.05  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   Hours for use are 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 73.06  MINIMUM EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Standard mufflers shall be properly attached and in constant
operation to reduce the noise of operation of the motor to the minimum
necessary for operation. No person shall use a muffler cutout, by-pass,
straight pipe or similar device on a recreational motor vehicle motor. The
exhaust system shall not emit or produce a sharp popping or crackling sound.



   (B)   Brakes shall be adequate to control the movement of and to
stop and hold under any conditions of operation.



   (C)   At least one clear lamp shall be attached to the front with
sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a distance of at least
100 feet ahead during the hours of darkness under normal atmospheric
conditions. The head lamp shall be so that glaring rays are not projected
into the eyes of an oncoming vehicle operator.  It shall also be equipped
with at least one red tail lamp having a minimum candlepower of sufficient
intensity to exhibit a red light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet
to the rear during the hours of darkness under normal atmospheric
conditions.  This equipment shall be required and shall be in operating
condition when the vehicle is operated between the hours of one-half hour
after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise, or at times of reduced
visibility.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 73.07  DESIGNATION OF PUBLIC AREAS FOR USE.



   (A)   The Council may designate areas for use of recreational motor
vehicles by approval of a majority of the members of the City Council. The
areas designated may be changed from time to time by the City Council. Any
area designated shall be published in the official newspaper of the city in a
conspicuous place after the approval. If an area is changed, the change shall
be published in like manner in the official newspaper of the city. An
up-to-date map of any designated park areas open for recreational motor
vehicle use shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk, who shall
provide on request a copy of the map together with the applicable rules,
regulations and this chapter to each person requesting the information from
the city.



   (B)   Unless designated by the City Council as an area for
recreational motor vehicles, the use on city park property shall be unlawful.
Further, the use of city parks designated by the City Council shall be in
accordance with all of the applicable provisions of this chapter.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 73.08  MOTORIZED GOLF CARTS.



   No person shall operate a motorized golf cart on streets, alleys,
sidewalks or other public property.



§ 73.09  SPECIALIZED VEHICLES: UTILITY-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND MINI-TRUCKS.



   (A)   Purpose and intent.  The purpose of this section is to
provide reasonable regulations for the use of specialized vehicles on public
property within the city.  This section is not intended to allow what the
Minnesota Statutes prohibit or to prohibit what the Minnesota Statues
expressly allow.  It is intended to ensure the public safety and prevent a
public nuisance.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      DRIVER.  The person driving and having physical control over the
utility-terrain vehicle or mini-truck.



      MINI-TRUCK.  As defined in M.S. § 169.011, Subd. 40(a), as may
be amended from time to time, a motor vehicle that has 4 wheels, is propelled
by an electric motor with a rated power of 7,500 watts or less or an internal
combustion engine with a piston displacement capacity of 660 cubic
centimeters or less, has a total dry weight of 900 to 2,200 pounds, contains
an enclosed cabin and a seat for the vehicle operator, commonly resembles a
pickup truck or van, including a cargo area or bed located at the rear of the
vehicle, and was not originally manufactured to meet federal motor vehicle
safety standards required of motor vehicles in the 49 C.F.R. §§ 571.101 to
571.404, and successor requirements.



      UTILITY-TERRAIN VEHICLE.  A motorized flotation-tired vehicle
with at least 3 but no more than 6 low pressure tires that has an engine
displacement of less than 960 cubic centimeters and total dry weight of less
than 1800 pounds and side-by-side seating.



   (C)   Operation.  Utility-terrain vehicles may only be used for
business or commercial purposes.



   (D)   Conditions of operation.



      (1)   A driver shall be at least 18 years of age.



      (2)   Utility terrain vehicles shall display the slow-moving
vehicle emblem provided for in M.S. § 169.045, as it may be amended from
time to time, when operated on designated roadways.



      (3)   Utility-terrain vehicles and mini-trucks shall be
equipped with a rearview mirror to provide the driver with adequate vision
from behind as required by M.S. § 169.70, as it may be amended from time to
time.



      (4)   Every person operating a utility-terrain vehicle or a
mini-truck on designated roadways has all the rights and duties applicable to
the driver or any other vehicle under provisions of M.S. Chapter 169, as it
may be amended from time to time, except when these provisions cannot
reasonably be applied to utility-terrain vehicles or mini-trucks and except
as otherwise specifically provided in M.S. § 169.045, Subd. 7, as it may be
amended from time to time.



      (5)   The number of occupants on the utility-terrain vehicle
or mini-truck shall not exceed the design occupant load.



      (6)   No operation of a utility-terrain vehicle and mini-truck
shall be allowed on private property without the consent of the owner, or on
any city sidewalk, trail or park.



      (7)   A mini-truck may be operated on roadways within the city
if it is equipped with all of the following:



         (a)   At least 2 headlamps;



         (b)   At least 2 tail lamps;



         (c)   Front and rear turn signal lamps;



         (d)   An exterior mirror mounted on the driver’s side
of the vehicle and either (a) an exterior mirror mounted on the passenger’s
side of the vehicle or (b) an interior rear-view mirror;



         (e)   A windshield;



         (f)   A seat belt for the driver and front passenger; and



         (g)   A parking brake.



   (E)   Violation; penalty.  Any person who operates a
utility-terrain vehicle or a mini-truck within the city in violation of this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 48, 4th Series, passed 1-22-2013)



CHAPTER 74:  BICYCLES, ROLLER BLADES, ROLLER SKATES, ROLLER SKIS AND
SKATEBOARDS



Section



Bicycles



   74.01   Definition



   74.02   Traffic laws apply



   74.03   Manner and number riding



   74.04   Hitching rides



   74.05   Where to ride



   74.06   Right-of-way; sidewalks



   74.07   Carrying articles



   74.08   Lighting and brake equipment



   74.09   Sale with reflectors



Roller Blades, Roller Skates, Roller Skis and Skateboards



   74.25   Definitions



   74.26   Unlawful acts



   74.27   Right-of-way



   74.28   Hours of use



   74.99   Violations



BICYCLES



§ 74.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BICYCLE.  Every device propelled solely by human power upon which any
person may ride, having two tandem wheels, except scooters and similar
devices, and including any device generally recognized as a BICYCLE though
equipped with two front or rear wheels.



§ 74.02  TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY.



   Every person riding a bicycle on a street or upon any path set aside
for the exclusive use of bicycles shall be granted all of the rights and
shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle
by this title, except as to special regulations in this chapter and except as
to those provisions of this chapter which by their nature can have no
application.



§ 74.03  MANNER AND NUMBER RIDING.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person propelling a bicycle to ride
other than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.



   (B)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time
than the number for which it is designed and equipped, except on a baby seat
attached to the bicycle, provided that the seat is equipped with a harness to
hold the child securely in the seat and that protection is provided against
the child's feet hitting the spokes of the wheel, or in a seat attached to
the bicycle operator.



Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.04  HITCHING RIDES.



   It is unlawful for any person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller
skates, roller blades, skate board, sled, or toy vehicle to attach the same
or themselves to any vehicle upon a street.



Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.05  WHERE TO RIDE.



   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a street shall ride as
near to the right side of the street as practicable, exercising due care when
passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.



   (B)   Persons riding bicycles upon a street shall not ride more than
2 abreast except on paths or parts of streets set aside for the exclusive use
of bicycles.



Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.06  RIGHT-OF-WAY; SIDEWALKS.



   Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, the person shall
yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before
overtaking and passing the pedestrian.



Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.07  CARRYING ARTICLES.



   It is unlawful for any person operating a bicycle to carry any package,
bundle, or article which prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand
upon the handlebars.



Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.08  LIGHTING AND BRAKE EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   Every bicycle, when in use at night time, shall be equipped
with, or its operator shall carry a lamp on the front which shall emit a
white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front, and
with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved by the Department of
Public Safety which is visible from all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet
to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a
motor vehicle.  A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500
feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.  No person
may, at any other time when there is not sufficient light to render clearly
discernible persons and vehicles on the highway at a distance of 500 feet
ahead, operate a bicycle unless the bicycle or its operator is equipped with
reflective surfaces that shall be visible during the hours of darkness from
600 feet when viewed in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor
vehicle. The reflective surfaces shall include reflective materials on each
side of each pedal to indicate their presence from the front or the rear and
with a minimum of 20 square inches on each side of the bicycle or its
operator of white reflective material. All reflective materials used in
compliance with this section shall meet the requirements as prescribed by the
Commissioner of Public Safety.



   (B)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable
the operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement.



Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.09  SALE WITH REFLECTORS.



   It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any new bicycle
unless it is equipped with such reflectors as are prescribed in § 74.08.



Penalty, see § 74.99



ROLLER BLADES, ROLLER SKATES, ROLLER SKIS AND SKATEBOARDS



§ 74.25  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:



   BUSINESS DISTRICT.  That part of the city so designated by council
resolution.



   OPERATE.  To ride on or upon or control the operation of roller
blades, roller skates, or a skateboard.



   OPERATOR.  Every person who operates or is in actual physical control
of roller blades, roller skates, or a skateboard.



   ROLLER BLADES/ROLLER SKATES.  A shoe with wheels attached or a device
with wheels which is designed to be attached to a shoe.



   ROLLER SKIS.  A pair of skis platformed with wheels attached which is
intended to simulate skiing.



   SKATEBOARD.  A device for riding-upon, usually while standing,
consisting of an oblong piece of wood, or of other composition, mounted on
skate wheels.



§ 74.26  UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to operate roller blades, roller
skates, roller skis or a skateboard under the circumstances set forth
hereafter:



      (1)   On private property of another without the express
permission to do so by the owner or occupant of the property; or



      (2)   In any careless, reckless, or negligent manner so as to
endanger or be likely to endanger the safety of any person or property of any
other person.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person operating roller blades, roller
skates, roller skis or a skateboard to attach the same, or the person of the
operator, to any vehicle upon a street.



   (C)   Every person operating roller blades, roller skates, roller
skis or a skateboard upon a street shall ride as close as possible to the
right-hand curb or edge of the street.



   (D)   Every person operating roller blades, roller skates, roller
skis or a skateboard upon a street shall observe the same rules of the road
as required of bicycles, pursuant to M.S. § 169.222.



Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.27  RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   The operator of roller blades, roller skates, roller skis or a
skateboard emerging from any alley, driveway, or building, upon approaching a
sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, shall yield the
right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or sidewalk area
and upon entering the street shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles
approaching on the street.



Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.28  HOURS OF USE.



   It is unlawful for any person to use roller blades, roller skates,
roller skis or a skateboard upon a public street, sidewalk, or other roadway
from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., except on private property with express
permission of owner, and except if the roller blades, roller skates, roller
skis, skateboard or operator are equipped with reflective surfaces that shall
be visible during the hours of darkness from 600 feet when viewed in front of
lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. The reflective material
shall be a minimum of 40 square inches. All reflective materials used in
compliance with this section shall meet the requirements as prescribed by the
Commissioner of Public Safety.



Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.99  VIOLATIONS.



   A person apprehended by a peace officer in violation of the provisions
of this chapter does, by his or her use of the public sidewalks, streets, and
public parking lots, consent to the impoundment by a police officer of the
roller blades, roller skates, roller skis or skateboard for a period of three
days upon a first offense, a week upon the second offense and 30 days upon a
third or additional offense. Any operator aggrieved by the impoundment of his
or her roller blades, roller skates roller skis or skateboard may petition
the Council for a hearing thereon at the next regular Council meeting
following the impoundment. This provision is in addition to the provisions
for fines and penalties as set forth in § 10.99.



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS




      Chapter





         90.   MANAGEMENT OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY





         91.   ANIMALS





         92.   HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES





         93.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS





         94.   AIR POLLUTION CONTROL




CHAPTER 90:  MANAGEMENT OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY



Section



General Provisions



   90.001   Application



   90.002   Definitions



Construction and Maintenance on Public Rights-of-Way



   90.020   Restricted construction



   90.021   Initiating construction projects



   90.022   Standards of construction



   90.023   Permits are required



   90.024   Inspection of construction projects



   90.025   Curb and gutter, street and sidewalk painting or coloring



   90.026   Sidewalk maintenance



City Parks



   90.040   Regulations



   90.041   Violation of regulations



   90.042   Animal and plant life



   90.043   Operation of motor vehicles



   90.044   Lakes or streams



   90.045   Permits needed for alcoholic beverages, large groups and
audio devices



   90.046   Glass beverage containers



   90.047   Audio devices, radios and stereos



   90.048   Fund-raising activity



   90.049   Camping prohibited



   90.050   Litter prohibited



Planting and Maintenance of Trees



   90.060   Public tree planting



   90.061   Maintenance of public trees



   90.062   Trees on private property



   90.063   Tree topping



   90.064   Professional tree trimming



Control and Prevention of Shade Tree Disease



   90.075   Declaration of policy



   90.076   Tree inspector



   90.077   Duties of inspector



   90.078   Public nuisance



   90.079   Unlawful act



   90.080   Nuisance abatement



   90.081   Spraying elm trees



   90.082   Transporting and storing elm wood prohibited



Public Nuisances



   90.095   General



   90.096   Orders of abatement



   90.097   Violation



Grass and Weed Control



   90.110   Duty of owner and occupant



   90.111   Failure to maintain



Ice and Snow Control



   90.125   Responsibility of owner and occupant



   90.126   Failure to maintain



Litter, Snow, and Other Debris on Public Property



   90.140   Prohibition



   90.141   Exceptions



   90.142   Recovering cost



   90.143   Violation



Junk Vehicles, Appliances, and Litter on Private Property



   90.155   Responsible person(s)



   90.156   Exceptions



   90.157   Failure to maintain



   90.158   Violation



Hazardous Buildings or Property



   90.175   Prohibition



   90.176   Responsible person(s)



   90.177   Public nuisance



   90.178   Nuisance abatement



   90.179   Posting of signs



Abatement of a Public Nuisance



   90.190   Public property



   90.191   Entry upon private property



   90.192   Declaration of public nuisance



   90.193   Notice of public nuisance



   90.194   Contents of notice



   90.195   Right to a hearing



   90.196   Court procedure



   90.197   City abatement of nuisance



   90.198   Violation



Assessment Regulations



   90.210   Classification of projects



   90.211   Special charges projects



   90.212   Other local improvements



   90.213   Consent assessment projects



Assessment and Utility Certification



   90.225   Requests for certification



   90.226   Certification



   90.227   Certificate charge



Disposal of Personal Property



   90.240   Abandoned motor vehicles



   90.241   Unclaimed private property



   90.242   Excess municipal property



   90.243   Disposal of abandoned motor vehicles, unclaimed property
and excess property



   90.244   Restrictions on city employees



   90.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 90.001  APPLICATION.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all property within the
city.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE.  Any beverage containing more than 0.5% alcohol by
volume.



   AUDIO DEVICE.  A loudspeaker, public address system, or sound
amplifying equipment.



   FUND-RAISING ACTIVITY.  Any sale of goods or services or solicitation
of funds. Also, any activity where goods or services are provided as a result
of a sale occurring at another time or place.



   LARGE GROUPS. A group of more than 50 people gathered together for the
same purpose.



   LITTER. Garbage, refuse or rubbish and all other waste materials which,
when discarded or maintained improperly, tend to create a danger to public
health, safety and welfare.



   NATURAL TERRAIN. Areas other than roadways, driveways (private or
public), parking lots, and similar areas.



   OCCUPANT.  The person living on or the renter/tenant of real property.



   OPERATE. To drive, operate or physically control a vehicle.



   OPERATOR.  Every person who drives, operates or is in physical control
of a vehicle.



   OWNER.  The possessor of the fee title to real estate or the person
purchasing fee title by contract. Also, the person having the title to a
vehicle.



   PARK.  Any real estate within the city which has been dedicated to or
purchased by the city and which is intended for recreational activities.



   PRIVATE PROPERTY.  All real estate which is not public property.



   PUBLIC PROPERTY.  Land, buildings, or fixtures owned or leased by the
city, formally dedicated to the public benefit or actually used by the public
without formal dedication but in a manner which creates the appearance of
dedicated public property.



   PUBLIC TREES.  Trees, shrubs or bushes located in parks or on other
public property.



   RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLE.  A motor vehicle used for recreational
purposes, including but not limited to trail bikes, mini bikes, amphibious
vehicles, all terrain vehicles, or snowmobiles.



   TREE TOPPING.  The severe cutting back of limbs larger than 3 inches
in diameter within the crown of the tree to such a degree so as to remove the
normal canopy and disfigure the tree.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY



§ 90.020  RESTRICTED CONSTRUCTION.



   No person may initiate any construction activities on any public
property without first complying with the requirements of this subchapter and
Chapter 150 of the Code. This restriction does not apply to city employees in
the performance of their official duties.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.021  INITIATING CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS.



   The owner of private real property abutting public property may
initiate a construction project on the adjacent public rights-of-way by
directly contracting with a qualified person for the project. Estimated costs
must be paid in advance or payment arrangements must be made which are deemed
adequate by a City Building Official.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.022  STANDARDS OF CONSTRUCTION.



   All construction shall be performed strictly in accordance with
standards on file in the office of a City Building Official.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.023  PERMITS ARE REQUIRED.



   Before any construction can be started involving streets, sidewalks,
curbs, gutters, curb cuts, or any other construction upon public property, a
permit must be obtained pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 150.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.024  INSPECTION OF CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS.



   A City Building Inspector shall inspect all improvements to the extent
deemed necessary. Any work which fails to meet the requirements of applicable
standards shall be corrected, all at the exclusive expense of the responsible
property owner. The Inspector may order any work to be stopped if it is found
to be unsatisfactory and the contractor or owner refuse to obey the
Inspector’s orders.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.025  CURB AND GUTTER, STREET AND SIDEWALK PAINTING OR COLORING.



   It is unlawful for any person to paint, letter, or color any street,
sidewalk, or curb and gutter for any purpose, or to utilize colored concrete
or other colored surfacing. This restriction shall not apply to city
employees or utility employees engaged in the performance of their duties.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 90.026  SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE.



   It is the responsibility of the owner of private property which abuts
any sidewalk on public property to maintain such sidewalk in a safe
condition. Any construction shall conform to the requirements of this
section. In the event that the property owner fails to conform to this
requirement, then the city may take steps to perform the maintenance
requirements and to assess the property owner in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



CITY PARKS



§ 90.040  REGULATIONS.



   The City Administrator is empowered to issue regulations concerning the
administration of city parks. The regulations may address closing hours,
swimming pool hours, protection of wild animals and birds, and such other
issues as may prove to be necessary. The regulations shall be legally
effective upon posting within a park.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.041  VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS.



   It is unlawful for any person to violate any posted regulation within a
city park.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 90.042  ANIMAL AND PLANT LIFE.



   It is unlawful for any person to do any of the following:



   (A)   Injure or disturb any animal or bird which is within a city
park except as the city may deem necessary for population control of any
species.



   (B)   Harm the plant life in any park or in any way impair the
natural beauty of a park except as part of authorized park construction,
reconstruction or maintenance projects;



   (C)   Permit any dog or cat into a park where animals are prohibited
except dogs assisting visually handicapped persons.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 90.043  OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   Motor vehicles may be operated only upon the roads or parking
lots of a park. It is unlawful for any person to operate any motorized
vehicle on the natural terrain or improved pedestrian walkways of any city
park.



   (B)   It is unlawful for the owner or person responsible for a
motorized vehicle to knowingly allow another to operate it in violation of
this section.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 90.044  LAKES OR STREAMS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to swim or wade in, or to travel
in any boat or other floatation device upon any lakes or streams in any park,
except in areas designated for such purposes.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to walk, ice skate, or to be
upon the frozen surface of a body of water in any park where it has been
sign-posted that the frozen surface is unsafe.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 90.045  PERMITS NEEDED FOR ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES, LARGE GROUPS AND AUDIO
DEVICES.



   (A)   A permit must be obtained before a person may engage in any of
the following activities within a city park:



      (1)   Transporting, possessing, or consuming alcoholic
beverages which are in a single container having a capacity of more than 1
gallon;



      (2)   Operating or playing any audio device;



      (3)   Gathering in large groups.



   (B)   A permit may be obtained from the City Clerk (the issuing
officer). A permit application shall be made upon forms provided by the City
Clerk. The forms shall provide information necessary for proper investigation
before issuance of the permit.



   (C)   The permit application must be signed by the applicant. The
application must be submitted no less than one business day prior to the
anticipated date of the event. An applicant must be at least 18 years of age.
However, if alcoholic beverages are involved, then the applicant must be at
least 21 years of age.



   (D)   If the City Clerk decides that a permit application should be
reviewed by the Council before a permit is issued, then the application shall
be brought before the next regular Council meeting. If the City Clerk denies
a permit, then the applicant shall be advised of their right to appeal the
denial to the City Council. The applicant shall have 30 days from the date of
the denial to request an appeal. The permit applicant shall be advised of the
meeting date and time. In any case where the application for a permit is
before the City Council, the applicant shall personally appear at the Council
meeting. Failure to appear shall constitute grounds for denying the
application for a permit.



   (E)   The permit shall specify such conditions as the issuing
officer or Council deem necessary to enhance the use and enjoyment of a park
by the public.



   (F)   The permit shall specify that the applicant is personally
responsible for ensuring compliance with the conditions of the permit and
with the provisions of this section of the Code. A copy of the permit shall
be given to the applicant. The applicant or, in the absence of the applicant
from the park, another responsible adult shall keep the permit in possession
while the permitted activity occurs in the park. The permit shall be shown to
a police officer or park employee upon request.



   (G)   A copy of the permit shall also be given to the Police
Department. The Police Department shall be empowered to monitor compliance
with the conditions of a permit. A police officer may revoke a permit and
terminate park use of that group if there is a significant violation of the
conditions of a permit or any provision of the City Code.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.046  GLASS BEVERAGE CONTAINERS.



   No person may bring into or possess in a park any glass beverage
container.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 90.047  AUDIO DEVICES, RADIOS AND STEREOS.



   No person may play an audio device, radio, stereo, or similar
electronic equipment in any park in such a manner that the sound is so loud
as to substantially disturb others in the park or residents of adjacent
property.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 90.048  FUND-RAISING ACTIVITY.



   No fund-raising activities may be conducted in any park, with the
following exceptions:



   (A)   Fund-raising activities conducted by a non-profit organization
involving only members of that particular organization;



   (B)   Persons possessing concession permits issued by the city;



   (C)   Concessions conducted by city employees or by persons under
direct contract with the city to operate a concession; and/or



   (D)   Community events sponsored or sanctioned by the city.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 90.049  CAMPING PROHIBITED.



   No person may camp in a park or stay overnight in a park.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 90.050  LITTER PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to do any of the following:  discard
litter except into public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter
will not be carried by the elements upon any part of a park. If public
receptacles are not available, litter shall be carried away from the park by
the person responsible for its presence and properly discarded elsewhere.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)  Penalty, see § 91.999



PLANTING AND MAINTENANCE OF TREES



§ 90.060  PUBLIC TREE PLANTING.



   It is unlawful for any person to plant a tree, shrub, hedge or similar
vegetation on public property without first obtaining the written permission
of the City Forester. A person desiring to plant a public tree shall submit a
request to the City Forester, specifying both the species of tree which is
proposed to be planted, as well as the proposed location of planting. The
City Forester shall respond in writing to the request as soon as reasonably
possible.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991; Am. Ord. 17, 4th Series, passed 1-17-2008) 
Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 90.061  MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC TREES.



   It is unlawful for any person except the City Forester or his or her
designee to prune, maintain, or remove any public tree.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 90.062  TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   The owner of private property shall be required to prune or remove
entirely dead, diseased or dangerous trees or broken or decayed limbs from
trees located on such private property. The property owner shall have a 90
day limitation upon notification by the City Forester during which they must
remove the dead or diseased tree. Trees which have been cut down  or pruned
tree branches shall be removed from the owner’s property or, if not in
violation of other provisions of this chapter, cut into appropriate lengths
for firewood and neatly stacked and stored for that purpose. The owner of
private property shall be required to prune trees which overhang any public
property so that the branches of the trees shall not obstruct light from any
street lamp or the view of any street intersection or traffic control signs
or devices. The trees shall be pruned so that its lowest branch is at least
14 feet above the adjacent street, alley or sidewalk. The City Forester is
empowered to issue orders to the owners of private property where trees are
located which violate the provisions of this section. In the event that the
work is not performed in accordance with such orders, then the city may take
immediate steps to have such condition declared a public nuisance pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter. The cost of work incurred by the city shall
be assessed to the property owner in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.063  TREE TOPPING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to top any public tree, any tree on
a slope below the breakline or in any ravine without the written
authorization of the City Forester. The City Forester is empowered to exempt
certain trees from this restriction where such trees are severely damaged by
storms.  The City Forester may exempt certain trees where pruning is
necessary to provide clearance for utility wires or street lights.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991; Am. Ord. 8, 4th Series, passed 1-16-2007) 
Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 90.064  PROFESSIONAL TREE TRIMMING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or business organization to engage
in the occupation of pruning, treating, or removing public trees without
first filing with the City Forester a Certificate of Insurance for liability
insurance of at least $300,000 concerning any singular claim and $1,000,000
for any number of claims arising out of a single occurrence. Such insurance
policy shall name the city as an additional insured. Furthermore, such person
or organization shall indemnify the city and hold it harmless from any claims
resulting from the pursuit of such occupation.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)  Penalty, see § 91.999



CONTROL AND PREVENTION OF SHADE TREE DISEASE



§ 90.075  DECLARATION OF POLICY.



   The Council has determined that the health of several species and
varieties of shade trees within the municipal corporate limits are threatened
by fatal shade tree diseases known as Dutch Elm Disease (caused by
Ceratocystis ulmi) and Oak Wilt Disease (caused by Ceratocystis fagacearum).
It has further determined that the loss of shade trees as a result of shade
tree diseases from public and private property would substantially depreciate
the value of property within the city and impair the safety, good order,
general welfare, and convenience of the public. It is declared to be the
intention of the Council to control and prevent the spread of shade tree
disease and to conduct a program of shade tree disease control.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.076  TREE INSPECTOR.



   The position of Tree inspector is created. The powers and duties of the
Tree Inspector are conferred upon the City Forester. The Inspector shall be
certified by the Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Agriculture as
provided by law.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.077  DUTIES OF INSPECTOR.



   (A)   It is the duty of the Inspector to coordinate all activities
of the city relating to the control or the prevention of shade tree disease.



   (B)   The Inspector shall annually inspect public and private
property within the city to determine if and to what extent shade trees have
become diseased. The Inspector may enter upon private property at any
reasonable time for the purposes of carrying out these duties. Before making
any inspections on private property, notice shall be given to the occupant as
well as the owner of such property in such fashion as is reasonable under the
circumstances. Upon finding conditions indicating shade tree disease, the
Inspector shall immediately send appropriate samples to the Commissioner of
Agriculture for analysis to take such other steps for diagnosis as may be
recommended by the Commissioner.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.078  PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   The following shall constitute a public nuisance:



   (A)   Any living or standing elm tree or part of an elm tree
infected to any degree with the Dutch Elm Disease fungus Ceratocystis ulmi
(Buisman) Moreau or which harbors any of the elm bark beetles Scolytus
Multistriatus (Eichh.) or Hylurgopinus Rufipes (Marsh). All trees will be
marked in a manner that will distinguish between high risk and low risk
trees. A "high risk" tree is an elm which is dead (with bark firmly
attached), leafless, rapidly dying with more than 30% leaf wilt by June 25 or
more slowly dying trees that have 30% or more wilt. A "low risk" tree is an
elm which is dying slowly (wilt may start in June but does not spread to more
than 30% of the crown during the growing season), or infected late in the
growing season and does not reach 30% crown wilt;



   (B)   Any dead elm tree or part of a dead elm tree from which the
bark has not been removed and burned or sprayed with an effective elm bark
beetle insecticide;



   (C)   Any living or standing northern red oak (Quercus Rubra),
northern pin oak (Quercus Ellipsoidalis), black oak (Quercus Velutina), or
scarlet oak (Quercus Coccinea) or parts of those trees infected to any degree
with the Oak Wilt Disease fungus Ceratocystis Fagacearum or which harbors any
insects or other agents identified by the Commissioner of the Minnesota
Department of  Agriculture as an oak wilt spore carrier (overland spread);



   (D)   Any dead oak tree of the above-mentioned species or parts of
those trees which has not been effectively treated, as defined by the
Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Agriculture, to reduce spore mat
formation of the oak Wilt fungus Ceratocystis Fagacearum.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.079  UNLAWFUL ACT.



   It is unlawful for any owner of private property containing a public
nuisance as defined in this section to fail to abate the public nuisance.
Upon the failure of the owner of private property to abate such a nuisance,
the Inspector shall proceed in the manner prescribed by this chapter to abate
the same.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 90.080  NUISANCE ABATEMENT.



   In abating the nuisances defined in this subchapter, the Inspector
shall cause the infected tree or wood to be sprayed, removed, burned, or
otherwise effectively treated so as to destroy and prevent as fully as
possible the spread of shade tree disease. Such abatement procedures shall be
carried out in accordance with current technical and expert opinions and
plans as may be designated by the Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of
Agriculture. No damage shall be awarded the owner for the destruction of any
shade tree, tree wood, or tree material. The cost of the abatement action
shall be assessed against the private property in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.081  SPRAYING ELM TREES.



   Whenever the Inspector determines that any shade tree or shade tree
wood within the city is infected, nearby high value shade trees shall be
sprayed. Spraying activities authorized by this subchapter shall be conducted
in accordance with technical and expert opinions and plans of the
Commissioner of Agriculture and under the supervision of the Commissioner
whenever possible.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.082  TRANSPORTING AND STORING ELM WOOD PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to transport or store within the city any
bark-bearing elm wood without having obtained a permit from the Inspector.
The Inspector shall grant such permits only when the purposes of this
subchapter will be served.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)  Penalty, see § 91.999



PUBLIC NUISANCES



§ 90.095  GENERAL.



   Whoever by an act or failure to perform a legal duty intentionally does
any of the following is guilty of maintaining a public nuisance:



   (A)   Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys,
injures, or endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort or repose of any
considerable number of members of the public; or



   (B)   Does an act or fails to do an act in violation of any law or
provision of the City Code;



   (C)   While having control of real property as the owner or
occupant, permits it to be used to maintain a public nuisance.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.096  ORDERS OF ABATEMENT.



   The City Administrator is empowered to issue orders to the owners of
private  property in violation of the provisions of this subchapter. In the
event that the work is not performed in accordance with such orders, then the
city may take immediate steps to have such condition declared a public
nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The cost of work
incurred by the city shall be assessed to the property owner in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.097  VIOLATION.



   A violation of this subchapter shall constitute a misdemeanor.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



GRASS AND WEED CONTROL



§ 90.110  DUTY OF OWNER AND OCCUPANT.



   Every owner and occupant of private real property shall be responsible
for cutting and controlling the grass and weeds on such property.
Furthermore, if the private property abuts any street or alley, then the
owner and occupant shall be responsible for cutting and controlling grass and
weeds on the public property between the private property and the center of
the street or alley.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.111  FAILURE TO MAINTAIN.



   (A)   If the grass or weeds attain a height in excess of 6 inches,
or noxious weeds go to seed, it shall be considered prima facie evidence of
the failure of the owner and occupant to comply with this subchapter.



   (B)   The city may then proceed as follows:



      (1)   Concerning public rights-of-way, the appointed Weed
Inspector shall provide written notice to the property owner utilizing first
class mail, advising such owner or occupant that the grass and weed cutting
must be performed within 5 days. If the owner fails to cut the grass and
weeds, then the city shall perform the necessary work to cut the grass and
weeds, keeping an accurate account of the cost. The cost shall be assessed to
the abutting private property in conformance with the provisions of this
chapter;



      (2)   Concerning private property, the appointed Weed
Inspector shall provide written notice to the property owner, utilizing first
class mail, advising such owner that the grass and weed cutting must be
performed within 5 days. Such notice shall also advise the owner that the
city shall perform such work, with the presumed consent of the owner, if the
owner fails to cut the grass and weeds within such schedule. If city
employees are utilized to cut the grass and weeds, an accurate account of the
time and charges shall be maintained. Such costs shall be assessed to the
benefitted property in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991; Am. Ord. 8, 4th Series, passed 1-16-2007)



ICE AND SNOW CONTROL



§ 90.125  RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER AND OCCUPANT.



   The owner and occupant of private property abutting a public sidewalk
shall remove accumulated snow from such sidewalk within 48 hours after it
stops snowing. Furthermore, such owner and occupant are responsible for
either removing ice from such public sidewalk or depositing within 48 hours
of accumulation of the ice or snow enough sand and/or salt on the icy
sidewalk to provide reasonable safety for the public.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.126  FAILURE TO MAINTAIN.



   If the property owner or occupant fails to remove the ice or snow from
a sidewalk as required by this section, the city may, without notice to the
owner or occupant, remove the snow or ice from the public sidewalks, keeping
an accurate account of the cost. The cost shall be assessed to the adjacent
property in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



LITTER, SNOW, AND OTHER DEBRIS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY



§ 90.140  PROHIBITION.



   It is unlawful for any person to place litter, snow, ice, yard or
garden waste or other debris upon any public property, public right-of-way or
in any ravine.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 90.141  EXCEPTIONS.



   The prohibition of this section shall not apply to the following
circumstances:



   (A)   A city employee acting within the scope of such employment;



   (B)   A person acting pursuant to contract with the city;



   (C)   The owner or occupant of abutting property acting pursuant to
special clean-up programs sponsored by the city. However, in such cases, all
litter except leaves, large tree limbs or other large objects shall be
contained in a proper container.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.142  RECOVERING COST.



   The city may, without notice to any person, remove the litter, snow,
ice, or other debris from the public property, keeping an accurate account of
the cost. The cost shall be recovered utilizing either of the following
methods:



   (A)   If the person violating this section is the owner or occupant
of abutting private property, then the cost shall be assessed to such owners
property, in conformance with the provisions of this chapter;



   (B)   As an alternative to the assessment procedure or if the person
violating this section is not the owner or occupant of abutting private
property, then the City Attorney, upon direction of the Council, shall bring
suit in District Court to recover from such violator such cost, including
costs, disbursements and actual attorneys fees in bringing the action.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.143  VIOLATION.



   A violation of this section which is committed in a manner or under
circumstances so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or
property shall constitute a misdemeanor.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



JUNK VEHICLES, APPLIANCES, AND LITTER ON PRIVATE PROPERTY



§ 90.155  RESPONSIBLE PERSONS.



   The owner(s) and/or occupant(s) of private property shall be
responsible for compliance with this subchapter.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.156  EXCEPTIONS.



   If a particular condition is not otherwise in violation of the
requirements of Chapter 156, then the following are exempt from this
subchapter:



   (A)   The storage of litter in proper containers;



   (B)   The keeping of unlicensed or inoperative vehicles on private
property when stored inside, or when such private property is licensed as a
junk yard, or when such private property is located in an appropriate
commercial or industrial zone, and the unlicensed or inoperative vehicles are
temporarily stored outside for no more than 30 days while awaiting repair.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.157  FAILURE TO MAINTAIN.



   The City Administrator is empowered to issue orders to the owners of
private property in violation of the provisions of this subchapter. In the
event that the work is not performed in accordance with such orders, then the
city may take immediate steps to have such condition declared a public
nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter. The cost of work
incurred by the city shall be assessed the property owner in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.158  VIOLATION.



   A violation of this subchapter shall constitute a misdemeanor.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



HAZARDOUS BUILDINGS OR PROPERTY



§ 90.175  PROHIBITION.



   It is unlawful for any person to own a hazardous building or hazardous
property, which is any building or property constituting a fire hazard or
hazard to public safety or health because of inadequate maintenance, age,
dilapidation, physical damage, unsanitary condition, abandonment, or
defective chimneys, electric wiring, gas connections or heating apparatus.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 90.176  RESPONSIBLE PERSON(S).



   The owner(s) of the building or property shall be responsible for
compliance with this section.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.177  PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   A hazardous building or hazardous property constitutes a public
nuisance.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.178  NUISANCE ABATEMENT.



   The procedures set forth within this chapter for abatement of a public
nuisance shall initially be applicable to a hazardous building or hazardous
property. However, once the Council determines that the building or property
is hazardous, then it may issue its order to the owner of the property to
correct or remove the hazardous condition of the building or property or to
raze or remove the building. Thereafter, the procedures outlined in M.S. Ch.
463, as it may be amended from time to time, shall apply to obtain abatement
of the hazardous building or property.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.179  POSTING OF SIGNS.



   The City Administrator shall cause to be posted at each entrance to a
hazardous building or in an appropriate place on hazardous property a notice
which reads: "DO NOT ENTER BY ORDER OF CITY OF NORTH MANKATO." Such notice
shall remain posted until the hazardous condition is abated.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



ABATEMENT OF A PUBLIC NUISANCE



§ 90.190  PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   If the condition constituting the nuisance occurs on public property,
then the procedures to abate such nuisance on public property as set forth
elsewhere in this chapter shall apply.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.191  ENTRY UPON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   The City Administrator may enter upon private property during
reasonable hours to inspect conditions which may constitute a public nuisance.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.192  DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   The City Administrator is empowered to determine whether a condition
shall be declared a public nuisance.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.193  NOTICE OF PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   Upon the determination of the City Administrator that a certain
condition constitutes a public nuisance, then notice of that determination
shall be provided to the owner and occupant of the affected private property.
The notice shall be made by first class mail, addressed to the owner and
occupant at their last known addresses. If the property is not occupied, then
a copy of the notice shall also be posted in a conspicuous place on the
property.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.194  CONTENTS OF NOTICE.



   The notice shall identify the condition that constitutes the public
nuisance and shall require the owner or occupant to properly abate such
nuisance within 30 days after mailing of the notice.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.195  RIGHT TO A HEARING.



   At any time prior to the expiration of the 30 days after mailing of the
notice, the property owner or occupant may submit a written request for a
hearing before the City Council concerning the merits of the declaration of
public nuisance by the City Administrator. The hearing shall be conducted at
a regularly scheduled Council meeting. Notice of the time and date of the
hearing shall be mailed to the owner and occupant. At the hearing, the
Council shall hear all relevant evidence bearing upon the question and shall
make an independent determination of whether the condition constitutes a
public nuisance. If the Council rules in favor of the owner or occupant, then
all proceedings shall terminate. However, if the Council determines that the
condition does constitute a public nuisance, then within 30 days from the
date of such determination, the owner or occupant shall abate the public
nuisance.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.196  COURT PROCEDURE.



   If the owner or occupant of the private real estate fails to abate a
public nuisance in accordance with the procedures of this section, and
further fails to provide the city with written consent to abate the nuisance,
then upon authorization of the City Council, the City Attorney shall petition
the District Court for a Writ for the Abatement of a Nuisance. Upon the
issuance of such a Writ, the City Administrator shall proceed to abate such
nuisance. The cost of such court procedure, including actual attorney's fees,
shall be added to the cost of the abatement procedure for assessment purposes.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.197  CITY ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.



   Upon the written consent of the property owner or pursuant to court
order, the city may abate a public nuisance. The actual cost of the abatement
procedure shall constitute an assessment against the affected private
property and shall be collected in the manner authorized by this chapter.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.198  VIOLATION.



   A violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



ASSESSMENT REGULATIONS



§ 90.210  CLASSIFICATION OF PROJECTS.



   Improvement projects or other cost-incurring services which are
provided at the expense of the city are divided into 3 classes, as follows.



   (A)   Special charges projects, as follows:



      (1)   Snow, ice, or litter removal from sidewalks or other
public property;



      (2)   Grass and weed control on streets, other public property
or private property;



      (3)   Removal or elimination of public health or safety
hazards from private property;



      (4)   Installation or repair of water service lines;



      (5)   Street sprinkling or other dust treatment of streets;



      (6)   The trimming and care of trees and removal of unsound
trees from any public property. The treatment and removal of insect infested
or diseased trees on private property;



      (7)   The repair of sidewalks and alleys;



      (8)   The operation of a street lighting system;



      (9)   The operation and maintenance of a fire protection or a
pedestrian skyway system;



      (10)   The abatement of a public nuisance as established
pursuant to this chapter;



      (11)   Delinquent utility bills.



   (B)   Other local improvements:  projects where the cost is
assessable against benefitted private property,  pursuant to the provisions
of M.S. Ch. 429, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (C)   Consent assessment projects:  projects or other
cost-incurring services which are provided at the expense of the city and
where the property owner consents to an assessment against the benefitted
property.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.211  SPECIAL CHARGES PROJECTS.



   The following procedures shall be utilized to obtain reimbursement for:



   (A)   Billing statement.  The city may do the work, either through
its employees or by contracting with third parties. Upon completion of the
work, all time and expense records shall be submitted to the City Clerk. The
City Clerk shall send by first class mail a billing statement for such time
and charges to the owner of the benefitted property. The statement shall
advise the owner that payment must be made in full within 30 days of mailing
if the owner desires to avoid the imposition of assessment expenses.
Alternatively, the city and such property owner may enter into a consent
assessment or other payment arrangement which is mutually agreeable
concerning payment of the statement.



   (B)   Special charges record. The City Clerk shall maintain a record
of unpaid special charges until such time that they have either been paid in
full or have been certified to the county as an assessment. The record shall
provide the name of the property owner, the address of the property, and the
amount of the special charges. The information is to be made available to
inquiring persons, upon payment of the appropriate fees.



   (C)   Assessment procedure. At the discretion of the City Clerk, but
at least annually, a report shall be made to the City Council concerning
unpaid special charges. The Council shall determine by resolution the amount
of the charges to be assessed and shall fix a date for a public hearing to
consider the proposed assessment. The proposed assessment roll shall be filed
with the Clerk and shall be open to public inspection. The City Clerk shall
provide published and mailed notice to the benefitted property owners
pursuant to the provisions of M.S. § 429.061, as it may be amended from time
to time. At the designated time, the City Council shall conduct a public
hearing to hear and pass upon all objections to the proposed assessment,
whether presented orally or in writing. The Council may amend the proposed
assessment as to any parcel and by resolution adopt the same as a special
assessment against the lands named in the assessment roll. All objections to
the assessments not received at the assessment hearing in the manner
prescribed by this section are waived, unless the failure to object at the
assessment hearing is due to a reasonable cause.  Any special assessment
levied pursuant to these provisions shall be payable in a single installment
or by up to 10 equal annual installments as the Council may provide. With the
above exceptions, the provisions of M.S. Ch. 429, as it may be amended from
time to time, shall be applicable to this process.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.212  OTHER LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS.



   All other improvement projects shall be processed to the provisions of
M.S. Ch. 429, as it may be amended from time to time.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.213  CONSENT ASSESSMENT PROJECTS.



   Any improvement project or other cost-incurring services provided at
the expense of the city may be assessed against the benefitted property by
the mutual consent of the property owner and the City Council. The  actual
amount of the assessment and the terms of payment shall be established by
mutual agreement. A written consent assessment agreement must be signed by
the property owner or owners of the benefitted property, containing the terms
agreed to plus the legal description of the property. Once the Council
approves the agreement, the City Clerk shall forward it to appropriate county
officials as required by law.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



ASSESSMENT AND UTILITY CERTIFICATION



§ 90.225  REQUESTS FOR CERTIFICATION.



   All requests for assessment certification on a property located within
the city shall be submitted in writing. Such requests may be submitted either
by mail or in person to the office of the City Clerk.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.226  CERTIFICATION.



   The City Clerk shall act upon all written requests for an assessment
certification within 10 working days, as marked from the date of receipt of
the request. The City Clerk shall certify, to the best of his or her
knowledge, the presence of any items which would constitute a lien upon the
property in question. Such items shall include, but are not limited to,
unpaid utility bills, delinquent special assessments, and pending special
assessments.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.227  CERTIFICATE CHARGE.



   The City Council shall specify a charge for the performance of this
service. The results of the certification shall not be released until the fee
has been paid unless the City Clerk has established appropriate credit
arrangements.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



DISPOSAL OF PERSONAL PROPERTY



§ 90.240  ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES.



   Abandoned motor vehicles lawfully coming into the custody of the city
shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of M.S. Ch. 168B, as
it may be amended from time to time.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.241  UNCLAIMED PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   The City Administrator shall maintain an inventory of the description
of personal property lawfully coming into the possession of the city in the
course of municipal operations and remaining unclaimed by the owner. The
inventory shall describe the property and shall state the date it came into
the possession of the city. The City Administrator shall utilize reasonable
efforts to identify and locate the owner of the property so that it might be
returned. However, if the property remains in the possession of the city for
a period of at least 60 days, it shall be considered to be abandoned. From
time to time the City Administrator may submit to the Council the inventory
of abandoned property. The Council may authorize sale of the abandoned
property by resolution. The City Clerk shall publish a notice announcing the
auction date and time and also describing the property, as well as providing
the names and addresses of the owners of the property, if known. The notice
shall be published once in the official newspaper at least 3 weeks prior to
the sale. Sale of the property shall be made to the highest bidder at public
auction. The net proceeds from the sale shall be paid into the General Fund
of the city. The former owner of any property sold at the auction shall have
6 months from the date of the sale to apply for payment of the net proceeds
attributable to the owner’s property.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.242  EXCESS MUNICIPAL PROPERTY.



   The City Administrator may recommend to the Council that certain
personal property owned by the city is no longer needed for a municipal
purpose and should be sold. The City Council by resolution may authorize the
sale of the property. If the total estimated value of the property is less
than $500, the City Administrator may sell the property through negotiated
sale. If the excess property has a total estimated value of $500 or more,
then the property shall be sold at public auction. Notice of the auction
shall be published once in the official newspaper at least 3 weeks prior to
the sale. The notice shall give the time and place of the sale and describe
the property to be sold. The net receipts from the sale shall be placed into
the General Fund of the city.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.243  DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES, UNCLAIMED PROPERTY AND  EXCESS
PROPERTY.



   (A)   Disposal of abandoned motor vehicles.



      (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



         ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE. A motor vehicle as defined in M.S.
Ch. 169, as it may be amended from time to time, that has remained for a
period of more than 48 hours on public property illegally or lacking vital
component parts, or has remained for a period of more than 48 hours on
private property without the consent of the person in control of such
property, or in an inoperable condition such that it has no substantial
possible further use consistent with its function unless it is kept in an
enclosed garage or storage building. It shall also mean a motor vehicle
voluntarily surrendered by its owner to the city. A classic car or pioneer
car shall not be considered an abandoned motor vehicle. Vehicles on the
premises of junk yards or automobile graveyards, which are licensed and
maintained in accordance with the City Code, shall not be considered
abandoned motor vehicles within the meaning of this section.



         VITAL COMPONENT PARTS. Those parts of a motor vehicle that
are essential to the mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including, but
not limited to, the motor, drive train and wheels.



      (2)   Custody. The city shall take into custody and impound
any abandoned motor vehicle.



      (3)   Immediate sale. When an abandoned motor vehicle is more
than 7 model years of age, is lacking vital component parts, and does not
display a license plate currently valid in Minnesota or any other state or
foreign country, it shall immediately be eligible for sale at public auction,
and shall not be subject to the notification, reclamation, or title provision
of this division.



      (4)   Notice.



         (a)   When an abandoned motor vehicle does not fall
within the provisions of subsection (3), the city shall give notice of the
taking within 10 days. The notice shall set forth the date and place of the
taking, the year, make, model and serial number of the abandoned motor
vehicle and the place where the vehicle is being held, shall inform the owner
and any lien holders of their right to reclaim the vehicle under subsection
(5), and shall state that failure of the owner or lien holder to exercise
their right to reclaim the vehicle shall be deemed a waiver by them of all
rights, title and interest in the vehicle and a consent to the sale of the
vehicle at a public auction pursuant to subsection (6).



         (b)   The notice shall be sent by mail to the registered
owner, if any, of the abandoned motor vehicle and to all readily identifiable
lien holders of record. If it is impossible to determine with reasonable
certainty the identity and address of the registered owner and all lien
holders, the notice shall be published once in the official newspaper.
Published notices may be grouped together for convenience and economy.



      (5)   Right to reclaim.



         (a)   The owner or any lien holder of an abandoned motor
vehicle shall have a right to reclaim such vehicle from the city upon payment
of all towing and storage charges resulting from taking the vehicle into
custody within 15 days after the date of the notice required by this
subsection.



         (b)   Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to
impair any lien of a garage keeper under the laws of this state, or the right
of the lien holder to foreclose. For the purposes of this division (5),
GARAGE KEEPER is an operator of a parking place or establishment, an operator
of a motor vehicle storage facility, or an operator of an establishment for
the servicing, repair or maintenance of motor vehicles.



      (6)   Public sale.



         (a)   An abandoned motor vehicle and contents taken into
custody and not reclaimed under subsection (5) of this subsection shall be
sold to the highest bidder at public auction or sale, following one published
notice published at least 7 days prior to such auction or sale. The purchaser
shall be given a receipt in a form prescribed by the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles which shall be sufficient title to dispose of the vehicle. The
receipt shall also entitle the purchaser to register the vehicle and receive
a certificate of title, free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership.
Before such a vehicle is issued a new certificate of title, it must receive a
motor vehicle safety check.



         (b)   From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned
motor vehicle, the city shall reimburse itself for the cost of towing,
preserving and storing the vehicle, and all administrative, notice and
publication costs incurred pursuant to this subsection. Any remainder from
the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or entitled
lien holder for 90 days and then shall be deposited in the  General Fund of
the city.



      (7)   Disposal of vehicles not sold. Where no bid has been
received for an abandoned motor vehicle, the city may dispose of it in
accordance with this subsection.



      (8)   Contracts and disposal.



         (a)   The city may contract with any qualified person
for collection, storage, incineration, volume reduction, transportation or
other services necessary to prepare abandoned motor vehicles and other scrap
metal for recycling or other methods of disposal.



         (b)   Where the city enters into a contract with a
person duly licensed by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, the Agency
shall review the contract to determine whether it conforms to the Agency's
plan for solid waste disposal. A contract that does so conform may be
approved by the Agency. Where the city enters into a contract with a person
duly authorized by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, the Agency shall
review the contract to determine whether it conforms to the Agency's plan for
solid waste disposal for the purpose of obtaining reimbursement.



         (c)   If the city utilizes its own equipment and
personnel for disposal of the abandoned motor vehicle, it shall be entitled
to reimbursement for the cost thereof along with its other costs as herein
provided.



   (B)   Disposal of unclaimed property.



      (1)   The term ABANDONED PROPERTY means tangible or intangible
property that has lawfully come into the possession of the city in the course
of municipal operations, remains unclaimed by the owner, and has been in the
possession of the city for at least 60 days and has been declared such by
action of the Council.



      (2)   In the event the property has been in the possession of
the municipality for a period of at least 60 days, the city may provide for
disposal of same by a private sale through a nonprofit organization that has
a significant mission of community service.



      (3)   The city may also provide for sale by private auction
and in the event such a public auction is to be held, the city shall give at
least 10 days published notice describing the specific property found or
recovered and to be sold and specifying the time and place of the sale. The
notice of sale must be published at least once in a legal newspaper published
within Nicollet County, Minnesota.



      (4)   Any funds received through either public or private sale
shall be designated to the General Fund. Should at any time within 6 months
of the date of sale, the owner of any unclaimed property which has been the
subject of a sale, apply and provide satisfactory proof of ownership, then
such proceeds received from the sale shall be paid over to the former owner.
All sales to individuals shall be absolute and final upon sale. The right to
the proceeds from the sale shall be absolute to the city 6 months after the
date of sale.



   (C)   Disposal of excess property.



      (1)   Declaration of surplus and authorizing sale of property.
The City Administrator may, from time to time, recommend to the Council that
certain personal property (chattels) owned by the city is no longer needed
for a municipal purpose and should be sold. By action of the Council, said
property shall be declared surplus, the value estimated and the City
Administrator authorized to dispose of said property in the manner stated
herein.



      (2)   Surplus property worth a total estimated value of less
than $500. The City Administrator may sell surplus property with a total
value of less than $500 through negotiated sale.



      (3)   Surplus property with a total estimated value between
$500 and $1,000. The City Administrator shall offer for public sale, to the
highest bidder, surplus property with a total estimated value of from $500 to
$1,000. Notice of such public sale shall be given stating time and place of
sale and generally describing the property to be sold at least 10 days prior
to the date of sale either by publication once in the official newspaper, or
by posting in a conspicuous place in the City Hall at the City
Administrator's option. Such sale shall be by auction.



      (4)   Surplus property with a total estimated value
over$1,000. The City Administrator shall offer for public sale, to the
highest bidder, surplus property worth a total estimated value over $1,000.
Notice of such public sale shall be given stating time and place of sale and
generally describing property to be sold at least 10 days prior to the date
of sale by publication once in the official newspaper. Such sale shall be to
the person submitting the highest sealed bid.



      (5)   Receipts from sales of surplus property. All receipts
from sales of surplus property under this section shall be placed in the
General Fund.



(1975 Code, § 2.60)  (Am. Ord. 152, passed 9-5-1995)



§ 90.244  RESTRICTIONS ON CITY EMPLOYEES.



   No employee of the city, Council member or advisor serving the city in
a professional capacity may be a purchaser of property auctioned by the city
under this section.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 90.999  PENALTY.



   Unless otherwise declared in this chapter with respect to a particular
offense, it is a petty misdemeanor for any person to violate any provision of
this chapter. However, the following violations shall be considered a
misdemeanor:



   (A)   A violation which is committed in a manner or under
circumstances so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or
property;



   (B)   A violation which is preceded by 2 or more convictions within
the preceding 12 month period. However, this provision shall not apply to
parking violations.



CHAPTER 91: ANIMALS



Section



   91.01   Definitions



   91.02   Dogs and cats



   91.03   Non-domestic animals



   91.04   Farm animals



   91.05   Impounding



   91.06   Kennels



   91.07   Birds



   91.08   Nuisances



   91.09   Seizure of animals



   91.10   Animals presenting a danger to health and safety of city



   91.11   Diseased animals



   91.12   Dangerous animals



   91.13   Dangerous animal requirements



   91.14   Basic care



   91.15   Breeding moratorium



   91.16   Enforcing officer



   91.17   Pound



   91.18   Interference with officers



   91.19   Prohibition on supplemental deer feeding



 



   91.99   Penalty



§ 91.01  DEFINITIONS. 



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL.  Any mammal, reptile, amphibian, fish, bird (including all
fowl and poultry) or other member commonly accepted as a part of the animal
kingdom.  Animals shall be classified as follows:



      (1)   DOMESTIC ANIMALS.  Those animals commonly accepted as
domesticated household pets.  Unless otherwise defined, domestic animals
shall include dogs, cats, caged birds, gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs,
domesticated rabbits, fish, non-poisonous, non-venomous and non-constricting
reptiles or amphibians, and other similar animals.



      (2)    FARM ANIMALS.  Those animals commonly associated with
a farm or performing work in an agricultural setting.  Unless otherwise
defined, farm animals shall include members of the equine family (horses,
mules), bovine family (cows, bulls), sheep, poultry (chickens, turkeys), fowl
(ducks, geese), swine (including Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs), goats, bees,
and other animals associated with a farm, ranch, or stable.



      (3)   NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS.  Those animals commonly
considered to be naturally wild and not naturally trained or domesticated, or
which are commonly considered to be inherently dangerous to the health,
safety, and welfare of  people.  Unless otherwise defined, non-domestic
animals shall include:



         (a)   Any member of the large cat family (family
felidae) including lions, tigers, cougars, bobcats, leopards and jaguars, but
excluding commonly accepted domesticated house cats.



         (b)   Any naturally wild member of the canine family
(family canidae) including wolves, foxes, coyotes, dingoes, and jackals, but
excluding commonly accepted domesticated dogs.



         (c)   Any crossbreeds such as the crossbreed between a
wolf and a dog, unless the crossbreed is commonly accepted as a domesticated
house pet.



         (d)   Any member or relative of the rodent family
including any skunk (whether or not descented), raccoon, squirrel, or ferret,
but excluding those members otherwise defined or commonly accepted as
domesticated pets.



         (e)   Any poisonous, venomous, constricting, or
inherently dangerous member of the reptile or amphibian families including
rattlesnakes, boa constrictors, pit vipers, crocodiles and alligators.



         (f)   Any other animal which is not explicitly listed
above but which can be reasonably defined by the terms of this section,
including but not limited to bears, deer, monkeys and game fish.



   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.  The Police Chief or his or her designee.



   AT LARGE.  Off the premises of the owner and not under the custody and
control of the owner or other person, either by leash, cord, chain, or
otherwise restrained or confined.



   CAT.  Both the male and female of the felidae species commonly
accepted as domesticated household pets.



   DOG.  Both the male and female of the canine species, commonly
accepted as domesticated household pets, and other domesticated animals of a
dog kind.



   OWNER.  Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation
owning, keeping, or harboring an animal.



   RELEASE PERMIT.  A permit issued by the Animal Control Officer or
other person in charge of the pound for the release of any animal that has
been taken to the pound.  A release permit may be obtained upon payment of a
fee to the City Clerk in accordance with the regular license requirement if
the animal is unlicensed, payment of a release fee, and any maintenance costs
incurred in capturing and impounding the animal.  The release fee shall be
as established in the Resolution Setting Fees and Charges adopted by the City
Council.



(Am. Ord. 63, 4th Series, passed 1-5-2015)



§ 91.02  DOGS AND CATS.



   (A)   Running at large prohibited.  It shall be unlawful for the
dog or cat of any person who owns, harbors, or keeps a dog or cat, to run at
large. A person, who owns, harbors, or keeps a dog or cat which runs at large
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Dogs or cats on a leash and accompanied by
a responsible person so as to be effectively restrained by leash, not to
exceed 6 feet in length, shall be permitted in streets or on public land
unless the city has posted an area with signs reading “Dogs or Cats
Prohibited.” Leashes shall be non-retractable.



   (B)   License required.



      (1)   All dogs over the age of 6 months kept, harbored, or
maintained by their owners in the city, shall be licensed and registered with
the city. Dog licenses shall be issued by the City Clerk upon payment of the
license fee as established in the Resolution Setting Fees and Charges adopted
by the City Council.



      (2)   It shall be the duty of each owner of a dog subject to
this section to pay to the City Clerk the license fee established in the
Resolution Setting Fees and Charges adopted by the City Council.



      (3)   Upon payment of the license fee as established by the
Resolution Setting Fees and Charges adopted by the City Council, the Clerk
shall issue to the owner a license certificate and metallic tag for each dog
licensed. The tag shall have stamped on it the year for which it is issued
and the number corresponding with the number on the certificate. Every owner
shall be required to provide each dog with a collar to which the license tag
must be affixed, and shall see that the collar and tag are constantly worn.
In case a dog tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate shall be issued by the
City Clerk.  A charge shall be made for each duplicate tag in an amount
established in the Resolution Setting Fees and Charges adopted by the City
Council.  Dog tags shall not be transferable from one dog to another and no
refunds shall be made on any dog license fee or tag because of death of a dog
or the owner leaving the city before the expiration of the license period.



      (4)   The licensing provisions of this division (B) shall not
apply to dogs whose owners are nonresidents temporarily within the city, nor
to dogs brought into the city for the purpose of participating in any dog
show.  If the animal owned is a service animal which is capable of being
properly identified as from a recognized school for seeing eye, hearing ear,
service or guide animals, and the owner is a blind or deaf person, or a
person with physical or sensory disabilities, then no license shall be
required.



      (5)   The funds received by the City Clerk from all dog
license and metallic tag fees as established by the Resolution Setting Fees
and Charges adopted by the City Council, shall first be used to defray any
costs incidental to the enforcement of this chapter; including, but not
restricted to, the costs of licenses, metallic tags, and impounding and
maintenance of the dogs.



   (C)   Cats.  Cats shall be included as controlled by this
division  insofar as running-at-large, pickup, impounding, boarding,
licensing and proof of anti-rabies vaccine is concerned. All other provisions
of this section shall also apply to cats unless otherwise provided.



   (D)   Vaccination.



      (1)   All dogs and cats kept harbored, maintained, or
transported within the city shall be vaccinated at least once every 3 years
by a licensed veterinarian for:



         (a)   Rabies; and



         (b)   Distemper.



      (2)   A certificate of vaccination must be kept on which is
stated the date of vaccination, owner's name and address, the animal's name
(if applicable), sex, description and weight, the type of vaccine, and the
veterinarian's signature. Upon demand made by the City Clerk, the Animal
Control Officer or a police officer, the owner shall present for examination
the required certificate(s) of vaccination for the animal(s). In cases where
certificates are not presented, the owner or keeper of the animal(s) shall
have 7 days in which to present the certificate(s) to the City Clerk or
officer. Failure to do so shall be deemed a violation of this section.



(Am. Ord. 17, 4th Series, passed 1-17-2008; Am. Ord. 63, 4th Series, passed
1-5-2015)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.03  NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS. 



   It shall be illegal for any person to own, possess, harbor, or offer
for sale, any non-domestic animal within the city.  Any owner of a
non-domestic animal at the time of adoption of this code shall have 30 days
in which to remove the animal from the city after which time the city may
impound the animal as provided for in this section.  An exception shall be
made to this prohibition for animals specifically trained for and actually
providing assistance to the handicapped or disabled, and for those animals
brought into the city as part of an operating zoo, veterinarian clinic,
scientific research laboratory, or a licensed show or exhibition.



Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.04  FARM ANIMALS. 



   (A)   Except in an RA zone, it is a public nuisance to keep farm
livestock or fowl, such as cattle, horses, mules, donkeys, sheep, goats,
hogs, chickens, ducks, geese, or any other animal generally described as a
farm animal. The term "keep" means to house, protect, feed, own or otherwise
care for the farm animal.



   (B)   If the owner or possessor of land is keeping animals
constituting a public nuisance under this subdivision on the date such land
is annexed into the city, then such nuisance shall be terminated within one
year from the date of annexation of such land. However, if such use
constitutes a significant threat to public health, then such use shall be
immediately terminated without regard to the passage of such period of time.



(Am. Ord. 102, 4th series, passed 4-2-2018)



§ 91.05  IMPOUNDING.



   (A)   Running at large.  Any unlicensed animal running at large is
hereby declared a public nuisance.  Any Animal Control Officer or police
officer may impound any dog or other animal found unlicensed or any animal
found running at large and shall give notice of the impounding to the owner
of the dog or other animal, if known.  The Animal Control Officer or police
officer shall not enter the property of the owner of an animal found running
at large or the owner of an unlicensed animal unless the officer has first
obtained the permission of the owner to do so or has obtained a warrant
issued by a court of competent jurisdiction to search for and seize the
animal.  In case the owner is unknown, the officer shall post notice at the
city office that if the dog or other animal  is not claimed within the time
specified in division (C) of this section, it will be sold or otherwise
disposed of. Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be
unlawful to kill, destroy, or otherwise cause injury to any animal, including
dogs and cats running at large.



   (B)   Biting animals.    Any animal that has not been inoculated
by a live modified rabies vaccine and which has bitten any person, wherein
the skin has been punctured or the services of a doctor are required, shall
be confined in the city pound for a period of not less than 10 days, at the
expense of the owner.  The animal may be released at the end of the time if
healthy and free from symptoms of rabies, and by the payment of all costs by
the owner.  However, if the owner of the animal shall elect immediately upon
receipt of notice of need for the confinement by the officer to voluntarily
and immediately confine the animal for the required period of time in a
veterinary hospital of the owner's choosing, within a 15 mile radius of this
city, and provide immediate proof of confinement in the manner as may be
required, the owner may do so.  If, however, the animal has been inoculated
with a live modified rabies vaccine and the owner has proof of the
vaccination by a certificate from a licensed veterinarian, the owner may
confine the dog or other animal to the owner's property.



   (C)   Reclaiming.  All animals conveyed to the pound shall be kept,
with humane treatment and sufficient food and water for their comfort, at
least five regular business days, unless the animal is a dangerous animal as
defined under § 91.11 in which case it shall be kept for seven regular
business days or the times specified in § 91.11, and except if the animal is
a cruelly-treated animal in which case it shall be kept for ten regular
business days, unless sooner reclaimed by their owners or keepers as provided
by this section. In case the owner or keeper shall desire to reclaim the
animal from the pound, the following shall be required, unless otherwise
provided for in this code or established from time to time by resolution of
the City Council:



      (1)   Payment of the release fee and receipt of a release
permit as established by the city, as that may be amended from time to time.



      (2)    Payment of maintenance costs, as provided by the pound,
per day or any part of day while animal is in the pound; and



      (3)   If a dog is unlicensed, payment of a regular license fee
as established by the Resolution Setting Fees and Charges adopted by the City
Council, and valid certificate of vaccination for rabies and distemper shots
is required.



   (D)   Unclaimed animals.  At the expiration of the times
established in division (C) of this section, if the animal has not been
reclaimed in accordance with the provisions of this section, the officer
appointed to enforce this section may let any person claim the animal by
complying with all provisions in this section. Any money collected under this
section shall be payable to the City Clerk.



(Am. Ord. 43, 4th Series, passed 1-17-2012; Am. Ord. 63, 4th Series, passed
1-5-2015)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.06  KENNELS.



   (A)   Definition of kennel. The keeping of 4 or more dogs or 4 or
more cats on the same premises, whether owned by the same person or not and
for whatever purpose kept, shall constitute a “kennel;” except that a
fresh litter of pups or kittens may be kept for a period of three months
before that keeping shall be deemed to be a “kennel.”



   (B)   Kennel as a nuisance.  Because the keeping of 4 or more dogs
or 4 or more cats on the same premises is subject to great abuse, causing
discomfort to persons in the area by way of smell, noise, hazard, and general
aesthetic depreciation, the keeping of 4 or more dogs or 4 or more cats on
the premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and no person shall keep or
maintain a kennel within the city. 



Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.07  BIRDS.



   The keeping of 4 or more birds on the same premises, whether owned by
the same person or not and for whatever purpose, is prohibited.



§ 91.08  NUISANCES.



   (A)   Habitual barking.  It shall be unlawful for any person to
keep or harbor a dog which habitually barks or cries.  Habitual barking
shall be defined as barking for repeated intervals of at least five minutes
with less than one minute of interruption.  The barking must also be audible
off of the owner's or caretaker's premises.



   (B)   Damage to property.  It shall be unlawful for any person's
dog or other animal to damage any lawn, garden, or other property, whether or
not the owner has knowledge of the damage.



   (C)   Cleaning up litter.  The owner of any animal or person having
the custody or control of any animal shall be responsible for cleaning up any
feces of the animal and disposing of the feces in a sanitary manner whether
on their own property, on the property of others or on public property.



   (D)   Warrant required.  The Animal Control Officer or police
officer shall not enter the property of the owner of an animal described in
this section unless the officer has first obtained the permission of the
owner to do so or has obtained a warrant issued by a court of competent
jurisdiction to search for and seize the animal.



   (E)   Other.  Any animals kept contrary to this section are subject
to impoundment as provided in § 91.05.



Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.09  SEIZURE OF ANIMALS.



   Any police officer or Animal Control Officer may enter upon private
property and seize any animal with the permission of the owner of the
property, if that person is also the owner of the animal, provided that the
following exist:



   (A)   There is an identified complainant other than the police
officer or Animal Control Officer making a contemporaneous complaint about
the animal;



   (B)   The officer reasonably believes that the animal meets either
the barking dog criteria set out in § 91.07(A); the criteria for cruelty set
out in § 91.13; or the criteria for an at large animal set out in §
91.01(E);



   (C)   The officer can demonstrate that there has been at least one
previous complaint of a barking dog; inhumane treatment of the animal; or
that the animal was at large at this address on a prior date;



   (D)   The officer has made a reasonable attempt to contact the owner
of the animal and the property to be entered and those attempts have either
failed or have been ignored;



   (E)   The Animal Control Officer or police officer shall not enter
the property of the owner of an animal described in this section unless the
officer has first obtained the permission of the owner to do so or has
obtained a warrant issued by a court of competent jurisdiction to search for
and seize the animal.  If the officer has the permission of the owner, a
property manager, landlord, innkeeper, or other authorized person to enter
the property or has obtained a pass key from a property manager, landlord,
innkeeper, or other authorized person to have that key shall not be
considered unauthorized entry, and a warrant to search for and seize the
animal need not be obtained; and



   (F)   Written notice of the seizure is left in a conspicuous place
if personal contact with the owner of the animal is not possible.



§ 91.10  ANIMALS PRESENTING A DANGER TO HEALTH AND SAFETY OF CITY.



   If, in the reasonable belief of any person or the Animal Control
Officer or police officer, an animal presents an immediate danger to the
health and safety of any person, or the animal is threatening imminent harm
to any person, or the animal is in the process of attacking any person, the
person or officer may destroy the animal in a proper and humane manner
whether or not the animal is on the property of its owner.  Otherwise, the
person or officer may apprehend the animal and deliver it to the pound for
confinement under § 91.05. If the animal is destroyed, the owner or keeper
of the animal destroyed shall be liable to the city for the cost of
maintaining and disposing of the animal, plus the costs of any veterinarian
examination. If the animal is found not to be a danger to the health and
safety of the city, it may be released to the owner or keeper in accordance
with § 91.05(C).



§ 91.11  DISEASED ANIMALS.



   (A)   Running at large.  No person shall keep or allow to be kept
on his or her premises, or on premises occupied by them, nor permit to run at
large in the city, any animal which is diseased so as to be a danger to the
health and safety of the city, even though the animal be properly licensed
under this section, and a warrant to search for and seize the animal is not
required.



   (B)   Confinement.  Any animal reasonably suspected of being
diseased and presenting a threat to the health and safety of the public, may
be apprehended and confined in the pound by any person, the Animal Control
Officer or a police officer. The officer shall have a qualified veterinarian
examine the animal. If the animal is found to be diseased in a manner so as
to be a danger to the health and safety of the city, the officer shall cause
the animal to be painlessly killed and shall properly dispose of the remains.
The owner or keeper of the animal killed under this section shall be liable
to the city for the cost of maintaining and disposing of the animal, plus the
costs of any veterinarian examinations.



   (C)   Release.  If the animal, upon examination, is not found to be
diseased the animal shall be released to the owner or keeper free of charge.



Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.12  DANGEROUS ANIMALS.



   (A)   Attack by an animal.  It shall be unlawful for any person's
animal to inflict or attempt to inflict bodily injury to any person or other
animal whether or not the owner is present. This section shall not apply to
an attack by a dog under the control of an on-duty law enforcement officer or
to an attack upon an uninvited intruder who has entered the owner’s home
with criminal intent.



   (B)   Destruction of dangerous animal.  The Animal Control Officer
shall have the authority to order the destruction of dangerous animals in
accordance with the terms established by this chapter.



   (C)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this division, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      (1)   DANGEROUS ANIMAL.  An animal which has:



         (a)   Caused bodily injury or disfigurement to any
person on public or private property;



         (b)   Engaged in any attack on any person under
circumstances which would indicate danger to personal safety;



         (c)   Exhibited unusually aggressive behavior, such as
an attack on another animal;



         (d)   Bitten one or more persons on two or more
occasions; or



         (e)   Been found to be potentially dangerous and/or the
owner has personal knowledge of the same, the animal aggressively bites,
attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals.



      (2)   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMAL. An animal which has:



         (a)   Bitten a human or a domestic animal on public or
private property;



         (b)   When unprovoked, chased or approached a person
upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public property in an apparent attitude
of attack; or



         (c)   Has engaged in unprovoked attacks causing injury
or otherwise threatening the safety of humans or domestic animals.



      (3)   PROPER ENCLOSURE. Securely confined indoors or in a
securely locked pen or structure suitable to prevent the animal from escaping
and to provide protection for the animal from the elements. A proper
enclosure does not include a porch, patio, or any part of a house, garage, or
other structure that would allow the animal to exit of its own volition, or
any house or structure in which windows are open or in which door or window
screens are the only barriers which prevent the animal from exiting. The
enclosure shall not allow the egress of the animal in any manner without
human assistance. A pen or kennel shall meet the following minimum
specifications:



         (a)   Have a minimum overall floor size of 32 square
feet.



         (b)   Sidewalls shall have a minimum height of five feet
and be constructed of 11-gauge or heavier wire. Openings in the wire shall
not exceed two inches, support posts shall be 1¼-inch or larger steel pipe
buried in the ground 18 inches or more. When a concrete floor is not
provided, the sidewalls shall be buried a minimum of 18 inches in the ground.



         (c)   A cover over the entire pen or kennel shall be
provided. The cover shall be constructed of the same gauge wire or heavier as
the sidewalls and shall also have no openings in the wire greater than two
inches.



         (d)   An entrance/exit gate shall be provided and be
constructed of the same material as the sidewalls and shall also have no
openings in the wire greater than two inches. The gate shall be equipped with
a device capable of being locked and shall be locked at all times when the
animal is in the pen or kennel.



      (4)   UNPROVOKED. The condition in which the animal is not
purposely excited, stimulated, agitated or disturbed.



   (D)   Designation as potentially dangerous animal. The Animal
Control Officer shall designate any animal as a potentially dangerous animal
upon receiving evidence that the potentially dangerous animal has, when
unprovoked, then bitten, attacked, or threatened the safety of a person or a
domestic animal as stated in division (C)(2). When an animal is declared
potentially dangerous, the Animal Control Officer shall cause one owner of
the potentially dangerous animal to be notified in writing that the animal is
potentially dangerous.



   (E)   Evidence justifying designation. The Animal Control Officer
shall have the authority to designate any animal as a dangerous animal upon
receiving evidence of the following:



      (1)   That the animal has, when unprovoked, bitten, attacked,
or threatened the safety of a person or domestic animal as stated in division
(C)(1).



      (2)   That the animal has been declared potentially dangerous
and the animal has then bitten, attacked, or threatened the safety of a
person or domestic animal as stated in division (C)(1).



   (F)   Authority to order destruction. The Animal Control Officer,
upon finding that an animal is dangerous hereunder, is authorized to order,
as part of the disposition of the case, that the animal be destroyed based on
a written order containing one or more of the following findings of fact:



      (1)   The animal is dangerous as demonstrated by a vicious
attack, an unprovoked attack, an attack without warning or multiple attacks;
or



      (2)   The owner of the animal has demonstrated an inability or
unwillingness to control the animal in order to prevent injury to persons or
other animals.



   (G)   Procedure. The Animal Control Officer, after having determined
that an animal is dangerous, may proceed in the following manner:  The
Animal Control Officer shall cause one owner of the animal to be notified in
writing or in person that the animal is dangerous and may order the animal
seized or make orders as deemed proper. This owner shall be notified as to
dates, times, places and parties bitten, and shall be given 14 days to appeal
this order by requesting a hearing before the City Council for a review of
this determination.



      (1)   If no appeal is filed, the Animal Control Officer shall
obtain an order or warrant authorizing the seizure and the destruction of the
animal from a court of competent jurisdiction, unless the animal is already
in custody or the owner consents to the seizure and destruction of the animal.



      (2)   If an owner requests a hearing for determination as to
the dangerous nature of the animal, the hearing shall be held before the City
Council, which shall set a date for hearing not more than three weeks after
demand for the hearing. The records of the Animal Control or City Clerk’s
office shall be admissible for consideration by the Animal Control Officer
without further foundation. After considering all evidence pertaining to the
temperament of the animal, the City Council shall make an order as it deems
proper. The City Council may order that the Animal Control Officer take the
animal into custody for destruction, if the animal is not currently in
custody. If the animal is ordered into custody for destruction, the owner
shall immediately make the animal available to the Animal Control Officer. 
If the owner does not immediately make the animal available, the Animal
Control Officer shall obtain an order or warrant authorizing the seizure and
the destruction of the animal from a court of competent jurisdiction.



      (3)   No person  shall harbor an animal after it has been
found by to be dangerous and ordered into custody for destruction.



   (H)   Stopping an attack. If any police officer or Animal Control
Officer is witness to an attack by an animal upon a person or another animal,
the officer may take whatever means the officer deems appropriate to bring
the attack to an end and prevent further injury to the victim.



   (I)   Notification of new address. The owner of an animal which has
been identified as dangerous or potentially dangerous shall notify the Animal
Control Officer in writing if the animal is to be relocated from its current
address or given or sold to another person. The notification shall be given
in writing at least 14 days prior to the relocation or transfer of ownership.
The notification shall include the current owner's name and address, the
relocation address, and the name of the new owner, if any.



Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.13  DANGEROUS ANIMAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Requirements. If the City Council does not order the
destruction of an animal that has been declared dangerous, the City Council
may, as an alternative, order any or all of the following:



      (1)   That the owner provide and maintain a proper enclosure
for the dangerous animal as specified in § 91.11(C)(3);



      (2)   Post the front and the rear of the premises with clearly
visible warning signs, including a warning symbol to inform children, that
there is a dangerous animal on the property as specified in M.S. § 347.51 as
may be amended from time to time;



      (3)   Provide and show proof annually of public liability
insurance in the minimum amount of $300,000;



      (4)   If the animal is a dog and is outside the proper
enclosure, the dog must be muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or
leash (not to exceed six feet in length) and under the physical restraint of
a person 16 years of age or older. The muzzle must be of a design as to
prevent the dog from biting any person or animal, but will not cause injury
to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration;



      (5)   If the animal is a dog, it must have an easily
identifiable, standardized tag identifying the dog as dangerous affixed to
its collar at all times as specified in M.S. § 347.51 as it may be amended
from time to time, and shall have a microchip implant as provided by M.S. §
347.151, as it may be amended from time to time;



      (6)   All animals deemed dangerous by the Animal Control
Officer shall be registered with the county in which this city is located
within 14 days after the date the animal was so deemed and provide
satisfactory proof thereof to the Animal Control Officer.



      (7)   If the animal is a dog, the dog must be licensed and up
to date on rabies vaccination. If the animal is a cat or ferret, it must be
up to date with rabies vaccination.



   (B)   Seizure. As authorized by M.S. § 347.54, as it may be amended
from time to time, the Animal Control Officer shall immediately seize any
dangerous animal if the owner does not meet each of the above requirements
within 14 days after the date notice is sent to the owner that the animal is
dangerous. Seizure may be appealed to district court by serving a summons and
petition upon the city and filing it with the district court.



   (C)   Reclaiming animals. A dangerous animal seized under §
91.12(B),  may be reclaimed by the owner of the animal upon payment of
impounding and boarding fees and presenting proof to animal control that each
of the requirements under § 91.12(B), is fulfilled. An animal not reclaimed
under this section within 14 days may be disposed of as provided under §
91.11(F), and the owner is liable to the city for costs incurred in confining
and impounding the animal.



   (D)   Subsequent offenses. If an owner of an animal has subsequently
violated the provisions under § 91.11 with the same animal, the animal must
be seized by animal control. The owner may request a hearing as defined in §
91.11(F). If the owner is found to have violated the provisions for which the
animal was seized, the Animal Control Officer shall order the animal
destroyed in a proper and humane manner and the owner shall pay the costs of
confining the animal. If the person is found not to have violated the
provisions for which the animal was seized, the owner may reclaim the animal
under the provisions of § 91.12(C). If the animal is not yet reclaimed by
the owner within 14 days after the date the owner is notified that the animal
may be reclaimed, the animal may be disposed of as provided under § 91.11(F)
and the owner is liable to the animal control for the costs incurred in
confining, impounding and disposing of the animal.



§ 91.14  BASIC CARE.



   All animals shall receive from their owners or keepers kind treatment,
housing in the winter, and sufficient food and water for their comfort. Any
person not treating their pet in a humane manner will be subject to the
penalties provided in this section.



§ 91.15  BREEDING MORATORIUM.



   Every female dog or female cat in heat shall be confined in a building
or other enclosure in a manner that it cannot come in contact with another
dog or cat except for planned breeding.  Upon capture and failure to reclaim
the animal, every dog or cat shall be neutered or spayed prior to being
transferred to a new owner.



§ 91.16  ENFORCING OFFICER.



   The Council is hereby authorized to appoint an animal control
officer(s) to enforce the provisions of this section. In the officer's duty
of enforcing the provisions of this section, he or she may from time to time,
with the consent of the City Council, designate assistants.



§ 91.17  POUND.



   Every year the Council shall designate an official pound to which
animals found in violation of this chapter shall be taken for safe treatment,
and if necessary, for destruction.



§ 91.18  INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICERS.



   No person shall in any manner molest, hinder, or interfere with any
person authorized by the City Council to capture dogs, cats or other animals
and convey them to the pound while engaged in that operation.  Nor shall any
unauthorized person break open the pound, or attempt to do so, or take or
attempt to take from any agent any animal taken up by him or her in
compliance with this chapter, or in any other manner to interfere with or
hinder the officer in the discharge of his or her duties under this chapter.



Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.19  PROHIBITION ON SUPPLEMENTAL DEER FEEDING.



   (A)   Findings. It is hereby determined that an increasing
population of deer within the city poses a threat to public safety by:



      (1)   Increasing the likelihood of deer-vehicle collisions;



      (2)   Contributing to the transmission of diseases to humans
from deer;



      (3)   Posing a threat to native and ornamental plants and
animal life by excessive foraging which disturbs natural ecological balances;



      (4)   Posing a threat to the quality of life by deer-related
damage to landscaping and vegetable gardens;



   (B)   Purpose. Prohibition on supplemental deerfeeding, which
results in unnatural concentrations of deer and can affect the normal
movement of deer within the community.



   (C)   Prohibition. No resident may place or permit to be placed on
the ground, or within five feet of the ground surface any grain, salt licks,
fruit, vegetables, nuts, seeds, hay or other edible materials which may
reasonably be expected to intentionally result in deer feeding, unless such
items are screened or protected in a manner that prevents deer from feeding
on them. Living fruit trees and other live vegetation shall not be considered
as supplemental deer feeding.



   (D)   Exemptions from provisions.



      (1)   Veterinarians, city animal control officials or county,
state or federal game officials who are in the course of their duties and
have deer in their custody or under their management.



      (2)   Persons are feeding birds using self-enclosed feeding
devices or containers.



      (3)   The use of straw, hay or straw-related materials for
erosion control, mulching, gardening or other landscape purposes.



      (4)   Persons are maintaining a compost pile that is screened
or protected to prevent deer from foraging.



(Ord. 87, 4th series, passed 3-6-2017)



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Separate offenses.  Each day a violation of this chapter is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable under this section.



   (B)   Misdemeanor.  Unless otherwise provided, violation of this
chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as provided in § 10.99.



   (C)   Petty misdemeanor.  Violations of §§ 91.02, 91.07, 91.13
and 91.14 are petty misdemeanors punishable as provided in § 10.99.



CHAPTER 92: HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES



Section



General Provisions



   92.01   Assessable current services



   92.02   Tree diseases



Nuisances



   92.15   Public nuisance



   92.16   Public nuisances affecting health



   92.17   Public nuisances affecting morals and decency



   92.18   Public nuisances affecting peace and safety



   92.19   Nuisance parking and storage



   92.20   Inoperable motor vehicles



   92.21   Building maintenance and appearance



   92.22   Duties of city officers



   92.23   Abatement



   92.24   Recovery of cost



Open Burning



   92.60   Definitions



   92.61   Prohibited materials



   92.62   Permit required for open burning



   92.63   Purposes allowed for open burning



   92.64   Permit application for open burning; permit fees



   92.65   Permit process for open burning



   92.66   Permit holder responsibility



   92.67   Revocation of open burning permit



   92.68   Denial of open burning permit



   92.69   Burning ban or air quality alert



   92.70   Rules and laws adopted by reference



   92.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 92.01  ASSESSABLE CURRENT SERVICES.



   (A)   Definition.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CURRENT SERVICE.  Shall mean one or more of the following: snow,
ice, or rubbish removal from sidewalks; weed elimination from street grass
plots adjacent to sidewalks or from private property; removal or elimination
of public health or safety hazards from private property, excluding any
hazardous building included in M.S. §§ 463.15 through 463.26 as they may
amended from time to time; installation or repair of water service lines;
street sprinkling, street flushing, light street oiling, or other dust
treatment of streets; repair of sidewalks and alleys; trimming and care of
trees and removal of unsound and insect-infected trees from the public
streets or private property; and the operation of a street lighting system.



   (B)   Snow, ice, dirt and rubbish.



      (1)   Duty of owners and occupants.  The owner and the
occupant of any property adjacent to a public sidewalk shall use diligence to
keep the walk safe for pedestrians.  No owner or occupant shall allow snow,
ice, dirt or rubbish to remain on the walk longer than 48 hours after its
deposit thereon.  Failure to comply with this section shall constitute a
violation.



      (2)   Removal by city.  The City Clerk or other person
designated by the City Council may cause removal from all public sidewalks
all snow, ice, dirt and rubbish as soon as possible beginning 48 hours after
any matter has been deposited thereon or after the snow has ceased to fall. 
The City Clerk or other designated person shall keep a record showing the
cost of removal adjacent to each separate lot and parcel.



   (C)   Public health and safety hazards.  When the city removes or
eliminates public health or safety hazards from private property under the
following provisions of this chapter, the administrative officer responsible
for doing the work shall keep a record of the cost of the removal or
elimination against each parcel of property affected and annually deliver
that information to the City Clerk.



   (D)   Installation and repair of water service lines.  Whenever the
city installs or repairs water service lines serving private property under
Chapter 52 of this code, the City Clerk shall keep a record of the total cost
of the installation or repair against the property.



   (E)   Repair of sidewalks and alleys.



      (1)   Duty of owner.  The owner of any property within the
city abutting a public sidewalk or alley shall keep the sidewalk or alley in
repair and safe for pedestrians.  Repairs shall be made in accordance with
the standard specifications approved by the City Council and on file in the
office of the City Clerk.



      (2)   Inspections; notice.  The City Council or its designee
shall make inspections as are necessary to determine that public sidewalks
and alleys within the city are kept in repair and safe for pedestrians or
vehicles.  If it is found that any sidewalk or alley abutting on private
property is unsafe and in need of repairs, the City Council shall cause a
notice to be served, by registered or certified mail or by personal service,
upon the record owner of the property, ordering the owner to have the
sidewalk or alley repaired and made safe within 30 days and stating that if
the owner fails to do so, the city will do so and that the expense thereof
must be paid by the owner, and if unpaid it will be made a special assessment
against the property concerned.



      (3)   Repair by city.  If the sidewalk or alley is not
repaired within 30 days after receipt of the notice, the City Clerk shall
report the facts to the City Council and the City Council shall by resolution
order the work done by contract in accordance with law.  No person shall
enter private property to repair a sidewalk, except with the permission of
the owner or after obtaining an administrative warrant. The City Clerk shall
keep a record of the total cost of the repair attributable to each lot or
parcel of property.



   (F)   Personal liability.  The owner of property on which or
adjacent to which a current service has been performed shall be personally
liable for the cost of the service.  As soon as the service has been
completed and the cost determined, the City Clerk, or other designated
official, shall prepare a bill and mail it to the owner and thereupon the
amount shall be immediately due and payable at the office of the City Clerk.



   (G)   Damage to public property.  Any person driving any vehicle,
equipment, object or contrivance upon any street, road, highway or structure
shall be liable for all damages which the surface or structure thereof may
sustain as a result of any illegal operation, or driving or moving of the
vehicle, equipment or object or contrivance; or as a result of operating,
driving or moving any vehicle, equipment, object or contrivance weighing in
excess of the maximum weight permitted by statute or this code.  When the
driver is not the owner of the vehicle, equipment, object or contrivance, but
is operating, driving or moving it with the express or implied permission of
the owner, then the owner and the driver shall be jointly and severally
liable for any such damage.  Any person who willfully acts or fails to
exercise due care and by that act damages any public property shall be liable
for the amount thereof, which amount shall be collectable by action or as a
lien under M.S. § 514.67, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (H)   Assessment.  On or before October 31 of each year, the City
Clerk shall list the total unpaid charges for each type of current service
and charges under this section against each separate lot or parcel to which
they are attributable under this section.  The City Council may then spread
the charges against property benefitted as a special assessment under the
authority of M.S. § 429.101 as it may be amended from time to time and other
pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor and collection
along with current taxes the following year or in annual installments, not
exceeding ten, as the City Council may determine in each case.



(Am. Ord. 8, 4th Series, passed 1-16-2007) Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.02  TREE DISEASES.



   (A)   Trees constituting nuisance declared.  The following are
public nuisances whenever they may be found within the city:



      (1)   Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected
to any degree with the Dutch Elm disease fungus Ceratocystis Ulmi (Buisman)
Moreau or which harbors any of the elm bark beetles Scolytus Multistriatus
(Eichh.) or Hylungopinus Rufipes (Marsh);



      (2)   Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including branches,
stumps, firewood or other elm material from which the bark has not been
removed and burned or sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle insecticide;



      (3)   Any living or standing oak tree or part thereof infected
to any degree with the Oak Wilt fungus Ceratocystis fagacearum;



      (4)   Any dead oak tree or part thereof which in the opinion
of the designated officer constitutes a hazard, including but not limited to
logs, branches, stumps, roots, firewood or other oak material which has not
been stripped of its bark and burned or sprayed with an effective fungicide;



      (5)   Any other shade tree with an epidemic disease.



   (B)   Abatement of nuisance.  It is unlawful for any person to
permit any public nuisance as defined in division (A) of this section to
remain on any premises the person owns or controls within the city.  The
nuisance may be abated as provided in §§ 92.22 and 92.23.



   (C)   Record of costs.  The City Clerk shall keep a record of the
costs of abatement done under this section for all work done for which
assessments are to be made, stating and certifying the description of the
land, lots, parcels involved, and the amount chargeable to each.



   (D)   Unpaid charges.  On or before September 1 of each year, the
City Clerk shall list the total unpaid charges for each abatement against
each separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this
section.  The City Council may then spread the charges or any portion
thereof against the property involved as a special assessment as authorized
by M.S. § 429.101 as it may be amended from time to time and other pertinent
statutes for certification to the County Auditor and collection the following
year along with the current taxes.



Penalty, see § 92.99



NUISANCES



§ 92.15  PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   Whoever by his or her act or failure to perform a legal duty
intentionally does any of the following is guilty of maintaining a public
nuisance, which is a misdemeanor:



   (A)   Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys,
injures or endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort or repose of any
considerable number of members of the public;



   (B)   Interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous for passage
any public highway or right-of-way, or waters used by the public; or



   (C)   Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law or §§
92.16, 92.17 or 92.18, or any other part of this code to be a public nuisance
and for which no sentence is specifically provided.



Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.16  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.



   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health:



   (A)   Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or
vegetable matter;



   (B)   All diseased animals running at large;



   (C)   All ponds or pools of stagnant water;



   (D)   Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours
after death;



   (E)   Accumulations of manure, refuse or other debris;



   (F)   Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not rodent-free or
fly-tight or which are so maintained as to constitute a health hazard or to
emit foul and disagreeable odors;



   (G)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake,
canal or body of water by sewage, industrial waste or other substances;



   (H)   All noxious weeds and other rank growths of vegetation upon
public or private property;



   (I)   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders, in
unreasonable quantities;



   (J)   All public exposure of people having a contagious disease;



   (K)   Any offensive trade or business as defined by statute not
operating under local license; and



   (L)   Use of coal tar and creosote-based products.



(Am. Ord. 34, 4th Series, passed 1-18-11)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.17  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY.



   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public
morals and decency:



   (A)   All gambling devices, slot machines and punch boards, except
as otherwise authorized by federal, state or local law;



   (B)   Betting, bookmaking and all apparatus used in those
occupations;



   (C)   All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous
sexual intercourse, gambling houses, houses of ill fame and bawdy houses;



   (D)   All places where intoxicating liquor is manufactured or
disposed of in violation of law or where, in violation of law, people are
permitted to resort for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor, or where
intoxicating liquor is kept for sale or other disposition in violation of
law, and all liquor and other property used for maintaining that place;



   (E)   Any vehicle used for the unlawful transportation of
intoxicating liquor, or for promiscuous sexual intercourse, or any other
immoral or illegal purpose.



Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.18  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.



   The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and
safety:



   (A)   All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks 48 hours
after the snow or other precipitation causing the condition has ceased to
fall;



   (B)   All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which
prevent people from having a clear view of all traffic approaching an
intersection. The maximum height of any hedge or similar vegetation on a
corner lot shall not exceed 3 feet in height in any building setback area;



   (C)   All wires and limbs of trees which are so close to the surface
of a sidewalk or street as to constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles;



   (D)   All obnoxious noises in violation of Minn. Rules Ch. 7030, as
they may be amended from time to time which are hereby incorporated by
reference into this code;



   (E)   The discharging of the exhaust or permitting the discharging
of the exhaust of any stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat,
motor vehicle, motorcycle, all terrain vehicle, snowmobile or any
recreational device except through a muffler or other device that effectively
prevents loud or explosive noises therefrom and complies with all applicable
state laws and regulations;



   (F)   The using or operation or permitting the using or operation of
any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, paging system,
machine or other device for producing or reproduction of sound in a
distinctly and loudly audible manner so as to disturb the peace, quiet and
comfort of any person nearby.  Operation of any device referred to above
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a manner so as to be plainly
audible at the property line of the structure or building in which it is
located, or at a distance of 50 feet if the source is located outside a
structure or building shall be prima facie evidence of violation of this
section.  The City Council may extend the time for use or operation  of any
receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, paging system, machine or
other device for the production or reproduction of sound to a later period of
time as determined appropriate by the City Council;



   (G)   No person shall participate in any party or other gathering of
people giving rise to noise, unreasonably disturbing the peace, quiet, or
repose of another person. When a police officer determines that a gathering
is creating such a noise disturbance, the officer may order all persons
present, other than the owner or tenant of the premises where the disturbance
is occurring, to disperse immediately. No person shall refuse to leave after
being ordered by a police officer to do so. Every owner or tenant of such
premises who has knowledge of the disturbance shall make every reasonable
effort to see that the disturbance is stopped;



   (H)   Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary public use
of streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds except under conditions as
are permitted by this code or other applicable law;



   (I)   Radio aerials or television antennae erected or maintained in
a dangerous manner;



   (J)   Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or
any use of a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to
gather, obstructing traffic and the free use of the street or sidewalk;



   (K)   All hanging signs, awnings and other similar structures over
streets and sidewalks, so situated so as to endanger public safety, or not
constructed and maintained as provided by ordinance;



   (L)   The allowing of rain water, ice or snow to fall from any
building or structure upon any street or sidewalk or to flow across any
sidewalk;



   (M)   Any barbed wire fence less than six feet above the ground and
within three feet of a public sidewalk or way;



   (N)   All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so
situated or operated on private property as to attract the public;



   (O)   Waste water cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets or
other public properties;



   (P)   Accumulations in the open of discarded or disused machinery,
household appliances, automobile bodies or other material in a manner
conducive to the harboring of rats, mice, snakes or vermin, or the rank
growth of vegetation among the items so accumulated, or in a manner creating
fire, health or safety hazards from accumulation;



   (Q)   Any well, hole or similar excavation which is left uncovered
or in another condition as to constitute a hazard to any child or other
person coming on the premises where it is located;



   (R)   Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or
a public street drain, gutter or ditch with trash of other materials;



   (S)   The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk or other
public property of any glass, tacks, nails, bottles or other substance which
may injure any person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire when passing
over the substance;



   (T)   The depositing of garbage or refuse on a public right-of-way
or on adjacent private property;



   (U)   All other conditions or things which are likely to cause
injury to the person or property of anyone.



   (V)   (1)   Noises prohibited. 



         (a)   General prohibition.  No person shall make or
cause to be made any distinctly and loudly audible noise that unreasonably
annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace,
safety, or welfare of any person or precludes their enjoyment of property or
affects their property's value. This general prohibition is not limited by
the specific restrictions of this section.



         (b)   Defective vehicles or loads.  No person shall use
any vehicle so out of repair or so loaded as to create loud and unnecessary
grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise.



         (c)   Loading, unloading, unpacking.  No person shall
create loud or excessive noise in loading, unloading, or unpacking any
vehicle.



         (d)   Radios, phonographs, paging systems, and the
like.  No person shall use or operate or permit the use or operation of any
radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, paging system, machine
or other device for the production or reproduction of sound in a distinct and
loudly audible manner as to unreasonably disturb the peace, quiet, and
comfort of any person nearby. Operation of any such set, instrument,
phonograph, machine or other device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at the property line of the
structure or building in which it is located, in the hallway or apartment
adjacent, or at a distance of 50 feet if the source is located outside a
structure or building, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this
section.  The City Council may extend the time for use or operation  of any
receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, paging system, machine or
other device for the production or reproduction of sound to a later period of
time as determined appropriate by the City Council.



         (e)   Schools, churches, hospitals, and the like.  No
person shall create any excessive noise on a street, alley or public grounds
adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or hospital when the
noise unreasonably interferes with the working of the institution or disturbs
or unduly annoys its occupants or residents and when conspicuous signs
indicate the presence of such institution.



      (2)   Hourly restriction of certain operations.



         (a)   Domestic power equipment.  No person shall
operate a power lawn mower, power hedge clipper, chain saw, mulcher, garden
tiller, edger, drill or other similar domestic power maintenance equipment
except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any weekday or between
the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any weekend or holiday.  Snow
removal equipment is exempt from this provision.



         (b)   Refuse hauling.  No person shall collect or
remove garbage or refuse in any residential district except between the hours
of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m. on any weekend or holiday.



         (c)   Construction activities.  No person shall engage
in or permit construction activities involving the use of any kind of
electric, diesel, or gas-powered machine or other power equipment except
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any weekend or holiday.



      (3)   Noise impact statements.  The Council may require any
person applying for a change in zoning classification or a permit or license
for any structure, operation, process, installation or alteration or project
that may be considered a potential noise source to submit a noise impact
statement on a form prescribed by the Council.  It shall evaluate each such
statement and take its evaluation into account in approving or disapproving
the license or permit applied for or the zoning change requested.



   (W)      Reflected glare or light from private exterior lighting
exceeding 0.5 footcandles as measured on the property line of the property
where the lighting is located when abutting any residential parcel, and one
footcandle when abutting any commercial or industrial parcel.



(Am. Ord. 8, 4th Series, passed 1-16-2007; Am. Ord. 63, 4th Series, passed
1-5-2015) Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.19  NUISANCE PARKING AND STORAGE.



   (A)   Declaration of nuisance.  The outside parking and storage on
residentially-zoned property or public rights-of-way of large numbers of
vehicles, trailers, materials, supplies or equipment not customarily used for
residential purposes in violation of the requirements set forth below is
declared to be a public nuisance because it (a) obstructs views on streets
and private property, (b) creates cluttered and otherwise unsightly areas,
(c) prevents the full use of residential streets for residential parking, (d)
introduces commercial advertising signs into areas where commercial
advertising signs are otherwise prohibited, (e) decreases adjoining
landowners' and occupants' enjoyment of their property and neighborhood, and
(f) otherwise adversely affects property values and neighborhood patterns.



   (B)   Unlawful parking and storage.



      (1)   A person must not place, store, or allow the placement
or storage of ice fish houses, skateboard ramps, playhouses or other similar
non-permanent structures outside continuously for longer than 24 hours in the
front-yard area of residential property unless more than 100 feet back from
the front property line.



      (2)   A person must not place, store, or allow the placement
or storage of pipe, lumber, forms, steel, machinery, or similar materials,
including all materials used in connection with a business, outside on
residential property.



      (3)   A person must not cause, undertake, permit or allow the
outside parking and storage of vehicles on residential property unless it
complies with the following requirements:



         (a)   Vehicles that are parked or stored outside in the
front-yard area must be on a paved driveway area.



         (b)   Vehicles, watercraft and other articles stored
outside on residential property must be owned by a person who resides on that
property. Students who are away at school for periods of time but still claim
the property as their legal residence will be considered residents on the
property.



      (4)   A person must not place, store or allow the placement of
any garbage dumpster, portable storage unit or similar non-permanent
structure on any residential property, including driveways, for longer than
10 consecutive days, except for dumpsters on private property where a valid
building permit has been issued. These types of non-permanent structures are
not permitted on any street or public right-of-way.



(Am. Ord. 8, 4th Series, passed 1-16-2007; Am. Ord. 17, 4th Series, passed
1-18-2008)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.20  INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to keep, park, store or abandon any motor
vehicle which is not in operating condition, partially dismantled, used for
repair of parts or as a source of repair or replacement parts for other
vehicles, kept for scrapping, dismantling or salvage of any kind, or which is
not properly licensed for operation with the state, pursuant to M.S. §
168B.011, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   This section does not apply to a motor vehicle enclosed in a
building.



   (C)   Any motor vehicles described in this section constitute a
hazard to the health and welfare of the residents of the community in that
such vehicles can harbor noxious diseases, furnish a shelter and breeding
place for vermin and present physical danger to the safety and well-being of
children and citizens; and vehicles containing fluids which, if released into
the environment, can and do cause significant health risks to the community.



   (D)   In the event a licensed motor vehicle parked or stored out of
doors on private property has not been moved within a consecutive 30-day time
period, the Zoning Administrator may, by written letter to the property
owner, request that the vehicle owner demonstrate the vehicle is operable by
starting and driving the vehicle a distance of not less than 500 feet. The
operation to be observed by the Zoning Administrator or his or her designee.



(Am. Ord. 17, 4th Series, passed 1-17-2008)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.21  BUILDING MAINTENANCE AND APPEARANCE.



   (A)   Declaration of nuisance.  Buildings, fences and other
structures that have been so poorly maintained that their physical condition
and appearance detract from the surrounding neighborhood are declared to be
public nuisances because they (a) are unsightly, (b) decrease adjoining
landowners and occupants' enjoyment of their property and neighborhood, and
(c) adversely affect property values and neighborhood patterns.



   (B)   Standards.  A building, fence or other structure is a public
nuisance if it does not comply with the following requirements:



      (1)   No part of any exterior surface may have deterioration,
holes, breaks, gaps, loose or rotting boards or timbers.



      (2)   Every exterior surface that has had a surface finish
such as paint applied must be maintained to avoid noticeable deterioration of
the finish.  No wall or other exterior surface may have peeling, cracked,
chipped or otherwise deteriorated surface finish on more than 20% of:



         (a)   Any 1 wall or other flat surface; or



         (b)   All door and window moldings, eaves, gutters, and
similar projections on any 1 side or surface.



      (3)   No glass, including windows and exterior light fixtures,
may be broken or cracked, and no screens may be torn or separated from
moldings.



      (4)   Exterior doors and shutters must be hung properly and
have an operable mechanism to keep them securely shut or in place.



      (5)   Cornices, moldings, lintels, sills, bay or dormer
windows and similar projections must be kept in good repair and free from
cracks and defects that make them hazardous or unsightly.



      (6)   Roof surfaces must be tight and have no defects that
admit water. All roof drainage systems must be secured and hung properly.



      (7)   Chimneys, antennae, air vents, and other similar
projections must be structurally sound and in good repair.  These
projections must be secured properly, where applicable, to an exterior wall
or exterior roof.



      (8)   Foundations must be structurally sound and in good
repair.



Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.22  DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.



   For purposes of §§ 92.22 and 92.23, the Police Department, or Sheriff
or person designated by the City Council, if the city has at the time no
Police Department, may enforce the provisions relating to nuisances.  Any
peace officer or designated person shall have the power to inspect private
premises and take all reasonable precautions to prevent the commission and
maintenance of public nuisances.  Except in emergency situations of imminent
danger to human life and safety, no police officer or designated person shall
enter private property for the purpose of inspecting or preventing public
nuisances without the permission of the owner, resident or other person in
control of the property, unless the officer or person designated has obtained
a warrant or order from a court of competent jurisdiction authorizing the
entry.



(Am. Ord. 17, 4th Series, passed 1-17-2008)



§ 92.23  ABATEMENT.



   (A)   Notice.  Written notice of violation; notice of the time,
date, place and subject of any hearing before the City Council; notice of
City Council order; and notice of motion for summary enforcement hearing
shall be given as set forth in this section.



      (1)   Notice of violation.  Written notice of violation shall
be served by a peace officer or designated person on the owner of record or
occupant of the premises either in person or by certified or registered
mail.  If the premises is not occupied, the owner of record is unknown, or
the owner of record or occupant refuses to accept notice of violation, notice
of violation shall be served by posting it on the premises.



      (2)   Notice of City Council hearing.  Written notice of any
City Council hearing to determine or abate a nuisance shall be served on the
owner of record and occupant of the premises either in person or by certified
or registered mail.  If the premises is not occupied, the owner of record is
unknown, or the owner of record or occupant refuses to accept notice of the
City Council hearing, notice of City Council hearing shall be served by
posting it on the premises.



      (3)   Notice of City Council order.  Except for those cases
determined by the city to require summary enforcement, written notice of any
City Council order shall be made as provided in M.S. § 463.17 (Hazardous and
Substandard Building Act), as it may be amended from time to time.



      (4)   Notice of motion for summary enforcement.  Written
notice of any motion for summary enforcement shall be made as provided for in
M.S. § 463.17 (Hazardous and Substandard Building Act), as it may be amended
from time to time.



   (B)   Procedure.  Whenever a peace officer or designated person
determines that a public nuisance is being maintained or exists on the
premises in the city, the officer or person designated shall notify in
writing the owner of record or occupant of the premises of such fact and
order that the nuisance be terminated or abated.  The notice of violation
shall specify the steps to be taken to abate the nuisance and the time within
which the nuisance is to be abated.  If the notice of violation is not
complied with within the time specified, the officer or designated person
shall report that fact forthwith to the City Council.  Thereafter, the City
Council may, after notice to the owner or occupant and an opportunity to be
heard, determine that the condition identified in the notice of violation is
a nuisance and further order that if the nuisance is not abated within the
time prescribed by the City Council, the city may seek injunctive relief by
serving a copy of the City Council order and notice of motion for summary
enforcement or obtain an administrative search and seizure warrant and abate
the nuisance.



   (C)   Emergency procedure; summary enforcement.  In cases of
emergency, where delay in abatement required to complete the notice and
procedure requirements set forth in divisions (A) and (B) of this section
will permit a continuing nuisance to unreasonably endanger public health
safety or welfare, the City Council may order summary enforcement and abate
the nuisance.  To proceed with summary enforcement, the officer or
designated person shall determine that a public nuisance exists or is being
maintained on premises in the city and that delay in abatement of the
nuisance will unreasonably endanger public health, safety or welfare.  The
officer or designated person shall notify in writing the occupant or owner of
the premises of the nature of the nuisance and of the city's intention to
seek summary enforcement and the time and place of the City Council meeting
to consider the question of summary enforcement.  The City Council shall
determine whether or not the condition identified in the notice to the owner
or occupant is a nuisance, whether public health, safety or welfare will be
unreasonably endangered by delay in abatement required to complete the
procedure set forth in division (A) of this section, and may order that the
nuisance be immediately terminated or abated.  If the nuisance is not
immediately terminated or abated, the City Council may order summary
enforcement and abate the nuisance.



   (D)   Immediate abatement.  Nothing in this section shall prevent
the city, without notice or other process, from immediately abating any
condition which poses an imminent and serious hazard to human life or safety.



Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.24  RECOVERY OF COST.



   (A)   Personal liability.  The owner of premises on which a
nuisance has been abated by the city shall be personally liable for the cost
to the city of the abatement, including administrative costs.  As soon as
the work has been completed and the cost determined, the City Clerk or other
official shall prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner. 
Thereupon the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the office of
the City Clerk.



   (B)   Assessment.  After notice and hearing as provided in M.S. §
429.061, as it may be amended from time to time, if the nuisance is a public
health or safety hazard on private property, the accumulation of snow and ice
on public sidewalks, the growth of weeds on private property or outside the
traveled portion of streets, or unsound or insect-infected trees, the City
Clerk shall, on or before September 1 next following abatement of the
nuisance, list the total unpaid charges along with all other charges as well
as other charges for current services to be assessed under M.S. § 429.101
against each separate lot or parcel to which the charges are attributable. 
The City Council may then spread the charges against the property under that
statute and other pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor
and collection along with current taxes the following year or in annual
installments, not exceeding ten, as the City Council may determine in each
case.



Penalty, see § 92.99



OPEN BURNING



§ 92.60  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FIRE CHIEF or FIRE MARSHAL.  The Fire Chief or Fire Marshal of the
Fire Department which provides fire protection services to the city.



   OPEN BURNING.  The burning of any matter if the resultant combustion
products are emitted directly to the atmosphere without passing through a
stack, duct or chimney, except a "recreational fire" as defined herein. 
Mobile cooking devices such as manufactured hibachis, charcoal grills, wood
smokers, and propane or natural gas devices are not defined as "open burning."



   RECREATIONAL FIRE.  A fire set with approved starter fuel no more than
three feet in height, contained within the border of a "recreational fire
site" using dry, clean wood; producing little detectable smoke, odor or soot
beyond the property line; conducted with an adult tending the fire at all
times; for recreational, ceremonial, food preparation for social purposes;
extinguished completely before quitting the occasion; and respecting weather
conditions, neighbors, burning bans, and air quality so that nuisance, health
or safety hazards will not be created.  No more than one recreational fire
is allowed on any property at one time.



   RECREATIONAL FIRE SITE.  An area of no more than a three foot diameter
circle (measured from the inside of the fire ring or border); completely
surrounded by non-combustible and non-smoke or odor producing material,
either of natural rock, cement, brick, tile or blocks or ferrous metal only
an which area is depressed below ground, on the ground, or on a raised bed. 
Included are permanent outdoor wood burning fireplaces.  Burning barrels are
not a "recreation fire site" as defined herein.  Recreational fire sites
shall not be located closer than 25 feet to any structure.



   STARTER FUELS.  Dry, untreated, unpainted, kindling, branches,
cardboard or charcoal fire starter.  Paraffin candles and alcohols are
permitted as starter fuels and as aids to ignition only.  Propane gas
torches or other clean gas burning devices causing minimal pollution must be
used to start an open burn.



   WOOD.  Dry, clean fuel only such as twigs, branches, limbs, "presto
logs," charcoal, cord wood or untreated dimensional lumber. The term does not
include wood that is green with leaves or needles, rotten, wet, oil soaked,
or treated with paint, glue or preservatives.  Clean pallets may be used for
recreational fires when cut into three foot lengths.



§ 92.61  PROHIBITED MATERIALS.



   (A)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning oils,
petro fuels, rubber, plastics, chemically treated materials, or other
materials which produce excessive or noxious smoke such as tires, railroad
ties, treated, painted or glued wood composite shingles, tar paper,
insulation, composition board, sheet rock, wiring, paint or paint fillers.



   (B)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of
hazardous waste or salvage operations, open burning of solid waste generated
from an industrial or manufacturing process or from a service or commercial
establishment or building material generated from demolition of commercial or
institutional structures.



   (C)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of
discarded material resulting from the handling, processing, storage,
preparation, serving or consumption of food.



   (D)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of any
leaves or grass clippings.



Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.62  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR OPEN BURNING.



   No person shall start or allow any open burning on any property in the
city without first having obtained an open burn permit, except that a permit
is not required for any fire which is a recreational fire as defined in §
92.60.



Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.63  PURPOSES ALLOWED FOR OPEN BURNING.



   (A)   Open burn permits may be issued only for the following
purposes:



      (1)   Elimination by fire of a health hazard that cannot be
abated by other practical means.



      (2)   Disposal of vegetative matter for managing forest,
prairie or wildlife habitat, and in the development and maintenance of land
and rights-of-way where chipping, composting, landspreading or other
alternative methods are not practical.



      (3)   Disposal of diseased trees generated on-site.



      (4)   Disposal of trees and stumps resulting from a permitted
construction activity.



   (B)   Fire training permits can only issued by the Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources.



Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.64  PERMIT APPLICATION FOR OPEN BURNING; PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   Open burning permits shall be obtained by making application
on a form provided by the city.  The permit application shall be presented
to the City Clerk for reviewing and processing those applications.



   (B)   An open burning permit may require the payment of a fee. 
Permit fees shall be in the amount established in the Ordinance Establishing
Fees and Charges, authorized by § 30.11, as it may be amended from time to
time.



Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.65  PERMIT PROCESS FOR OPEN BURNING.



   Upon receipt of the completed open burning permit application and
permit fee, the Fire Chief or Fire Marshal shall schedule a preliminary site
inspection to locate the proposed burn site, note special conditions, and set
dates and time of permitted burn and review fire safety considerations.



§ 92.66  PERMIT HOLDER RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   Prior to starting an open burn, the permit holder shall be
responsible for confirming that no burning ban or air quality alert is in
effect.  Every open burn event shall be constantly attended by the permit
holder or his or her competent representative.  The open burning site shall
have available, appropriate communication and fire suppression equipment as
set out in the fire safety plan.



   (B)   The open burn fire shall be completely extinguished before the
permit holder or his or her representative leaves the site.  No fire may be
allowed to smolder with no person present.  It is the responsibility of the
permit holder to have a valid permit, as required by this subchapter,
available for inspection on the site by the Police Department, Fire
Department, MPCA representative or DNR forest officer.



   (C)   The permit holder is responsible for compliance and
implementation of all general conditions, special conditions, and the burn
event safety plan as established in the permit issued.  The permit holder
shall be responsible for all costs incurred as a result of the burn,
including but not limited to fire suppression and administrative fees.



Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.67  REVOCATION OF OPEN BURNING PERMIT.



   The open burning permit is subject to revocation at the discretion of
DNR forest officer, the Fire Chief or Fire Marshal.  Reasons for revocation
include but are not limited to a fire hazard existing or developing during
the course of the burn, any of the conditions of the permit being violated
during the course of the burn, pollution or nuisance conditions developing
during the course of the burn, or a fire smoldering with no flame present.



Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.68  DENIAL OF OPEN BURNING PERMIT.



   If established criteria for the issuance of an open burning permit are
not met during review of the application, it is determined that a practical
alternative method for disposal of the material exists, or a pollution or
nuisance condition would result, or if a burn event safety plan cannot be
drafted to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief or Fire Marshal, these officers
may deny the application for the open burn permit.



§ 92.69  BURNING BAN OR AIR QUALITY ALERT.



   No recreational fire or open burn will be permitted when the city or
DNR has officially declared a burning ban due to potential hazardous fire
conditions or when the MPCA has declared an Air Quality Alert.



Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.70  RULES AND LAWS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The provisions of M.S. §§ 88.16 to 88.22, as these statutes may be
amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of
this subchapter as if fully set forth at this point.



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   Violation of any provision of this chapter, including maintaining a
nuisance after being notified in writing by first class mail of a violation
of any provision of this chapter, shall be a misdemeanor and punished as
provided in § 10.99.



CHAPTER 93: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



General Provisions



   93.01   Unloading on street or sidewalk



   93.02   Street and sidewalk obstruction



   93.03   Materials on street or sidewalk



   93.04   Sump pump water discharge



Right-Of-Way Construction Regulations



   93.20   Election to manage the public right-of-way



   93.21   Definitions and adoption of rules by reference



   93.22   Permit requirement



   93.23   Permit applications



   93.24   Issuance of permit; conditions



   93.25   Permit fees



   93.26   Right-of-way patching and restoration



   93.27   Supplementary applications



   93.28   Denial of permit



   93.29   Installation requirements



   93.30   Inspection



   93.31   Work done without a permit



   93.32   Supplementary notification



   93.33   Revocation of permits



   93.34   Mapping data; information required



   93.35   Location of facilities



   93.36   Damage to other facilities



   93.37   Right-of-way vacation



   93.38   Indemnification and liability



   93.39   Abandoned facilities; removal of abandoned facilities



   93.40   Appeal



   93.41   Reservation of regulatory and police powers



Cross-reference:



   Assessable current services, see § 92.01



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 93.01  UNLOADING ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.



   No person shall unload any heavy material in the streets of the city by
throwing or letting the material fall upon the pavement of any street, alley,
sidewalk, or other public way, without first placing some sufficient
protection over the pavement.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.02  STREET AND SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTION.



   No person shall obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public
way within the city by erecting thereon any fence or building, or permitting
any fence or building to remain thereon.  Each day that any fence or
building is permitted to remain upon the public way shall constitute a
separate offense.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.03  MATERIALS ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.



   No person shall encumber any street or sidewalk.  No owner, occupant,
or person having the care of any building or lot of land, bordering on any
street or sidewalk, shall permit it to be encumbered with barrels, boxes,
cans, articles, or substances of any kind, so as to interfere with the free
and unobstructed use thereof.  No owner, occupant or person shall discharge
grass clippings or accumulate leaves on any public street or sidewalk.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.04  SUMP PUMP WATER DISCHARGE.



   As part of any street improvement or maintenance project, all sump pump
discharge lines on properties adjacent to the improvement project that are
discharging into the street or causing water to flow into the street are
required to be tied directly into a storm sewer system. Water from any sump
pump discharge line shall not create a nuisance affecting public health or
safety.



(Ord. 12, 4th series, passed 1-22-2019)  Penalty, see § 10.99



RIGHT-OF-WAY CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS



§ 93.20  ELECTION TO MANAGE THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   In accordance with the authority granted to the city under state and
federal statutory, administrative, and common law, the city hereby elects
pursuant to this chapter to manage rights-of-ways within its jurisdiction.



§ 93.21  DEFINITIONS AND ADOPTION OF RULES BY REFERENCE.



   Minn. Rules Ch. 7819, as it may be amended from time to time, is hereby
adopted by reference and is incorporated into this code as if set out in
full. The definitions included in Minn. Rules part 7819.0100 subps. 1 through
23, as it may be amended from time to time, are the definitions of the terms
used in the following provisions of this subchapter.



§ 93.22  PERMIT REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   Permit required.  Except as otherwise provided in this code,
no person may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way without first having
obtained the appropriate permit from the city. 



      (1)   Excavation permit.  An excavation permit is required to
excavate that part of the right-of-way described in the permit and to hinder
free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by
placing facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration
specified therein. 



      (2)   Obstruction permit. An obstruction permit is required to
hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of right-of-way by
placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the extent and
for the duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is not required if
a person already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same project.



   (B)   Permit extensions.  No person may excavate or obstruct the
right-of-way beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless the
person makes a supplementary application for another right-of- way permit
before the expiration of the initial permit, and a new permit or permit
extension is granted.



   (C)   Delay penalty.  In accordance with Minn. Rules part 7819.1000
subp. 3, as it may be amended from time to time and notwithstanding division
(B) of this section, the city shall establish and impose a delay penalty for
unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or
restoration.  The delay penalty shall be established from time to time by
the Ordinance Establishing Fees and Charges, adopted pursuant to § 30.11 of
this code, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (D)   Permit display.  Permits issued under this subchapter shall
be conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the
indicated work site and shall be available for inspection by the Clerk,
Utilities Superintendent or other person designated by the Council. 



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.23  PERMIT APPLICATIONS.



   Application for a permit shall contain, and will be considered complete
only upon compliance with the requirements of the following provisions:



   (A)   Submission of a completed permit application form, including
all required attachments, scaled drawings showing the location and area of
the proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed
facilities, and the following information:



      (1)   Each permittee's name, gopher one-call registration
certificate number, address and e-mail address if applicable, and telephone
and facsimile numbers.



      (2)   The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and
telephone and facsimile numbers of a local representative.  The local
representative or designee shall be available at all times.  Current
information regarding how to contact the local representative in an emergency
shall be provided at the time of registration.



      (3)   A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:



         (a)   Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued
to the registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the
state, or a form of self-insurance acceptable to the Clerk, Utilities
Superintendent or other person designated by the Council;



         (b)   Verifying that the registrant is insured against
claims for personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property
damage arising out of the use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the
registrant, its officers, agents, employees, and permittees, and placement
and use of facilities and equipment in the right-of-way by the registrant,
its officers, agents, employees, and permittees, including, but not limited
to, protection against liability arising from completed operations, damage of
underground facilities, and collapse of property;



         (c)   Naming the city as an additional insured as to
whom the coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for whom
defense will be provided as to all coverages;



         (d)   Requiring that the Clerk, Utilities Superintendent
or other person designated by the Council be notified 30 days in advance of
cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage term;



         (e)    Indicating comprehensive liability coverage,
automobile liability coverage, workers compensation and umbrella coverage
established by the Clerk, Utilities Superintendent or other person designated
by the Council in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the public and
to carry out the purposes and policies of this chapter.



      (4)   The city may require a copy of the actual insurance
policies. 



      (5)   If the person is a corporation, a copy of the
certificate required to be filed under M.S. § 300.06, as it may be amended
from time to time as recorded and certified to by the Secretary of State.



      (6)   A copy of the person's order granting a certificate of
authority from the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other applicable
state or federal agency, where the person is lawfully required to have the
certificate from the Commission or other state or federal agency.



   (B)   Payment of money due the city for:



      (1)   Permit fees as established by the Ordinance Establishing
Fees and Charges adopted pursuant to § 30.11 of this code, as that ordinance
may be amended from time to time, estimated restoration costs and other
management costs;



      (2)   Prior obstructions or excavations; 



      (3)   Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the
city because of the applicant's prior excavations or obstructions of the
rights-of-way or any emergency actions taken by the city; or



      (4)   Franchise fees or other charges as established by the
city, as that may be amended from time to time, if applicable.



§ 93.24  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Permit issuance.  If the applicant has satisfied the
requirements of this chapter, the Clerk, Utilities Superintendent or other
person designated by the Council shall issue a permit.



   (B)   Conditions.  The Clerk, Utilities Superintendent or other
person designated by the Council may impose reasonable conditions upon the
issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to
protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to protect the
right-of-way and its current use.



§ 93.25  PERMIT FEES.



   Permit fees shall be in an amount established in the Ordinance
Establishing Fees and Charges, adopted pursuant to § 30.11, as it may be
amended from time to time.



   (A)   Excavation permit fee.  The city shall establish an
excavation permit fee as established by the city, as that may be amended from
time to time, in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs:



      (1)   The city management costs; and



      (2)   Degradation costs, if applicable.



   (B)   Obstruction permit fee. The city shall establish the
obstruction permit fee as established by the city, as that may be amended
from time to time, and shall be in an amount sufficient to recover the city
management costs.



   (C)   Payment of permit fees.  No excavation permit or obstruction
permit shall be issued without payment of excavation or obstruction permit
fees.  The city may allow applicant to pay those fees within 30 days of
billing.



   (D)   Non-refundable.  Permit fees as established by the city, as
that may be amended from time to time, that were paid for a permit that the
Clerk, Utilities Superintendent or other person designated by the Council has
revoked for a breach as stated in § 93.33 are not refundable.



   (E)   Application to franchises.  Unless otherwise agreed to in a
franchise, management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to
the franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise.



   (F)   All permit fees shall be established consistent with the
provisions of Minn. Rules part 7819.100, as it may be amended from time to
time.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.26  RIGHT-OF-WAY PATCHING AND RESTORATION.



   (A)   Timing.  The work to be done under the excavation permit, and
the patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days
as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the
permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under
this subchapter.



   (B)   Patch and restoration.  The permittee shall patch its own
work.  The city may choose either to have the permittee restore the
right-of-way or to restore the right-of-way itself.



      (1)   City restoration.  If the city restores the
right-of-way, the permittee shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days of
billing.  If following the restoration, the pavement settles due to the
permittee's improper backfilling, the permittee shall pay to the city, within
30 days of billing, all costs associated with having to correct the defective
work.



      (2)   Permittee restoration.  If the permittee restores the
right-of-way itself, it may be required  at the time of application for an
excavation permit to post a construction performance bond or a deposit in
accordance with the provisions of Minn. Rules part 7819.3000, as it may be
amended from time to time.



   (C)   Standards.  The permittee shall perform patching and
restoration according to the standards and with the materials specified by
the city and shall comply with Minn. Rules part 7819.1100, as it may be
amended from time to time. The Clerk, Utilities Superintendent or other
person designated by the Council shall have the authority to prescribe the
manner and extent of the restoration, and may do so in written procedures of
general application or on a case-by-case basis.



   (D)   Duty to correct defects.  The permittee shall correct defects
in patching, or restoration performed by the permittee or its agents.  The
permittee upon notification from the Clerk, Utilities Superintendent or other
person designated by the Council, shall correct all restoration work to the
extent necessary, using the method required by the Clerk, Utilities
Superintendent or other person designated by the Council.  The work shall be
completed within 5 calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the Clerk,
Utilities Superintendent or other person designated by the Council, not
including days during which work cannot be done because of circumstances
constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonal or
unreasonable under this subchapter.



   (E)   Failure to restore.  If the permittee fails to restore the
right-of-way in the manner and to the condition required by the Clerk,
Utilities Superintendent or other person designated by the Council, or fails
to satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the Clerk,
Utilities Superintendent or other person designated by the Council, the
Clerk, Utilities Superintendent or other person designated by the Council at
his or her option may do the work.  In that event the permittee shall pay to
the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of restoring the
right-of-way.  If the permittee fails to pay as required, the city may
exercise its rights under the construction performance bond.



   (F)   Degradation fee in lieu of restoration.  In lieu of
right-of-way restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation
fee as established by the city, as that may be amended from time to time. 
However, the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for patching and the
degradation fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these
responsibilities.



§ 93.27  SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Limitation on area.  A right-of-way permit is valid only for
the area of the right-of-way specified in the permit.  No permittee may do
any work outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein.
Any permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in
the permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working in that
greater area make application for a permit extension and pay any additional
fees required thereby, and be granted a new permit or permit extension.



   (B)   Limitation on dates.  A right-of-way permit is valid only for
the dates specified in the permit.  No permittee may begin its work before
the permit start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after
the end date.  If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end
date, it must apply for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and
receive the new permit or an extension of the old permit before working after
the end date of the previous permit.  This supplementary application must be
submitted before the permit end date. 



§ 93.28  DENIAL OF PERMIT.



   The city  may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and
conditions of this chapter or if the city determines that the denial is
necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to
protect the right-of-way and its current use.



§ 93.29  INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.



   The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other
work performed in the right-of- way shall be done in conformance with Minn.
Rules part 7819.1100, as it may be amended from time to time and other
applicable local requirements, in so far as they are not inconsistent with
M.S. §§ 237.162 and 237.163, as they may be amended from time to time.



§ 93.30  INSPECTION.



   (A)   Notice of completion.  When the work under any permit
hereunder is completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate
in accordance Minn. Rules part 7819.1300, as it may be amended from time to
time.



   (B)   Site inspection.  The permittee shall make the work-site
available to city personnel and to all others as authorized by law for
inspection at all reasonable times during the execution of and upon
completion of the work. 



   (C)   Authority of Clerk, Utilities Superintendent or other person
designated by the Council.



      (1)   At the time of inspection, the Clerk, Utilities
Superintendent or other person designated by the Council may order the
immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life,
health, safety, or well-being of the public.



      (2)   The Clerk, Utilities Superintendent or other person
designated by the Council may issue an order to the permittee for any work
which does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable
standards, conditions, or codes.  The order shall state that failure to
correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit.  Within
ten days after issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to
the Clerk, Utilities Superintendent or other person designated by the Council
that the violation has been corrected.  If proof has not been presented
within the required time, the Clerk, Utilities Superintendent or other person
designated by the Council may revoke the permit pursuant to § 93.33.



§ 93.31  WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.



   (A)   Emergency situations.



      (1)   Each person with facilities in the right-of-way shall
immediately notify the city of any event regarding its facilities which it
considers to be an emergency.  The owner of the facilities may proceed to
take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency.  Within two
business days after the occurrence of the emergency, the owner shall apply
for the necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith and fulfill the
rest of the requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this
chapter for the actions it took in response to the emergency.



      (2)   If the city  becomes aware of an emergency regarding
facilities, the city will attempt to contact the local representative of each
facility owner affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency.  In any
event, the city may take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the
emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the person whose facilities
occasioned the emergency.



   (B)   Non-emergency situations.  Except in an emergency, any person
who, without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or
excavates a right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit, and as a penalty
pay double the normal fee for the permit, pay double all the other fees
required by this code, deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct
any damage to the right-of-way and comply with all of the requirements of
this chapter.



§ 93.32  SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION.



   If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or
ends sooner than the date given on the permit, the permittee shall notify the
Clerk, Utilities Superintendent or other person designated by the Council of
the accurate information as soon as this information is known.



§ 93.33  REVOCATION OF PERMITS.



   (A)   Substantial breach.  The city reserves its right, as provided
herein, to revoke any right-of-way permit, without a fee refund if there is a
substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance,
rule or regulation, or any material condition of the permit.  A substantial
breach by the permittee shall include, but shall not be limited, to the
following:



      (1)   The violation of any material provision of the
right-of-way permit;



      (2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of
the right-of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any
fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens;



      (3)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the
application for a right-of-way permit;



      (4)   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner;
unless a permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work
is due to reasons beyond the permittees control; or



      (5)   The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that
does not conform to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to §
93.30.



   (B)   Written notice of breach.  If the city determines that the
permittee has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any
statute, ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the permit the city
shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy that violation. 
The demand shall state that continued violations may be cause for revocation
of the permit.  A substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city,
at its discretion, to place additional or revised conditions on the permit to
mitigate and remedy the breach. 



   (C)   Response to notice of breach. Within 24 hours of receiving
notification of the breach, the permittee shall provide the city with a plan,
acceptable to the city, that will cure the breach.  The permittee's failure
to so contact the city, or the permittee's failure to submit an acceptable
plan, or the permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the approved plan,
shall be cause for immediate revocation of the permit. 



   (D)   Reimbursement of city costs.  If a permit is revoked, the
permittee shall also reimburse the city for the city's reasonable costs,
including restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable
attorneys' fees incurred in connection with the revocation.



§ 93.34  MAPPING DATA; INFORMATION REQUIRED.



   Each permittee shall provide mapping information required by the city
in accordance with Minn. Rules parts 7819.4000 and 7819.4100, as it may be
amended from time to time.



§ 93.35  LOCATION OF FACILITIES.



   (A)   Compliance required.  Placement, location, and relocation of
facilities must comply with applicable laws, and with Minn. Rules parts
7819.3100, 7819.5000 and 7819.5100, as they may be amended from time to time,
to the extent the rules do not limit authority otherwise available to cities.



   (B)   Corridors.  The city may assign specific corridors within the
right-of-way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each
type of facilities that is or, pursuant to current technology, the city
expects will someday be located within the right-of-way.  All excavation,
obstruction, or other permits issued by the city involving the installation
or replacement of facilities shall designate the proper corridor for the
facilities at issue.



   (C)   Limitation of space. To protect the health, safety, and
welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use,
the Clerk, Utilities Superintendent or other person designated by the Council
shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional
facilities within the right-of-way.  In making those decisions, the Clerk,
Utilities Superintendent or other person designated by the Council shall
strive to the extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users
of the right-of-way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the
public interest, the public's needs for the particular utility service, the
condition of the right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential
utilities, the protection of existing facilities in the right-of-way, and
future city plans for public improvements and development projects which have
been determined to be in the public interest.



§ 93.36  DAMAGE TO OTHER FACILITIES.



   When the city does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to
maintain, support, or move facilities to protect it, the Clerk, Utilities
Superintendent or other person designated by the Council shall notify the
local representative as early as is reasonably possible and placed as
required.  The costs associated therewith will be billed to that registrant
and must be paid within 30 days from the date of billing.  Each facility
owner shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the
right-of-way which it or its facilities damages.  Each facility owner shall
be responsible for the cost of repairing any damage to the facilities of
another registrant caused during the city's response to an emergency
occasioned by that owner’s facilities.



§ 93.37  RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION.



   If the city vacates a right-of-way which contains the facilities of a
registrant, the registrant’s rights in the vacated right-of-way are
governed by Minn. Rules part 7819.3200, as it may be amended from time to
time.



§ 93.38  INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.



   By applying for and accepting a permit under this chapter, a permittee
agrees to defend and indemnify the city in accordance with the provisions of
Minn. Rules 7819.1250, as it may be amended from time to time.



§ 93.39  ABANDONED FACILITIES; REMOVAL OF ABANDONED FACILITIES.



   Any person who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-way shall
remove them from that right-of-way if required in conjunction with other
right-of-way repair, excavation, or construction, unless this requirement is
waived by the Clerk, Utilities Superintendent or other person designated by
the Council.



§ 93.40 APPEAL.



   A right-of-way user that has been denied registration; has been denied
a permit; has had permit revoked; or believes that the fees imposed are
invalid, may have the denial, revocation, or fee imposition reviewed, upon
written request, by the City Council.  The City Council shall act on a
timely written request at its next regularly scheduled meeting.  A decision
by the City Council affirming the denial, revocation, or fee as imposition
will be in writing and supported by written findings establishing the
reasonableness of the decision.



§ 93.41  RESERVATION OF REGULATORY AND POLICE POWERS.



   A permittees or registrants rights are subject to the regulatory and
police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary
to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.



CHAPTER 94:  AIR POLLUTION CONTROL



Section



   94.01   Burning



   94.02   Air pollution control rules



   94.03   Exceptions



   94.04   Permit



§ 94.01  BURNING.



   It is unlawful for any person to burn or permit burning of any debris
upon premises owned or occupied by that person, except as otherwise provided
by this Code.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 94.02  AIR POLLUTION CONTROL RULES.



   The Air Pollution Control Rules, as amended from time to time,
promulgated by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, are hereby adopted by
reference. Three copies of said Rules shall be marked CITY OF NORTH MANKATO -
OFFICIAL COPY and kept on file in the office of the City Administrator and
shall be open to inspection and use by the public.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



Statutory reference:



   Ambient air quality standards, see Minn. Rules Ch. 7009



   Standards for stationary sources, see Minn. Rules Ch. 7011



   Mobile and indirect sources, see Minn. Rules Ch. 7023



§ 94.03  EXCEPTIONS.



   The following open burning shall be excepted from the regulation of
this chapter, provided that with respect to divisions (B), (C), and (D)
below, an appropriate permit shall first be obtained:



   (A)   Open fires used solely for the preparation of food;



   (B)   Fires set for the instruction and training of public and
industrial fire fighting personnel;



   (C)   Fires set for the elimination of fire hazards which cannot be
abated by any other practical means;



   (D)   The burning of trees, brush, grass or other vegetable matter
in the clearing of land, right-of-way maintenance operations and agricultural
crop burning.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 94.04  PERMIT.



   Any permits which are required by this chapter shall be obtained from
the City Clerk.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS




      Chapter





         110.   GENERAL BUSINESS REGULATIONS AND LICENSING





         111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES





         112.   ADULT USES




CHAPTER 110:  GENERAL BUSINESS REGULATIONS AND LICENSING



Section



General Provisions



   110.01   Definitions



   110.02   Applications



   110.03   Action on application for license



   110.04   Carrying or posting



   110.05   Penalty for property owners



   110.06   Responsibility of licensee



   110.07   License fees



   110.071   License background checks



   110.08   Penalty for late annual license payment



Business Regulations



   110.20   Mechanical amusement devices



   110.21   Shows



   110.22   Tobacco



   110.23   Nonalcoholic beverages



   110.24   Peddlers



   110.25   Taxicabs



   110.26   Concession permits



   110.27   Pawnbrokers



 



   110.98   Violation



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 110.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICANT.  Any person making an application for a license under this
chapter.



   APPLICATION.  A form with blanks or spaces thereon to be filled in and
completed by the applicant as his or her request for a license, furnished by
the city and uniformly required as a prerequisite to the consideration of the
issuance of a license for a business.



   BOND.  A corporate surety document in the form and with the provisions
acceptable and specifically approved by the city.



   BUSINESS.  Any activity, occupation, sale of goods or services, or
transaction that is either licensed or regulated, or both licensed and
regulated, by the terms and conditions of this chapter.



   LICENSE.  A document issued by the city to an applicant permitting him
or her to carry on and transact a business.



   LICENSEE.  An applicant who, pursuant to his or her application, holds
a valid, current, unexpired and unrevoked license from the city for carrying
on a business.



   LICENSE FEE.  The money paid to the city pursuant to an application
and prior to issuance of a license to transact and carry on a business.



   SALE, SELL, and SOLD.  All forms of barter and all manner or means of
furnishing merchandise to persons.



(1975 Code, § 6.01)



§ 110.02  APPLICATIONS.



   All applications shall be made as follows.



   (A)   All applications shall be made at the office of the City Clerk
upon forms that have been formulated by the city for such purposes.



   (B)   All such applications must be subscribed, sworn to, and
include, but not be limited to, the following:



      (1)   Applicant’s name and citizenship;



      (2)   Applicant’s present address and length of time he or
she has lived at that address;



      (3)   Applicant’s occupation and length of time so engaged;



      (4)   Applicant’s addresses and occupations for the 3 years
next preceding the date of application;



      (5)   Names and addresses of applicant’s employers, if any,
for the 3 years next preceding the date of application;



      (6)   Whether or not applicant has ever been convicted of a
felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor, including violation of a municipal
ordinance but excluding traffic violations, and if so, the date and place of
conviction and the nature of the offense;



      (7)   Type of license and location of premises for which
application is made;



      (8)   At least 4 character references if applicant has not
resided in the city for 2 years next preceding the date of application;



      (9)   Such other information as the Council shall deem
necessary considering the nature of the business for which license
application is made.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any applicant to intentionally make a false
statement or omission upon any application form. Any false statement in such
application, or any willful omission to state any information called for on
such application form, shall, upon discovery of such falsehood work an
automatic refusal of license, or if already issued, shall render any license
or permit issued pursuant thereto void and of no effect to protect the
applicant from prosecution for violation of this chapter or any part hereof.



   (D)   The City Clerk shall, upon receipt of each application
completed in accordance herewith, forthwith investigate the truth of
statements made therein and the moral character and business reputation of
each applicant for license to such extent as he or she deems necessary. For
such investigation the City Clerk may enlist the aid of the Chief of Police.
The Council shall not consider an application before such investigation has
been completed.



   (E)   Applications for renewal licenses may be made in such
abbreviated form as the Council may by resolution adopt.



(1975 Code, § 6.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.03  ACTION ON APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   Granting. The Council may grant any application for the period
of the remainder of the then current calendar year or for the entire ensuing
license year. All applications, including proposed license periods, must be
consistent with this chapter.



   (B)   Issuing. If an application is granted, the City Clerk shall
issue a license pursuant thereto in the form prescribed by the Council upon
proof of ownership, payment of the appropriate license fee, and approval of
the bond or insurance as to form and surety or carrier, if required. All
licenses shall be on a calendar year basis beginning January 1 and ending
December 31. Liquor license fees shall be prorated on the basis of 1/12 for
each calendar month, or part thereof remaining in the then current license
year. (All other licenses shall not be prorated.) Licenses shall be valid
only at one location and on the premises therein described. In order to
effectuate the change in license year, the City Clerk is hereby authorized to
credit the applicant for any unearned portion of a license fee, or charge a
prorated amount only.



   (C)   Transfer. A license shall be transferable between persons upon
consent of the Council and payment of the investigation fee. No license shall
be transferable to a different location without prior consent of the Council
and upon payment of the fee for a duplicate license. It is unlawful to make
any transfer in violation of this division.



   (D)   Termination. Licenses shall terminate only by expiration or
revocation.



   (E)   Refusal and revocation. The Council may, for any reasonable
cause, refuse to grant any application or revoke any license. No license
shall be granted to a person of questionable moral character or business
reputation. Before revocation of any license, the Council shall give notice
to the licensee and grant such licensee opportunity to be heard. Notice to be
given and the exact time of hearing shall be stated in the resolution calling
for such hearing.



   (F)   Duplicate license. Duplicates of all original licenses may be
issued by the City Clerk, without action by the Council, upon licensee’s
affidavit that the original has been lost, and upon payment of the current
fee for issuance of the duplicate. All duplicate licenses shall be clearly
marked DUPLICATE.



(1975 Code, § 6.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.04  CARRYING OR POSTING.



   All transient merchants, peddlers and solicitors shall at all times
when so engaged carry their license on their person. All other licensees
shall post their licenses in their place of business near the licensed
activity; provided, however, that in the case of machine or other device
licensing, the city may provide a sticker for the current license year which
shall be affixed to each machine or device requiring such sticker. All
licensees shall display their licenses upon demand by any officer or citizen.



(1975 Code, § 6.03)



§ 110.05  PENALTY FOR PROPERTY OWNERS.



   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly permit any real property
owned or controlled by him or her to be used, without a license, for any
business for which a license is required by this chapter.



(1975 Code, § 6.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.06  RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEE.



   The conduct of agents and employees of a person to whom a license or
permit is issued shall be deemed the conduct of the licensee himself or
herself.



(1975 Code, § 6.06)



§ 110.07  LICENSE FEES.



   License fees for all licenses required in this chapter shall be
adopted, and from time to time amended and revised, by resolution of the
Council, which resolution, bearing the effective date thereof, shall be kept
on file in the office of the City Clerk and open to public inspection. The
fees when so adopted shall be uniformly enforced.



(1975 Code, § 6.07)



§ 110.071  LICENSE BACKGROUND CHECKS.



   (A)   Purpose and intent.  The purpose and intent of this section
is to establish regulations that will allow law enforcement access to
Minnesota's Computerized Criminal History information for specified
non-criminal purposes for licensing background checks.



   (B)   Criminal history license background investigations. 



      (1)   Licenses.  The Police Department is hereby required, as
the exclusive entity within the city, to do a criminal history background
investigation on the applications for the following licenses within the city:
city licenses, liquor licenses and peddlers’ licenses.



      (2)   Investigative procedures.  In conducting the criminal
history background investigation in order to screen license applicants, the
Police Department is authorized to access data maintained in the Minnesota
Bureau of Criminal Apprehensions Computerized Criminal History information
system in accordance with BCA policy. Any data that is accessed and acquired
shall be maintained at the Police Department under the care and custody of
the chief law enforcement official or his or her designee. A summary of the
results of the computerized criminal history data may be released by the
Police Department to the city staff involved in the license approval process.



      (3)   Applicant’s consent to investigation.  Before the
investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize the Police
Department by written consent to undertake the investigation. The written
consent must fully comply with the provisions of M.S. Ch. 13 regarding the
collection, maintenance and use of the information.



(Ord. 34, 4th Series, passed 1-18-11; Am. Ord. 43, 4th Series, passed
1-17-2012)



§ 110.08  PENALTY FOR LATE ANNUAL LICENSE PAYMENT.



   The City Council may establish, by resolution, any late payment
penalties or fees to be applied in  cases where an annual license is not
renewed in accordance with the notified deadline.



(Ord. 21, 4th Series, passed 1-20-2009)



BUSINESS REGULATIONS



§ 110.20  MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      COIN AMUSEMENT.  Any machine which upon the insertion of a coin,
token or slug operates or  may be operated by the public generally for
entertainment or amusement, which machine emits music, noise or displays
motion pictures.



      GAME OF SKILL. Any device excepting pool and billiard tables,
bowling alleys and shooting lanes, but including miniatures thereof, played
by manipulating special equipment and propelling balls or other projectiles
across a board or field into respective positions whereby a score is
established, the object of which is to secure a special number or numbers or
a high or low total score or any other method used to indicate a winner which
may be played by the public generally at a price paid either directly or
indirectly for such privilege, whether a prize is offered for the game or not.



      MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE.  Includes both games of skill and
coin amusement as herein defined.



   (B)   License required. It is unlawful for any person to keep or
maintain a mechanical amusement device for use by the public without first
having obtained a license from the city.



   (C)   Unlawful use and devices. It is unlawful for any person to:



      (1)   Sell or maintain a machine or device which is for
gambling or contains an automatic pay-off device;



      (2)   Give any prize, award, merchandise, gift, or thing of
value to any person on account of operation of such device;



      (3)   Sell or maintain, or permit to be operated in his or her
place of business, any mechanical amusement device equipped with an automatic
payoff device;



      (4)   Equip any mechanical amusement device with an automatic
pay-off device;



      (5)   Permit persons under the age of 18 years to play or
operate any game of skill; or



      (6)   Permit the playing of coin amusement machines between
the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day.



(1975 Code, § 6.20)



§ 110.21  SHOWS.



   (A)   License required. It is unlawful for any person to present any
public show, movie, caravan, circus, carnival, theatrical or other
performance or exhibition without first having obtained a license from the
city.



   (B)   Exceptions. No license shall be required in the following
instances:



      (1)   Performances presented in the local schools and
colleges, under the sponsorship of such schools and colleges, and primarily
for the students only;



      (2)   Performances of athletic, musical or theatrical events
sponsored by local schools or colleges using student talent only;



      (3)   Any performance or event in, or sponsored by, bona fide
local church and non-profit organizations, provided that such organization
shall be incorporated.



(1975 Code, § 6.21)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.22  TOBACCO.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICES. Any product containing or delivering
nicotine, lobelia, or any other substance intended for human consumption that
can be used by a person to simulate smoking in the delivery of nicotine or
any other substance through inhalation of vapor from the product. ELECTRONIC
DELIVERY DEVICE shall include any component part of such a product whether or
not sold separately. ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE shall not include any product
that has been approved or otherwise certified by the United States Food and
Drug Administration for legal sales for use in tobacco cessation treatment or
other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that
approved purpose.



      TOBACCO.Includes tobacco in any form, including but not limited
to, cigarettes, cigars, bagged, canned or packaged product.



      TOBACCO-RELATED DEVICE.  Includes any electronic delivery
devices and nicotine or lobelia delivery products.



   (B)   License required. It is unlawful if for any person, directly
or indirectly, to keep for retail sale, sell at retail, or otherwise dispose
of any tobacco or tobacco-related devices in any form unless a license shall
first be obtained from the city.



   (C)   Restrictions.



      (1)   Separate licenses and stickers for each dispensing
machine shall be issued for the sale of tobacco or tobacco-related devices at
each fixed place of business, and no license shall be issued for a movable
place of business.



      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to sell or give away any
tobacco or tobacco-related device in any form to any person under the age of
21. Licensees shall verify by means of a government issued photographic
identification that the person obtaining the tobacco or tobacco-related
device is over the age of 21.



      (3)   Smoking prohibited in tobacco and electronic delivery
device retail establishment.  Smoking or using electronic delivery device
for the purpose of sampling tobacco, tobacco-related products, nicotine or
lobelia delivery devices shall be prohibited.



      (4)   The use of any electronic delivery device is prohibited
anywhere smoking is prohibited by the Minnesota Clean Indoor Act. This
section is intended to complement the Minnesota Clean Indoor Act, M.S. §§
144.411 to 144.417, as amended from time-to-time. Nothing in the section
authorizes smoking in any location where smoking is restricted by other
applicable laws.



   (D)   Fees. No license shall be issued under this chapter until the
appropriate license fee shall be paid in full. Fee for a license under this
chapter shall be established in the city's ordinance establishing fees and
charges, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (E)   Violations and penalties.



      (1)   Misdemeanor prosecution. Nothing in this section shall
prohibit the city from seeking prosecution of a misdemeanor for any alleged
violation of this section.



      (2)   Violations. Per administrative penalties any licensee
found to have violated this chapter or whose employee shall have violated
this chapter, shall be charged an administrative fine of $75 for a first
violation of this chapter; $200 for a second offense on the same licensed
premises within a 24-month period; and $250 for a third or subsequent offense
at the same location within a 24-month period. In addition, after the third
offense, the license shall be suspended for not less than 7 consecutive days.



   (F)   Effective date. This section becomes effective on the date of
its publication, or upon the publication of a summary of Ordinance 58, 4th
Series, as provided by M.S. § 412-191, Subd. 4, as it may be amended from
time to time, which meets the requirements of M.S. § 331A.01, Subd. 10, as
it may be amended from time to time.



(1975 Code, § 6.22)  (Am. Ord. 58, 4th series, passed 7-7-2014; Am. Ord.
93, 4th series, passed 2-5-2018) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.23  NONALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



   (A)   Definition. The term SOFT DRINK as used in this section means
any nonalcoholic beverage other than water, coffee, tea, chocolate, cocoa,
milk and cream.



   (B)   License required. It is unlawful for any person to keep for
sale or sell soft drinks for consumption on  the premises where sold, or
adjacent thereto, without first having obtained a license from the city,
whether such soft drinks are sold in bottles, cans or other containers, or
manufactured or mixed on the premises.



(1975 Code, § 6.23)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.24  PEDDLERS.



   (A)   Purpose. This section is not intended to interfere with
legitimate business activities of peddlers as the same are herein defined,
whether the same be local or interstate. These provisions are intended only
to, as nearly as possible, ferret out the illegitimate or confidence
operators and to regulate and control all those who would use their unique
presence on property within the city, either in person or by means of a
telephone contact, or their unique proximity to its residents, for purposes
of harassment, nuisance, theft, or other unlawful activities.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      PEDDLER.  Includes door-to-door, street-to-street,
place-to-place or temporary vendors of sales or services without a fixed,
determined and permanent location within the City of North Mankato at which
he or she transacts his or her business, carries on his or her occupation or
practices his or her profession, and includes, but is not limited to, persons
commonly referred to as peddlers, solicitors, transient merchants or
canvassers.



      TELEPHONE SOLICITATION.  Any contact by telephone to secure an
appointment or to make a sale of any service or merchandise, which call
results in the delivery of any merchandise, performance of any service,
arranging an appointment, meeting or other confrontation between the
telephone solicitor and the person contacted for the purpose of selling any
such service or merchandise.



   (C)   License required. It is unlawful for any person to engage in
peddling without a license from the city.



   (D)   Conditions of licensing.



      (1)   Separate licenses. Each individual engaged as a peddler
or accompanying a licensee at work must secure a separate license.



      (2)   Practices prohibited. It is unlawful for any person,
licensed under this section, to call attention to his or her business or to
his or her merchandise by crying out, blowing a horn, ringing a bell, or by
any loud or unusual noise, or by use of any amplifying device.



      (3)   Hours.  Any person licensed under this ordinance shall
limit their activities from the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.



   (E)   Identification badge.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in business
solicitation unless such person displays upon their chest an identification
badge issued by the city as provided herein in such a fashion that the badge
is clearly and readily visible at all times to any solicitee.



      (2)   The City Clerk shall issue an identification badge to
each person who is granted a business solicitation license pursuant to this
section. If the solicitor is an organization, then each person who solicits
on behalf of the organization shall be issued an identification badge. The
identification badge shall state the name of the solicitor, the purpose for
which solicitations are being conducted and the dates on which the license is
effective. Furthermore, the City Clerk shall instruct each solicitor
concerning the requirement that the identification badge must be displayed at
all times while soliciting. The identification badge is only a certification
that the solicitor has a license by the city. It does not convey any city
endorsement of the solicitation.



   (F)   Exceptions. This section shall not apply to any sale under
court order, nor to any bona fide auction sale, nor to newsboys, nor to a
sale at wholesale to a retail dealer in the articles sold, nor to the sale of
farm or garden products by the person producing the same, nor sales of
admissions by local school students to a school function. Nor shall this
section apply to solicitations for philanthropic, religious, and educational
charitable causes if the following procedure has been accomplished:



      (1)   Sworn application has been made to the City Clerk
showing name of the organization, its purposes, its officers and directors,
period of solicitation and solicitors form of remuneration;



      (2)   The City Clerk has investigated and found such
statements true and for charitable purpose and therefore issued a permit
without charge.



(1975 Code, § 6.24)  (Am. Ord. 2, passed 12-1-1980; Am. Ord. 34, 4th
Series, passed 1-18-11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.25  TAXICABS.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      DRIVER.  The person driving and having physical control over a
taxicab whether he or she be the licensee or in the employ of the licensed
operator.



      OPERATOR.  A licensee owning or otherwise having control of one
or more taxicabs.



      TAXICAB.  Any passenger conveyance being driven, on call or
traversing a scheduled or unscheduled route for public use or hire upon
payment of a fare or at regular fare rates, but not including such as are
designed for mass transportation as buses, trains or streetcars.



   (B)   License required. It is unlawful for any person to drive or
operate a taxicab without a license from the city.



   (C)   License issuance and display, and vehicle marking. All
licenses shall be issued for specific conveyances, except as otherwise herein
provided. License tags, including number and year for which issued, shall be
plainly visible from the front of the conveyance. Both sides of every
licensed taxicab, when in use, shall be plainly and permanently marked as
such with a painted sign or appurtenances showing the full or abbreviated
name of the licensed operator.



   (D)   Insurance required. Before a taxicab license is issued by the
Council, and at all times effective during such licensed period, the licensee
shall have and maintain public liability and bodily injury insurance in the
amount of $100,000 for any one person and $300,000 per any accident, as well
as $50,000 property damage insurance. Such insurance shall cover all
passengers carried by the insured licensee and shall be for public taxicab
purposes. All such policies shall contain a clause providing for 10 days
written notice to the City Clerk before cancellation and a memorandum of such
insurance shall be furnished to the city before a license is issued.



   (E)   Rates. Each applicant shall file with the City Clerk, before a
taxicab license is issued or renewed, a schedule of proposed maximum rates to
be charged by him or her during the licensed period for which the application
is made. The schedule of proposed maximum rates, or a compromise schedule
thereof, shall be approved by the Council before granting the license. Such
schedule shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the taxicab in full view
of passengers riding therein. Nothing herein shall prevent a taxicab licensee
from petitioning the Council for review of such rates during the licensed
period, and the Council may likewise consider such petition and make new
rates effective at any time. No taxicab licensee shall charge rates in excess
of maximum rates approved by the Council.



   (F)   Mechanical condition. Before issuing a taxicab license, the
applicant shall present to the Council a certificate signed by a competent
and experienced mechanic showing that the taxicab conveyance is in good
mechanical condition, that it is thoroughly safe for transportation of
passengers and that it is in neat and clean condition. Such similar
certificate may be required from time to time during the licensed period. In
lieu of such certificate the Council may accept the report of the Chief of
Police relative thereto.



(1975 Code, § 6.25)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.26  CONCESSION PERMITS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to sell food or beverages in any
city park or other public property that is designated by the city to be
controlled as if it were a city park without first having obtained a
concession permit from the city.



   (B)   The following conditions shall apply to the issuance of such
permits.



      (1)   Permits shall be issued only for tournaments or approved
nonprofit group events.



      (2)   Concession permits for nonprofit group events must be
approved by the City Council. Concession permits for tournaments may be
approved by the City Clerk.



      (3)   There shall be only one concession permit issued per
tournament or approved nonprofit group event. Additional permits may be
authorized by the City Council for state, regional or national events as it
deems appropriate in the circumstance.



      (4)   A concession permit shall not include beer. Beer may be
sold only after obtaining a temporary 3.2% license as required by the city
code.



      (5)   The concession permit fee shall be set by resolution of
the City Council.



(Ord. 124, passed 4-20-1992)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.27  PAWNBROKERS.



   (A)   Statement of policy. 



      (1)   The City Council  finds that use of services provided
by pawnbrokers provides an opportunity for the commission of crimes and their
concealment because pawn businesses have the ability to receive and transfer
property stolen by others easily and quickly. The City Council also finds
that consumer protection regulation is warranted in transactions involving
pawnbrokers. The purpose of this section is to prevent pawn businesses from
being used as facilities for the commission of crimes, and to assure that
such businesses comply with basic consumer protection standards, thereby
protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of
the city.



      (2)   To help the city better regulate pawn businesses,
decrease and stabilize costs associated with the regulation of the pawn
industry, and increase identification of criminal activities in the pawn
industry through the timely collection and sharing of pawn transaction
information, this section also implements and establishes the required use of
the Automated Pawn System (APS).



   (B)   Definitions.  As used herein, unless otherwise indicated, the
following terms are defined as follows:



      PAWNBROKER.  Any natural person, partnership or corporation,
either as principal, agent or employee thereof, who loans money on deposit or
pledge of personal property or other valuable thing, or who deals in the
purchasing of personal property or other valuable thing, on condition of
selling the same back again at a stipulated price, or who loans money secured
by chattel mortgage on personal property, taking possession of the property
or any part thereof so mortgaged. To the extent that a pawnbroker's business
includes buying personal property previously used, rented or leased, or
selling it on consignment, the provisions of this section shall be applicable.



      REPORTABLE TRANSACTION.  Every transaction conducted by a
pawnbroker in which merchandise is received through a pawn, purchase,
consignment or trade, or in which a pawn is renewed, extended or redeemed, or
for which a unique transaction number or identifier is generated by their
point-of-sale software, or an item is confiscated by law enforcement, is
reportable except:



         (a)   The bulk purchase or consignment of new or used
merchandise from a merchant, manufacturer or wholesaler having an established
permanent place of business, and the retail sale of the merchandise, provided
the pawnbroker must maintain a record of such purchase or consignment that
describes each item, and must mark each item in a manner that relates it to
that transaction record.



         (b)   Retail and wholesale sales of merchandise
originally received by pawn or purchase, and for which all applicable hold
and/or redemption periods have expired.



   (C)   License required.  It is unlawful for any pawnbroker to
engage in business as a pawnbroker, or otherwise portray the person or
business as a pawnbroker, unless the pawnbroker has a valid license
authorizing engagement in the business. Any pawn transaction made without
benefit of a license is void.



   (D)   License fees.



      (1)   The annual license fee for each premise licensed is $250.



      (2)   A billable transaction fee shall be established by the
City Council and shall reflect the cost of processing transactions and other
related regulatory expenses as determined by the City Council. License
holders shall be notified in writing 30 days before any increase in this fee
is implemented. Billable transaction fees shall be billed monthly and are due
and payable within 30 days. Failure to pay the billable transaction fee to
the city is a violation of this chapter.



   (E)   Application.



      (1)   Form.  Each application for a license by this section
shall be made at the office of the City Clerk, upon such form as may be
prescribed, and must be completed by every applicant for a new license or for
renewal of an existing license.



      (2)   New manager. When a license holder places a manager in
charge of a business, or if the named manager(s) in charge of a licensed
business changes, the license holder must complete and submit the appropriate
application within 14 days of the change in managers. This application to
change managers must be accompanied with payment of the investigation fee as
required by division (E)(4).



      (3)   Application execution.  All applications for a license
under this section must be signed and sworn to under oath or affirmation by
the applicant. If the application is that of a natural person, it must be
signed and sworn to by such person; if that of a corporation, by an officer
thereof; if that of a partnership, by one of the general partners; and if
that of an unincorporated association, by the manager or managing officer
thereof.



      (4)   Criminal investigation.  Each application for a new
license or to change managers, required by the provisions of this section,
submitted by an applicant shall be accompanied by payment of an investigation
fee of $500, if the investigation process is conducted solely within the
State of Minnesota. If the investigation is conducted outside the State of
Minnesota, the issuing authority may recover the actual investigation costs
not exceeding $5,000.



   (F)   Term.  Each license issued pursuant to the provisions of this
section shall expire on December 31 immediately following such issuance.



   (G)   Records required.  At the time of any reportable transaction
other than renewals, extensions or redemptions, every license holder must
immediately record, in English, the following information by using ink or
other indelible medium on forms, or in a computerized record approved by the
city:



      (1)   A complete and accurate description of each item,
including but not limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial
number, model number, brand name or other identifying mark on such an item.



      (2)   The purchase price, amount of money loaned upon, or
pledged therefor.



      (3)   The maturity date of the transaction and the amount due,
including monthly and annual interest rates and all pawn fees and charges.



      (4)   Date, time and place the item of property was received
by the license holder, and the unique alpha and/or numeric transaction
identifier that distinguishes it from all other transactions in the license
holder's records.



      (5)   Full name, current residence address, current residence
telephone number, date of birth and accurate description of the person from
whom the item of the property was received, including: sex, height, weight,
race, color of eyes and color of hair.



      (6)   The identification number and state of issue from any of
the following forms of identification of the seller:



         (a)   Current valid Minnesota driver's license.



         (b)   Current valid Minnesota identification card.



         (c)   Current valid photo identification card issued by
another state or province of Canada.



      (7)   The signature of the person identified in the
transaction.



      (8)   (a)   The license holder must also take a color
photograph or color video recording of:



            1.   Each customer involved in a billable
transaction; and



            2.   Every item pawned or sold that does not have
a unique serial or identification number permanently engraved or affixed.



         (b)   Color photograph.



            1.   If a photograph is taken, it must be at least
2 inches in length 2 inches in width, and must be maintained in such a manner
that the photograph can be readily matched and correlated with all other
records of the transaction to which they relate.



            2.   Such photographs must be available to the
city's Police Chief, or his or her designee, upon request.



            3.   The major portion of the photograph must
include an identifiable front facial close-up of the person who pawned or
sold the item.



            4.   Items photographed must be accurately
depicted.



            5.   The license holder must inform the person
that he or she is being photographed by displaying a sign of sufficient size
in a conspicuous place in the premises.



         (c)   Color video taping.



            1.   If a video photograph is taken, the video
camera must zoom in on the person pawning or selling the item so as to
include an identifiable close-up of that person's face.



            2.   Items photographed by video must be
accurately depicted.



            3.   Video photographs must be electronically
referenced by time and date so they can be readily matched and correlated
with all other records of the transaction to which they relate.



            4.   The license holder must inform the person
orally that he or she is being videotaped, and by displaying a sign of
sufficient size in a conspicuous place on the premises.



            5.   The license holder must keep the exposed
videotape for 3 months.



      (9)   Digitized photographs.  License holders must fulfill
the color photograph requirements in division (G)(8) by submitting them as
digital images, in a format specified by the issuing authority,
electronically cross-referenced to the reportable transaction with which they
are associated. Notwithstanding that digital images may be captured from
required video recordings, this provision does not alter or amend the
requirements in division (G)(8).



      (10)   Renewals, extensions and redemptions.  For renewals,
extensions and redemptions, the license holder shall provide the original
transaction identifier, the date of the current transaction, and the type of
transaction.



      (11)   Inspection of records.  The records must at all
reasonable times be open to inspection by the city's Police Department. Data
entries shall be retained for at least 3 years from the date of transaction.
Entries of required digital images shall be retained a minimum of 90 days.



   (H)   Daily reports to the Police Department.



      (1)   Daily reports.  The city's Police Department provides
license holders with the current version of the Automated Pawn System
Interchange File Specification. License holders must submit every reportable
transaction to the city's Police Department daily in the following manner:



         (a)   License holders must provide to the city's Police
Department with all reportable transaction information by transferring it
from their computers to the Automated Pawn System via modem using the current
version of the Automated Pawn System Interchange File Specification.



         (b)   All required records must be transmitted
completely and accurately after the close of business each day, in accordance
with standards and procedures established by the city.



         (c)   Any transaction that does not meet the Automated
Pawn System Interchange File Specification must be corrected and resubmitted
the next business day.



         (d)   The license holder must display a sign of
sufficient size, in a conspicuous place in the premises, which informs
patrons that all transactions are reported to the city's Police Department
daily.



      (2)   Billable transaction fees.  License holders will be
charged for each billable transaction reported to the city's Police
Department.



         (a)   If a license holder is unable to successfully
transfer the required reports by modem, the license holder must provide the
city's Police Department, upon request, with printed copies of all reportable
transactions, along with the video tape(s) for that date, by noon the next
business day.



         (b)   If the problem is determined to be in the license
holder's system and is not corrected by the close of the first business day
following the failure, the license holder must continue to provide the
required reports as detailed in division (H)(1) above and must be charged a
$50 reporting failure penalty, daily, until the error is corrected; or



         (c)   If the problem is determined to be outside the
license holder's system, the license holder must continue to provide the
required reports in division (H)(1) above, and resubmit all such transactions
via modem when the error is corrected.



         (d)   If a license holder is unable to capture, digitize
or transmit the photographs required in division (G)(8), the license holder
must immediately take all required photographs with a still camera,
cross-reference the photographs to the correct transaction, and make the
pictures available to the city's Police Department upon request.



         (e)   Regardless of the cause or origin of the technical
problems that prevented the license holder from uploading their reportable
transactions, upon correction of the problem, the license holder shall upload
every reportable transaction from every business day the problem had existed.



         (f)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division
(H)(2)(a) through (c), the city's Police Department may, upon presentation of
extenuating circumstances, delay the implementation of the daily reporting
penalty.



   (I)   Receipt required.  Every license holder must provide a
receipt to the party identified in every reportable transaction, and must
maintain a duplicate of that receipt for 3 years. The receipt must include at
least the following information:



      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the licensed
business.



      (2)   The date and time the item was received by the licensee.



      (3)   Whether the item was pawned or sold, or the nature of
the transaction.



      (4)   An accurate description of each item received, including
but not limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial number,
model number, brand name or other identifying mark on such an item.



      (5)   The signature or unique identifier of the license holder
or employee that conducted the transaction.



      (6)   The amount advanced or paid.



      (7)   The monthly and annual interest rates, including all
pawn fees and charges.



      (8)   The last regular day of business by which the item must
be redeemed by the pledger without risk that the item will be sold, and the
amount necessary to redeem the pawned item on that date.



      (9)   The full name, current residence address, current
residence telephone number, and date of birth of the pledger or seller.



      (10)   The identification number and state of issue for any of
the following forms of identification of the seller:



         (a)   Current valid Minnesota driver's license.



         (b)   Current valid Minnesota identification card.



         (c)   Current valid photo driver's license or
identification card issued by another state or province of Canada.



      (11)   Description of the pledger or seller, including
approximate sex, height, weight, race, color of eyes and color of hair.



      (12)   The signature of the pledger or seller.



      (13)   All printed statements as required by M.S. § 325J.04,
Subd. 2, or any other applicable statutes.



   (J)   Redemption period.  Any person pledging, pawning or
depositing an item for security must have a minimum of 60 days from the date
of that transaction to redeem the item before it may be forfeited and sold.
During the 60-day redemption period, items may not be removed from the
licensed location except as provided in division (Q). License holders are
prohibited from redeeming any item to anyone other than the person to whom
the receipt was issued, or to any person identified in a written and
notarized authorization to redeem the property identified in the receipt, or
to a person identified in writing by the pledger at the time of the initial
transaction and signed by the pledger, or with approval of the city's Police
Department. Written authorization for release of property to persons other
than original pledger must be maintained along with original transaction
record in accordance with division (G).



   (K)   Holding period. Any item purchased or accepted in trade by a
license holder must not be sold or otherwise transferred for 30 days from the
date of the transaction. An individual may redeem an item at any time.



   (L)   Police order to hold property.



      (1)   Investigative hold.  Whenever a law enforcement
official from any agency notifies a license holder not to sell an item, the
item must not be sold or removed from the premises. The investigative hold
shall be confirmed in writing by the originating agency within 72 hours, and
will remain in effect for 15 days from the date of initial notification, or
until the investigative order is canceled, or until an order to
hold/confiscate is issued, pursuant to division (L)(2), whichever comes first.



      (2)   Order to hold.  Whenever the city's Police Chief, or
his or her designee, notifies a license holder not to sell an item, the item
must not be sold or removed from the licensed premises until authorized to be
released by the city's Police Chief or his or her designee. The order to hold
shall expire 90 days from the date it is placed unless the city's Police
Chief, or his or her designee, determines the hold is still necessary and
notifies the license holder in writing.



      (3)   Order to confiscate.  If an item is identified as
stolen or evidence in a criminal case, the city's Police Chief, or his or her
designee, may:



         (a)   Physically confiscate and remove it from the shop,
pursuant to a written order from the city's Police Chief, or his or her
designee; or



         (b)   Place the item on hold or extend the hold as
provided in division (L)(2), and leave it in the licensed premise.



      (4)   Confiscation.  When an item is confiscated, the person
doing so shall provide identification upon request of the license holder, and
shall provide the license holder the name and phone number of the
confiscating agency, a contact person, and the case number related to the
confiscation.



      (5)   Notification when order no longer necessary.  When an
order to hold/confiscate is no longer necessary, the city's Police Chief, or
his or her designee, shall so notify the license holder.



   (M)   Inspection of items. At all times during the terms of the
license, the license holder must allow law enforcement officials to enter the
premises where the licensed business is located, including all off-site
storage facilities as authorized in division (Q), during normal business
hours, except in an emergency, for the purpose of inspecting such premises,
and inspecting the items, wares, merchandise and records therein, to verify
compliance with this section or other applicable laws.



   (N)   Label required.  License holders must attach a label to every
item at the time it is pawned, purchased or received in inventory from any
reportable transaction. Permanently recorded on this label must be the number
or name that identifies the transaction in the license holder's records, the
transaction date, the name of the item, and the description or the model and
serial number of the item as reported to the city's Police Department,
whichever is applicable, and the date the item is out of pawn or can be sold,
if applicable. Labels shall not be re-used.



   (O)   Prohibited acts.



      (1)   No person under the age of 18 years may pawn or sell, or
attempt to pawn or sell, goods with any licensee, nor may any license holder
receive any goods from a person under the age of 18 years.



      (2)   No license holder may receive any goods from a person of
unsound mind or an intoxicated person.



      (3)   No license holder may receive any goods, unless the
seller presents identification in the form of a valid State of Minnesota
driver's license, a valid State of Minnesota identification card, or current
valid photo driver's license or identification card issued by the state or
providence of residency of the person from whom the item was received.



      (4)   No license holder may receive any item of property that
possesses an altered or obliterated serial number or operation identification
number, or any item of property that has had its serial number removed.



      (5)   No person may pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave or
deposit with any license holder:



         (a)   Any article of property not their own;



         (b)   The property of another, whether with permission
or without; or



         (c)   Any article of property in which another has a
security interest.



      (6)   No person seeking to pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave
or deposit any article of property with any license holder shall:



         (a)   Give a false or fictitious name;



         (b)   Give a false date of birth;



         (c)   Give a false or out-of-date address of residence
or telephone number; or



         (d)   Present a false or altered identification, or the
identification of another.



   (P)   Denial, suspension or revocation of license. Any license
issued under this section may be denied, suspended or revoked for one or more
of the following reasons:



      (1)   The proposed use does not comply with the applicable
zoning code.



      (2)   The proposed use does not comply with any health,
building, building maintenance or other provisions of the city code or state
law.



      (3)   The applicant or license holder has failed to comply
with one or more provisions of this section.



      (4)   The applicant is not a citizen of the United States or a
resident alien, or upon whom it is impractical or impossible to conduct an
investigation due to the unavailability of information.



      (5)   The applicant has been convicted of a felony.



      (6)   Fraud, misrepresentation or bribery in securing or
renewing a license.



      (7)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in the
application and investigation for, or in the course of, the applicant's
business.



      (8)   Violation within the preceding 5 years, of any law
relating to theft, damage or trespass to property, sale of a controlled
substance, or operation of a business.



      (9)   The owner of the premises licensed or to be licensed
would not qualify for a license under the terms of this section.



   (Q)   Business at only one location.  A license under this chapter
authorizes the license holder to carry on its business only at the permanent
place of business designated in the license. However, upon written request,
the city's Police Chief may approve an off-site locked and secured storage
facility. The license holder shall permit inspection of the facility in
accordance with division (M). All provisions of this section regarding record
keeping and reporting apply to the facility and its contents. Property shall
be stored in compliance with all provisions of the city code. The license
holder must either own the building in which the business is conducted, and
any approved off-site storage facility, or have a lease on the business
premise that extends for more than 6 months.



   (R)   Refusal and revocation.  The Council may, for any reasonable
cause, refuse to grant any application or revoke any license. No license
shall be granted to a person of questionable moral character or business
reputation. Before revocation of any license, the Council shall give notice
to the licensee and grant such licensee opportunity to be heard. Notice to be
give and the exact time of hearing shall be stated in the resolution calling
for such hearing.



(Ord. 39, 4th Series, passed 7-18-2011)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.98  VIOLATION.



   Every person violates a section, division, subsection or provision of
this chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor
except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.



(1975 Code, § 6.99)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 111:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section



General Provisions



   111.001   Application



   111.002   Definitions



   111.003   Kinds of licenses



   111.004   Liability insurance



Retail Licensing Rules



   111.020   License required



   111.021   Licensing official



   111.022   Council approval is required



   111.023   License application process



   111.024   Expiration date of licenses



   111.025   New license application procedures



   111.026   Renewal of pre-existing permit or license



   111.027   Transfer of license due to change of ownership



   111.028   Posting of licenses



   111.029   Resident agent



   111.030   Additional restrictions on licences



   111.031   Police access



   111.032   Payment of delinquent taxes or charges



   111.033   Duplicate license



   111.034   Notice posting



   111.035   Reporting illegal conduct



   111.036   Premises licensed



License for 3.2% Malt Liquor



   111.050   On-sale



   111.051   Off-sale



   111.052   Liability insurance



   111.053   In combination with an intoxicating liquor license



   111.054   Temporary 3.2% malt liquor license, on-sale, for special
events



License for Intoxicating Liquor, On-Sale



   111.065   Eligible licensees



   111.066   Sales by clubs



   111.067   Investigation fee



   111.068   Liability insurance



   111.069   Temporary on-sale license



   111.070   In combination with intoxicating liquor, off-sale



License for Intoxicating Liquor, Off-Sale



   111.085   Eligible licensees



   111.086   Drug store



   111.087   Not to be combined with 3.2% malt liquor, on-sale



   111.088   Liability insurance



   111.089   Liquor samples



   111.090   Limitations on issuance of licenses to one person or place



   111.091   In combination with intoxicating liquor, on-sale



Wine Licenses



   111.115   Eligible licensees



   111.116   Combination with intoxicating malt liquor



   111.117   Investigation fee



   111.118   Liability insurance



   111.119   Restrictions



   111.120   License for temporary vintage wine auctions, off-sale



Set-Up Permits



   111.135   Eligible licensees



   111.136   Limitations on licensing



   111.137   Expiration date



   111.138   Club lockers



   111.139   Liability insurance



   111.140   One-day set-up permits



Sunday Liquor License



   111.155   Eligible licensees



   111.156   Additional fees



Cabaret License



   111.170   Eligible licensees



   111.171   When license is required



   111.172   Investigation fee



   111.173   Liability insurance



   111.174   License limitations



   111.175   Additional fees



Fees



   111.190   Investigation fee



   111.191   Annual license fees



   111.192   Fee increase procedures



Regulations



   111.205   Hours of sale



   111.206   Persons allowed on the licensed premises



   111.207   License revocation or suspension



   111.208   Lawful gambling



   111.209   Adult uses



   111.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 111.001  APPLICATION.



   This chapter shall apply to all transactions involving alcoholic
beverages within the city. Furthermore, this chapter is intended to act as a
localized supplement to M.S. Ch. 340A, the Minnesota Liquor Act, as it may be
amended from time to time.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 111.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   3.2% MALT LIQUOR.  Malt liquor containing not less than 0.5% alcohol
by volume nor more than 3.2% alcohol by weight.



   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.  Any beverage containing more than 0.5% alcohol
by volume.



   CLUB.  A corporation organized under the laws of the State of
Minnesota for civic, fraternal, social, or business purposes, for
intellectual improvement, or for the promotion of sports, or a
congressionally chartered veterans organization which has more than 50
members, has owned or rented a building or space in a building for more than
one year that is suitable and adequate for the accommodation of its members
and is directed by a board of directors, executive committee, or other
similar body chosen by the members at a meeting held for that purpose. No
member, officer, agent or employee shall receive any profit from the
distribution or sale of beverages to the members of the club, or their
guests, beyond a reasonable salary or wages fixed and voted each year by the
governing body.



   EXCLUSIVE LIQUOR STORE.  An establishment used exclusively for the
sale of intoxicating liquor, whether on-sale, off-sale or a combination of
on-sale and off-sale. The establishment may also incidentally sell ice,
tobacco products, soft drinks or food for consumption on the premises.



   HOTEL/MOTEL.  An establishment where food and lodging are regularly
furnished to transients and which has a resident proprietor or manager, a
dining room with public facilities for seating not less than 30 guests at one
time and at least 10 guest rooms.



   INTOXICATING LIQUOR.  Ethyl alcohol, distilled, fermented, spiritous,
vinous and malt beverages containing more than 3.2% of alcohol by weight.



   LICENSED PREMISES.  The premises described in the approved license
application consisting of an  enclosed building or portion of an enclosed
building and possessing a specific street address within the city.



   RESTAURANT.  An establishment where meals are regularly served at
tables to the general public with seating facilities for not less than 30
guests at one time.



   TAPROOM. A brewer (licensed under M.S. § 340A.301) who sells for
consumption malt liquor may produce on their premises. This license is exempt
from maintaining minimum food service requirements.



   WINE .  An intoxicating liquor containing no more than 14% of alcohol
by volume and made by the fermentation of grapes, grape juice, other fruits
or honey, and including compounds sold as wine, vermouth, cider, or saki.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992; Am. Ord. 63, 4th Series, passed 1-5-2015)



§ 111.003  KINDS OF LICENSES.



   The following kinds of licenses may be issued within the city:



   (A)   3.2% malt liquor, off-sale;



   (B)   3.2% malt liquor, on-sale, to include taprooms;



   (C)   Temporary 3.2% malt liquor, on-sale, for special events;



   (D)   Intoxicating liquor, on-sale;



   (E)   Intoxicating liquor, off-sale;



   (F)   Temporary intoxicating liquor, on-sale, for special events;



   (G)   Wine, on-sale;



   (H)   Temporary vintage wine auctions, off-sale;



   (I)   Set-up permits;



   (J)   Sunday liquor;



   (K)   Cabaret.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992; Am. Ord. 63, 4th Series, passed 1-5-2015)



§ 111.004  LIABILITY INSURANCE.



   (A)   Required limits. When liability insurance is required in this
chapter, the minimum requirement of coverage shall be at least $50,000 of
coverage because of bodily injury to any one person in any one occurrence,
$100,000 because of bodily injury to 2 or more persons in any one occurrence,
$10,000 because of injury to or destruction of property of others in any one
occurrence, $50,000 for loss of means of support to any one person in any one
occurrence, and $100,000 for loss of means of support of 2 or more persons in
any one occurrence. An annual aggregate policy limit for dram shop insurance
of not less than $300,000 per policy year may be included in the policy
provisions.



   (B)   When insurance is not required. If insurance is not required
by a licensee because of annual sales which are less than a prescribed
amount, then a licensee claiming the insurance waiver must provide the City
Clerk with an affidavit establishing compliance with the monetary limits plus
copies of federal and state income tax returns or such other accounting
documents as may be required in order to verify the monetary claim. The City
Clerk shall advise the Council of compliance with these requirements at the
time the Council is requested to approve the applicable liquor license.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



RETAIL LICENSING RULES



§ 111.020  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person may directly or indirectly, on any pretense or by any device,
sell, barter, keep for sale, or otherwise dispose of alcoholic beverages as
part of a sales transaction without first having obtained a license from the
city.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.021  LICENSING OFFICIAL.



   The City Clerk shall be the licensing official for the city. All
applications for any license shall be made to the City Clerk.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.022  COUNCIL APPROVAL IS REQUIRED.



   No license or permit will be issued within the city without the prior
approval of the City Council.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.023  LICENSE APPLICATION PROCESS.



   A person wishing to obtain a license to sell alcoholic beverages within
the city shall submit the following to the City Clerk:



   (A)   The application form which conforms to the type of license
desired;



   (B)   A certificate of liability insurance, if required for the
particular type of license;



   (C)   The investigation fee, if the application is for the initial
issuance or transfer of an on-sale intoxicating liquor license or wine
license;



   (D)   A certificate of workers' compensation insurance as required
by the laws of the State of Minnesota;



   (E)   Annual or pro-rated license fee in accordance with the fee
schedule;



   (F)   Written appointment of resident agent.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.024  EXPIRATION DATE OF LICENSES.



   . All licenses expire on December 31 of each year.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.025  NEW LICENSE APPLICATION PROCEDURES.



   An application for a new license may be submitted at any time. If an
investigation fee is required, it must be paid in full and all required
insurance certificates must be submitted with the application. Upon approval
of the application, the annual license fee must be paid in full before the
application will be forwarded to the state.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.026  RENEWAL OF PRE-EXISTING PERMIT OR LICENSE.



   (A)   Set-up permit. The application for renewal of a pre-existing
set-up permit must be submitted on or before November 30 for a permit taking
effect on the following January 1. All annual permit fees shall be paid in
full on or before December 20 of the current year.



   (B)   Pre-existing liquor licenses. All applications for renewal of
a pre-existing license must be submitted on or before November 30 of the
current year for a license taking effect on January 1 of the following year.
All annual license fees for the following year shall be paid in full on or
before December 20 of the current  year.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.027  TRANSFER OF LICENSE DUE TO CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP.



   (A)   Any change in ownership involving a license requires the
submission of an application to transfer that license. A change of ownership
requiring official transfer of a license occurs, as follows:



      (1)   If the licensee is a natural person, upon the sale of
the business requiring the license or upon the death of the licensee;



      (2)   If the licensee is a corporation, upon change in
ownership of more than 10% of its stock;



      (3)   If the licensee is a partnership, upon the addition of a
new partner.



   (B)   An application to transfer a license shall be treated the same
as an application for a new license. If the change in ownership is caused by
the death of a licensee, then the personal representative is authorized to
continue to operate the business for up to 90 days but must submit the
application within 30 days of the date of death. In all other cases, the
application must be submitted and approved by the Council before the sale of
any alcoholic beverages can occur under the new ownership.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.028  POSTING OF LICENSES.



   All licensees shall conspicuously post their liquor license or permit
in their places of business.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.029  RESIDENT AGENT.



   Before a liquor license or set-up permit will be issued, the applicant
shall appoint in writing a natural person who is a resident of the city to
act as its agent for service of notices or other process relating to the
license. The agent must be a person who could qualify individually as a
licensee.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.030  ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS ON LICENSES.



   The Council may place upon a license such conditions or restrictions as
it may deem necessary and justified.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.031  POLICE ACCESS.



   All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by any police
officer. As a condition of receiving a liquor license, all licensees must
consent to such inspection, without a warrant.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.032  PAYMENT OF DELINQUENT TAXES OR CHARGES.



   No liquor license shall be granted for any premises upon which taxes,
assessments or other financial charges of the city are delinquent and unpaid.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.033  DUPLICATE LICENSE.



   Duplicates of original licenses may be issued by the City Clerk without
action of the Council, upon the licensee’s affidavit that the original has
been lost and upon payment of the duplicate license fee.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.034  NOTICE POSTING.



   A premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages must
post and maintain a copy of the license in a conspicuous place within the
licensed premises.



   (A)   One or more signs which read: "THE MAXIMUM CRIMINAL PENALTY
FOR DRIVING WHEN UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL IS $1,000 OR 90 DAYS IN JAIL
OR BOTH. MINNESOTA STATUTES, SECTION 169.121. THE MAXIMUM CRIMINAL PENALTY
FOR CRIMINAL VEHICULAR HOMICIDE IS $20,000 OR TEN YEARS IMPRISONMENT OR BOTH.
MINNESOTA STATUTES, SECTION 609.21."



   (B)   One or more signs which read: "THIS ESTABLISHMENT IS
PROHIBITED BY LAW FROM SERVING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES TO A PERSON WHO IS UNDER
21 YEARS OF AGE OR OBVIOUSLY INTOXICATED. MINNESOTA STATUTES, SECTION
340A.502 AND 340A.503."



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.035  REPORTING ILLEGAL CONDUCT.



   Licensees and their employees shall report to the police all illegal
conduct committed by customers occurring within the licensed premises. The
report must be made within 24 hours of the occurrence and shall include the
identity of the customer(s) and a description of the conduct.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.036  PREMISES LICENSED.



   (A)   The application for any license granted hereunder shall
contain a detailed description of the premises upon which description on the
application shall be a drawing which designates the area to be licensed,
which drawing shall be deemed a part of the application.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, no premises
shall be licensed unless contained wholly within a completely enclosed
building and all activities related to the sale and/or consumption of
intoxicating liquor and/or 3.2% malt liquor shall be strictly limited to the
completely enclosed building or portion thereof as have been licensed.



   (C)   An applicant may make application to have an area that is
contiguous to the completely enclosed licensed premises included in the area
licensed to permit the sale and/or consumption of intoxicating and/or 3.2%
malt liquor in such contiguous area that is not wholly within a completely
enclosed building. Such application shall be accompanied by an investigation
and review fee, which fee shall be nonrefundable and in addition to any other
investigation fee required.



   (D)   Each application pursuant to division (C) of this section
shall contain a description of the nonenclosed area that is proposed to be
licensed and shall be accompanied by a drawing of the proposed area to be
licensed. Such application shall also include a detailed scale description of
the barriers that will be used, method of seating, ingress and egress
arrangements, security provisions, sanitary and fire arrangements and
lighting. The drawings required hereunder shall include the dimensions of the
area, barriers, tables, aisles and equipment and shall be drawn
proportionately to scale.



   (E)   The application pursuant to division (C) of this section shall
be submitted to the Police Department, Fire Department, Planning Division,
City Attorney, Building Inspector and City Administrator for review and
comment before submission to the City Council. The aforementioned city staff
shall review the suitability of the proposed nonenclosed premises in light of
the applicable fire, building and life safety codes, zoning ordinances, past
performance of the licensee in maintaining order on the licensed premises and
obeying applicable laws, the adequacy of the proposal to provide for the
safety of persons on the proposed premises, impact on the surrounding land,
adequacy of lighting, appropriateness of noise level, suitability of ingress
and egress arrangements, including control of persons entering and leaving
for purposes of preventing consumption by minors and safety of seating
arrangements.



   (F)   Any application granted for the inclusion of nonenclosed
premises in the licensed premises shall be granted upon such terms and
conditions as the Council may specify in granting such application relating
to the limits of such use, including provisions relating to:



      (1)   Hours of operation in the unenclosed area;



      (2)   Barriers to be maintained delineating the unenclosed
area such as requiring planters, walls or fences;



      (3)   Minimum lighting requirements;



      (4)   Type of chairs and/or tables used and/or their anchoring;



      (5)   Days of the week or months enclosed premises may be used;



      (6)   Personnel required to supervise the unenclosed area;



      (7)   Items required by applicable fire, building and life
safety codes;



      (8)   Maximum number of persons who may be present at any one
time;



      (9)   Fencing to be opaque;



      (10)   Means and methods used to restrict consumption to
licensed area and prevent removal or consumption of beverages outside
licensed area;



      (11)   Additional parking requirements;



      (12)   The type of beverage container used;



      (13)   Amplified music;



      (14)   Sanitary facilities provided, their location and number.



   (G)   Any licensing of unenclosed premises shall be deemed
experimental and, as such, no expectation shall be had by the licensee that
the licensing of the unenclosed premises will be renewed even though no
misconduct occurred on the unenclosed premises in the event the City Council
determines to repeal the general authorization for unenclosed areas to be
included in the licensed premises of establishments.



   (H)   Seasonal extension of permitted unenclosed area.



      (1)   An applicant may make application to have an area that
is contiguous to the unenclosed or enclosed licensed premises included in the
licensed area for a six-month seasonal extension of permitted area to permit
the sale and/or consumption of intoxicating and/or nonintoxicating liquor.



      (2)   Such application shall be an additional application.



      (3)   Such application for a seasonal use of contiguous
unenclosed premises shall comply with all the requirements set forth in
divisions (D) through (F) in terms of the requirements and standards for its
issuance and the terms of its licensure.



      (4)   Applicants must prove adequate insurance is provided to
cover the seasonal extension of permitted area.



(Ord. 138, passed 4-4-1994; Am. Ord. 94, 4th Series, passed 8-7-2017)



LICENSE FOR 3.2% MALT LIQUOR



§ 111.050  ON-SALE.



   An on-sale 3.2% malt liquor license may be issued to drug stores,
restaurants, hotels/motels, clubs, bowling centers, taprooms or
establishments used exclusively for the sale of 3.2% malt liquor with the
incidental sale of tobacco products and soft drinks.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992; Am. Ord. 63, 4th Series, passed 1-5-2015)



§ 111.051  OFF-SALE.



   (A)   An off-sale 3.2% malt liquor license may be issued to any
person who qualifies for it under the laws of the state or this Code.



   (B)   Off-sale malt liquor. A brewer licensed under M.S. §
340A.301, Subd. 6(d), (i), or (j) may be licensed for the “off-sale” of
malt liquor produced and packaged on the licensed premises, subject to the
following conditions:



      (1)   Off-sale of malt liquor may only be made during the
hours that “off-sale” of liquor may be made in § 111.205 or State
Statute. The hours are to include Sundays excluding December 25 and after
8:00 p.m. on December 24;



      (2)   The malt liquor shall be packaged in 64-ounce containers
commonly known as “growlers” or in 750-milliliter bottles;



      (3)   The malt liquor sold at “off-sale” must be removed
from the licensed premise before the applicable closing time at exclusive
liquor stores;



      (4)   The “growler” must be sealed in such a manner that
the seal must be broken in order to open the container and the seal must bear
the name and address of the brewer, and the legend “Not for Consumption in
Public” must be prominently displayed on the seal.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992; Am. Ord. 67, 4th Series, passed 6-1-2015)



§ 111.052  LIABILITY INSURANCE.



   Liability insurance shall ordinarily be required, providing coverage in
an amount no less than that set by this chapter. However, liability insurance
is not required for a licensee who at the time of submission of their
application for renewal provides to the City Clerk an affidavit and such
additional supporting financial records as may be required by the City Clerk
which establish the following:



   (A)   For an on-sale 3.2% malt liquor license, that they had sales
of less than $10,000 of 3.2% malt liquor for the preceding year;



   (B)   For an off-sale 3.2% malt liquor license, that they had sales
of less than $20,000 of 3.2% malt liquor for the preceding year.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.053  IN COMBINATION WITH AN INTOXICATING LIQUOR LICENSE.



   A person licensed to sell intoxicating liquor at on-sale is not
required to obtain an on-sale license to sell 3.2% malt liquor at on-sale. A
person licensed to sell intoxicating liquor at off-sale is not required to
obtain an off-sale license to sell 3.2% malt liquor at off-sale.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.054  TEMPORARY 3.2% MALT LIQUOR LICENSE, ON-SALE, FOR SPECIAL EVENTS.



   A club or charitable, religious, or non-profit organization may be
issued a temporary on-sale 3.2% malt liquor license for special events. The
temporary license may authorize sale in a school building. No applicant shall
qualify for a temporary license for more than 12 days in any calendar year.
The Council may impose other restrictions.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992; Am. Ord. 77, 4th Series, passed 8-1-2016)



LICENSE FOR INTOXICATING LIQUOR, ON-SALE



§ 111.065  ELIGIBLE LICENSEES.



   The city may issue an on-sale intoxicating liquor license to a
hotel/motel, restaurant, bowling center, club, congressionally chartered
veteran's organization, or exclusive liquor store.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.066  SALES BY CLUBS.



   Liquor sales made by a club or veteran’s organization must be made
only to its members and bona fide guests. A guest must be in the company of a
host member. A club shall keep a daily register showing the name of a guest
and the name of the host member. The register shall be open to inspection by
police officers.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.067  INVESTIGATION FEE.



   At the time of submitting an initial application for an on-sale license
or an application for transfer of an existing license, the applicant shall
pay the investigation fee set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.068  LIABILITY INSURANCE.



   Liability insurance is required, providing coverage in an amount no
less than that set by this chapter.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.069  TEMPORARY ON-SALE LICENSE.



   A temporary on-sale license for intoxicating liquor may be issued to a
club or charitable, religious or other nonprofit organization in existence
for at least 3 years. The license may authorize the sale of intoxicating
liquor for not more than 3 consecutive days in connection with a social event
within the city sponsored by the applicant. No investigation fee shall be
paid. Liability insurance is required.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.070  IN COMBINATION WITH INTOXICATING LIQUOR, OFF-SALE.



   An on-sale intoxicating liquor license may not be issued or transferred
to a licensee who already possesses an off-sale intoxicating liquor license.
However, those licensees who possess both an intoxicating liquor off-sale and
an intoxicating liquor on-sale license effective January 1, 1991, may
continue to renew such a combination of licenses. This renewal privilege
terminates if either license is revoked or upon transfer of either license
due to change of ownership.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



LICENSE FOR INTOXICATING LIQUOR, OFF-SALE



§ 111.085  ELIGIBLE LICENSEES.



   The city may issue an off-sale intoxicating liquor license to a
hotel/motel, restaurant, bowling center, club, congressionally chartered
veteran's organization, exclusive liquor store or to a drug store.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.086  DRUG STORE.



   No intoxicating liquor license may be issued to a person operating a
drug store unless the person has operated it for at least 2 years or has
purchased a drug store that has been in continuous operation for 2 or more
years.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.087  NOT TO BE COMBINED WITH 3.2% MALT LIQUOR, ON-SALE.



   An off-sale intoxicating liquor license may not be issued for premises
where 3.2% malt liquor is sold on-sale.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.088  LIABILITY INSURANCE.



   Liability insurance is required, providing coverage in an amount no
less than that set by this chapter.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.089  LIQUOR SAMPLES.



   A licensee with an off-sale intoxicating liquor license may provide
samples of malt liquor, wine, liqueurs, or cordials, which the licensee has
in stock, and is offering for sale to the general public. The samples must be
dispensed at no charge and are to be consumed in the licensees’ premises
during permitted hours of off-sale in a quantity of less than 100 milliliters
of malt liquor per variety per customer, 50 milliliters of wine per variety
per customer, and 25 milliliters of liqueur or cordials per variety per
customer.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.090  LIMITATIONS ON ISSUANCE OF LICENSES TO ONE PERSON OR PLACE.



   No more than one off-sale intoxicating liquor license may be directly
or indirectly issued to the same person or for the same place in the city.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.091  IN COMBINATION WITH INTOXICATING LIQUOR, ON-SALE.



   An off-sale intoxicating liquor license may not be issued or
transferred to a licensee who already possesses an on-sale intoxicating
liquor license. However, those licensees who possess both an intoxicating
liquor on-sale and an intoxicating liquor off-sale license effective January
1, 1991, may continue to renew such a combination of licenses. This renewal
privilege terminates if either license is revoked or upon transfer of either
license due to change of ownership.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



WINE LICENSES



§ 111.115  ELIGIBLE LICENSES.



   An on-sale wine license may be issued to a restaurant, having
facilities for seating at least 30 guests at one time.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.116  COMBINATION WITH INTOXICATING MALT LIQUOR.



   The restaurant holding an on-sale wine license and an on-sale 3.2% malt
liquor license may sell intoxicating malt liquor at on-sale but only if the
gross receipts of the restaurant are at least 60% attributable to the sale of
food. Prior to selling any intoxicating malt liquor, the licensee shall file
with the City Clerk an affidavit setting forth the claim and providing the
City Clerk with such additional financial records as are required. Upon
adequate showing of compliance with these requirements, the City Clerk shall
issue written authorization allowing the combination sale.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.117  INVESTIGATION FEE.



   At the time of submitting an initial application for an on-sale license
or an application for transfer of an existing license, the applicant shall
pay the investigation fee set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.118  LIABILITY INSURANCE.



   Liability insurance is required, providing coverage in an amount no
less than that set by this chapter. However, liability insurance is not
required for a licensee who at the time of submission of their application
for renewal provides to the City Clerk an affidavit and such supporting
financial records as may be required by the City Clerk which establish that
the sales of wine plus sales of all other alcoholic beverages for the
preceding year were less than $10,000.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.119  RESTRICTIONS.



   A licensee may serve wine for consumption on the licensed premises only
in conjunction with the sale of food. This section shall not apply to the
sale of wine exclusively for sacramental purposes.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.120  LICENSE FOR TEMPORARY VINTAGE WINE AUCTIONS, OFF-SALE.



   A temporary license may be issued for the off-sale of vintage wine at
an auction. The term VINTAGE WINE means bottled wine which is at least 5
years old. The license is to be effective for no more than 3 consecutive days
and the auction shall not sell more than 600 cases of wine. The requirements
for liability insurance shall not be applicable and no investigation fee is
required.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



SET-UP PERMITS



§ 111.135  ELIGIBLE LICENSEES.



   A set-up permit may be issued to a restaurant, hotel/motel, an
establishment licensed for the on-sale of 3.2% malt liquor or a club.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.136  LIMITATIONS ON LICENSING.



   A permit authorizes the consumption and display of intoxicating liquor
on the premises. The permit does not authorize the sale of intoxicating
liquor.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.137  EXPIRATION DATE.



   All permits expire on March 31 of each year.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.138  CLUB LOCKERS.



   A club issued a permit under this section may allow members to bring
and to keep a personal supply of intoxicating liquor in lockers on the
club’s premises. All bottles kept on the premises must have attached to it
a label signed by the member. No person under 21 years of age may keep a
supply of intoxicating liquor on club premises.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.139  LIABILITY INSURANCE.



   No liability insurance is required.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.140  ONE-DAY SET-UP PERMITS.



   A one-day permit for the consumption and display of intoxicating liquor
may be issued to a non-profit organization in conjunction with a social
activity sponsored by the organization. No more than 10 permits may be issued
in any one year by the city pursuant to this provision.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



SUNDAY LIQUOR LICENSE



§ 111.155  ELIGIBLE LICENSEES.



   A Sunday liquor license may be issued to a restaurant, club, bowling
center, taproom or hotel/motel which provides for the sale of food and which
already holds an on-sale intoxicating liquor license. The minimum seating
capacity for the food service area must be at least 30 persons. Taprooms are
not subject to the minimum seating capacity for the food service area of at
least 30 persons.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992; Am. Ord. 63, 4th Series, passed 1-5-2015)



§ 111.156  ADDITIONAL FEES.



   No additional investigation fee is required. However, there shall be
imposed a Sunday license fee in addition to the annual license fee for the
on-sale intoxicating liquor license.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



CABARET LICENSE



§ 111.170  ELIGIBLE LICENSEES.



   The city may issue a cabaret license permitting the sale of
intoxicating liquor at on-sale to a hotel/motel, restaurant, bowling center,
club, congressionally chartered veteran's organization, or exclusive liquor
store.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.171  WHEN LICENSE IS REQUIRED.



   A cabaret license is required before any on-sale licensee may provide
live entertainment for its patrons. Live entertainment includes, but is not
limited to, group performances, bands or stage shows. However, no cabaret
license shall be required if the live entertainment is limited to a single
musical instrument which accompanies group singing by patrons.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.172  INVESTIGATION FEE.



   At the time of submitting an initial application for a cabaret license
or an application for transfer of an existing license, the applicant shall
pay the same investigation fee as required for an applicant for an on-sale
liquor license. However, if the applicant already possesses an on-sale liquor
license and is converting to a cabaret license, no additional investigation
fee shall be required.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.173  LIABILITY INSURANCE.



   Liability insurance is required, providing coverage in an amount no
less than that set by this chapter.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.174  LICENSE LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   It shall be a basis for revocation or suspension of the
cabaret license as well as the intoxicating liquor on-sale license if a
licensee permits any patrons or those providing live entertainment upon the
licensed premises to expose specified anatomical areas or to engage in
specified sexual activities.



   (B)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.  Less than completely and opaquely
covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breast(s)
below a point immediately above the top of the areola and human male genitals
in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.



      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.  Any presentation which in whole or
in part depicts sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sado-masochistic abuse.



      SEXUAL CONDUCT.  Human masturbation, sexual intercourse or any
touching of the genitals, pubic areas or buttocks of either a male or female
or the breasts of a female, whether alone or between members of the same or
opposite sex or between humans and animals, done in an act of apparent sexual
stimulation or gratification.



      SEXUAL EXCITEMENT.  The condition of male or female genitals or
the breasts of the female when in a state of sexual stimulation or the
sensual experiences of humans engaging in or witnessing sexual conduct or
nudity.



      SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE.  Flagellation or torture by or upon a
person who is nude or clad in under garments, in revealing or bizarre costume
or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained
by another.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.175  ADDITIONAL FEES.



   There shall be imposed a cabaret license fee in addition to the annual
license fee for the on-sale intoxicating liquor license.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



FEES



§ 111.190  INVESTIGATION FEE.



   (A)   Investigation fees shall be charged for on-sale licenses to
sell intoxicating liquor or wine either for an initial application or on
application for transfer of an existing license.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



§ 111.191  ANNUAL LICENSE FEES.



   (A)   The Council will annually establish license fees as they
relate to alcoholic beverages. A list of such fees is available in the City
Clerk's office.



   (B)   No license fees shall be refunded.



   (C)   Liquor licenses issued other than January 1 shall be prorated
for the remainder of the calendar year.



§ 111.192  FEE INCREASE PROCEDURES.



   The annual license fee may not be increased until a public hearing is
conducted on the issue. Notice of the proposed increase of fees must be
mailed to all affected licensees at least 30 days before the date of the
hearing.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1992)



REGULATIONS



§ 111.205  HOURS OF SALE.



   (A)   3.2% malt liquor, on-sale or off-sale. No sale of 3.2% malt
liquor, whether on-sale or off-sale, may be made at the following times:



      (1)   Between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the days of Monday
through Saturday;



      (2)   Between 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sunday. However,
sale of 3.2% malt liquor made by a licensee possessing an intoxicating liquor
license shall conform with the hours of sale established for the style of AN
intoxicating liquor license possessed by the licensee.



   (B)   Intoxicating liquor, on-sale. No sale of intoxicating liquor
at on-sale may be made at the following times:



      (1)   Between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the days of Monday
through Sunday;



      (2)   Between 8:00 p.m. on December 24 and 8:00 a.m. on
December 25.



   (C)   Sunday liquor sales. A licensee possessing an on-sale
intoxicating liquor license as well as a Sunday liquor license shall make no
sales of alcoholic beverages at the following times:



      (1)   Between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the days of Monday
through Sunday;



      (2)   Between 8:00 p.m. on December 24 and 2:00 a.m. on
December 25;



      (3)   Between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on December 25.



   (D)   Intoxicating liquor, off-sale. No sale of alcoholic beverages
may be made by an off-sale licensee at the following times:



      (1)   On Sundays, except between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m.;



      (2)   Before 8:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday;



      (3)   After 10:00 p.m. on Monday through Saturday;



      (4)   On Thanksgiving Day:



      (5)   On Christmas Day - December 25;



      (6)   (a)   After 8:00 p.m. on Christmas Eve, December 24.



         (b)   No delivery of alcohol to an off-sale licensee may
be made by a wholesaler or accepted by an off-sale licensee on a Sunday. No
order solicitation or merchandising may be made by a wholesaler on a Sunday.



   (E)   Set-up permit limitations. No establishment with a set-up
permit may allow a person to consume or display intoxicating liquor and no
person may consume or display intoxicating liquor at the following times:



      (1)   Between 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sundays;



      (2)   Between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the days of Monday
through Saturday.



   (F)   Wine, on-sale. A licensee possessing an on-sale wine license
may not sell wine at the following times:



      (1)   Between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the days of Monday
through Saturday;



      (2)   Between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Sundays;



      (3)   Between 8:00 p.m. on December 24 and 2:00 a.m. on
December 25, unless December 24 is a Sunday, in which case the Sunday sales
schedule shall apply;



      (4)   Between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on December 25, unless
December 25 is a Sunday, in which case the Sunday sales schedule shall apply.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991;  Am. Ord. 231, passed 8-18-2003; Am. Ord. 68,
4th Series, passed 7-7-2015; Am. Ord. 88, 4th Series, 5-1-2017)



§ 111.206  PERSONS ALLOWED ON THE LICENSED PREMISES.



   (A)   Closing the licensed premises. All licensed premises must be
closed to the public and no one may be on the licensed premises at the time
that sales, consumption or display of alcoholic beverages are prohibited,
except as follows:



      (1)   An employee of the licensee actually engaged in the
performance of duties for the licensee;



      (2)   A restaurant while actually serving meals to customers,
but only if the annual gross receipts of the restaurant are at least 60%
attributable to the sale of food.



   (B)   Age restrictions.



      (1)   No person under 18 years of age may serve or sell
intoxicating liquor in a licensed premises.



      (2)   No person under 21 years of age may enter a licensed
premises except to work, consume meals on premises that qualify as a
restaurant or attend social functions that are held in a portion of the
premises where liquor is not sold.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 111.207  LICENSE REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.



   (A)   Responsible officer. The Chief of Police shall be responsible
for investigating any violations of law or license limitations by any license
holder. If the Chief of Police determines that a violation may warrant
immediate disciplinary action, then the information concerning such
violations shall be provided to the Council in a timely fashion. In all other
situations, the Chief of Police shall coordinate with the City Clerk to
provide the information to the Council at the time the City Clerk submits the
application for renewal of licenses to the Council for consideration.



   (B)   Council action. If the Council determines that disciplinary
action may be warranted due to the information provided by the Chief of
Police, then a formal hearing before the Council shall be scheduled. Notice
of such hearing shall be given to the license holder at least 30 days prior
to the hearing. The notice shall contain information adequate to advise the
license holder concerning the allegations. The license holder shall have the
right to appear at the Council meeting and to contest the claims. Upon the
finding that the license holder has failed to comply with the law or a
license restriction, the Council may suspend the license for up to 60 days or
revoke the license or impose a civil fine not to exceed $2,000 for each
violation.



   (C)   Civil and criminal penalties. The imposition of a suspension
or revocation of a license as a civil penalty shall not impair the ability of
lawful authority from filing criminal charges and seeking criminal penalties
for any violation of law.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 111.208  LAWFUL GAMBLING.



   (A)   Leasing agreements. A licensee may lease any portion of the
licensed premises to "qualified" organizations licensed to conduct lawful
gambling pursuant to M.S. Ch. 349, as it may be amended from time to time. An
organization is "qualified" for leasing purposes if it meets one of the
following criteria:



      (1)   At least 40% of its active members reside within the
city;



      (2)   Eighty percent of its active members reside within
Minnesota School District 77; or



      (3)   One hundred percent of net profits generated within the
city are irrevocably designated to an eligible recipient as established from
time to time by resolution of the Council and located within the corporate
limits of the cities of North Mankato or Mankato, Minnesota. For those
organizations qualifying under this subsection, a minimum of 40% of the net
profits generated within the city will be restricted to the benefit of local
residents as defined by the geographic area within Minnesota School District
77.



   (B)   Liquor license renewals. At the time a licensee applies for
renewal of a liquor license or permit, there shall be submitted to the City
Clerk copies of all leasing agreements concerning any lawful gambling
covering any portion of the previous 12 months. The licensee shall also
submit a copy of the verified statement of the organization concerning the
residency requirement.



   (C)   Leasing restrictions. The following restrictions apply to
lawful gambling leases.



      (1)   A licensee may not lease to anyone except a "qualified"
organization.



      (2)   A licensee may not lease any portion of the licensed
premises to more than 1 organization licensed to conduct lawful gambling at
the same time.



      (3)   The maximum term of such lease shall be no more than 2
years, but such lease may be renewed.



   (D)   Local gambling tax.



      (1)   A tax of 3% shall be imposed upon the gross receipts
generated within the city by licensed organizations from the conduct of
lawful gambling activities. The 3% tax shall be levied on the gross receipts
less the cost of prizes actually paid out by the organization.



      (2)   The tax shall be paid to the city on a monthly basis, on
or before the last business day of the month following the month for which
the report is made. Such payment shall be accompanied by a report containing
the following information upon such form as may be required by the City
Finance Director:



         (a)   Total amount of receipts from lawful gambling
activities within the city during the reporting period.



         (b)   The total amount of prizes actually paid out by
the organization during the reporting period from such gross receipts.



         (c)   The signature of the person filing the return.



         (d)   The period covered by the return.



   (E)   Specific expenditures.



      (1)   A licensed organization shall make specific expenditures
of 10% from its net profits derived from lawful gambling. The 10% expenditure
shall be levied on gross receipts generated within the city less prizes
actually paid out by the organization and amounts expended for allowable
expenses to include the 3% local gambling tax attributable to such gross
receipts.



      (2)   The specific expenditure shall be paid twice a year on
or before June 30 and December 31 toward the lawful purpose established from
time to time by resolution of the Council.



      (3)   The licensed organization shall also submit the
following information upon such form as may be required by the City Finance
Director:



         (a)   Total amount of receipts generated within the city
from lawful gambling activities during the reporting period;



         (b)   The total amount of prizes actually paid out
attributable to the gross receipts by the organization during the reporting
period;



         (c)   The total amount of money expended for allowable
expenses attributable to the gross receipts;



         (d)   The amount of net profits derived from lawful
gambling during the reporting period attributable to the gross profits;



         (e)   The identification of the lawful purpose to which
such 10% expenditure was made;



         (f)   The signature of the person filing the report;



         (g)   The period covered by the report; and



         (h)   A receipt from the person or entity representing
the lawful purpose to which such 10% expenditure was made.



(Ord. 107, passed 6-5-1989; Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991; Am. Ord. 155,
passed 5-20-1996; Am. Ord. 48, 4th Series, passed 1-22-2013)



§ 111.209  ADULT USES.



   (A)   Prohibition. It is unlawful for the holder of an on-sale
liquor, 3.2% malt liquor, wine or bottle club license issued under the
chapter or for any manager, officer, agent servant, or employee of such
license holder to exhibit, allow, or permit on the licensed premises any
adult use defined in Chapter 156.



   (B)   Exceptions. This section does not apply to any license holder
which, prior to April 15, 2002, lawfully allowed adult uses on the licensed
premises.



(Ord. 216, passed 4-15-2002)  Penalty, see § 111.999



§ 111.999  PENALTY.



   Unless otherwise declared in this chapter with respect to a particular
offense, it is a petty misdemeanor for any person to violate any provision of
this chapter. However, the following violations shall be considered a
misdemeanor:



   (A)   A violation which is committed in a manner or under
circumstances so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or
property;



   (B)   A violation which is preceded by 2 or more convictions within
the preceding 12 month period.  However, this provision shall not apply to
parking violations.



(Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



CHAPTER 112: ADULT USES



Section



   112.01   Definitions



   112.02   Purpose



   112.03   General provisions



   112.04   Adult use-principal



   112.05   Adult uses-accessory



   112.06   Non-conforming adult use, principal or accessory



   112.07   Adult uses



   112.99   Penalty



§ 112.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADULT USES.  Includes adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters,
adult motion picture rental, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult
massage parlors, adult steam room/bathhouse/sauna facilities, adult
companionship establishments, adult rap/conversation parlors, adult
health/sport clubs, adult cabarets, adult novelty businesses, adult motion
picture arcades, adult modeling studios, adult hotels/motels, adult body
painting studios, and other premises, enterprises, establishments, businesses
or places open to some or all members of the public, at or in which there is
an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction or description of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" which are
capable of being seen by members of the public.



   ADULT USE-ACCESSORY. A use, business, or establishment having 10% or
less of its stock in trade or floor area allocated to, or more than 20% or
less of its gross receipts derived from movie rentals or magazine sales.



   ADULT USE-PRINCIPAL. A use, business, or establishment having more than
10% of its stock in trade or floor area allocated to, or more than 20% of its
gross receipts derived from, any adult use.



   ADULT USE-BODY PAINTING STUDIO. An establishment or business which
provides the service of applying paint or other substance, whether
transparent or non-transparent, to or on the body of a patron when such body
is wholly or partially nude in terms of "specified anatomical areas."



   ADULT USE-BOOKSTORE. A building or portion of a building used for the
barter, rental or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures,
slides, records, audio tape, videotape, or motion picture film if such
building or portion of a building is not open to the public generally but not
to 1 or more classes of the public extending any minor by reason of age or if
a substantial or significant portion of such items are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of “specified
sexual activities” or "specified anatomical areas."



   ADULT USE-CABARET. A building or portion of a building used for
providing dancing or other live entertainment, if such building or portion of
a building excludes minors by virtue of age or if such dancing or other live
entertainment is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the
presentation, display, depiction or description of "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas."



   ADULT USE-COMPANIONSHIP ESTABLISHMENT. A companionship establishment
which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides the service of
engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion between an
employee of the establishment and a customer, if such service is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas."



   ADULT USE-CONVERSATION/RAP PARLOR.  A conversation/rap parlor which
excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides the service of engaging
in or listening to conversation, talk, or discussion, if such service is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas."



   ADULT USE-HEALTH/SPORT CLUB.  A health/sport club which excludes
minors by reason of age, or if such club is distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."



   ADULT USE-HOTEL OR MOTEL.  Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel
from which minors are specifically excluded from patronage and wherein
material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas."



   ADULT USE-MASSAGE PARLOR HEALTH CLUB.  A massage parlor or health club
which restricts minors by reason of age, and which provides the services of
massage, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."



   ADULT USE-MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A building or portion of a
building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting
material if such building or portion of a building as a prevailing practices
excludes minors by virtue of age, or if such material is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein.



   ADULT USE-MODELING STUDIO.  An establishment whose major business is
the provision, to customers, of figure models who are so provided with the
intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such
customers and who engage in "specified sexual activities" or display
"specified anatomical areas" while being observed, painted, painted upon,
sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted by such
customers.



   ADULT USE-MOTION PICTURE ARCADE.  Any place to which the public is
permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically or mechanically controlled or operated till or motor picture
machines, projectors or other image-producing devises are maintained to show
images to 5 or fewer persons per machine at any on time, and where the images
so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting
or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."



   ADULT USE-MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A building or portion of a building
with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting materials in such
building or portion of a building as a prevailing practice excludes minors by
virtue of age or if such material is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for
observation by patrons therein.



   ADULT USE-NOVELTY BUSINESS.  A business which has a principal activity
the sale of devices which stimulate human genitals or devices which are
designated for sexual stimulation.



   ADULT USE-SAUNA.  A sauna which excludes minors by reason of age, or
which provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of
bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning,
relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided by the steam
room/bathhouse facility is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."



   ADULT USE-STEAM BATHHOUSE FACILITY.  A building or portion of a
building used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the
purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot
air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent if such building or portion of
a building restricts minors by reason of age or if the service provided by
the steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.



      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breast(s) below a point
immediately above the top of the areola.



      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even
if completely and opaquely covered.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.



      (1)   Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation,
anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical
stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of
a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a
sexual relationship, and any of the following sexual-oriented acts or
conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio,
necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty;



      (2)   Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual
stimulation, arousal or tumescence;



      (3)   Use of a human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral
copulation, coitus, or masturbation;



      (4)   Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, or female breast;



      (5)   Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom
are nude, clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes, and who
are engaged in activities involving flagellation, torture, fettering, binding
or other physical restraint of any such persons;



      (6)   Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other
sexually-oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or



      (7)   Human erection, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal
irrigation.



(Ord. 215, passed 4-15-2002)



§ 112.02  PURPOSE.



   The nature of adult uses is such that they are recognized as having
adverse secondary characteristics, particularly when they are accessible to
minors and located near residential property or related residential uses such
as schools, day care centers, libraries or parks. Furthermore, the
concentration of adult uses has an adverse effect upon the use and enjoyment
of adjacent areas. The nature of adult uses requires that they not be allowed
within certain zoning districts, or within minimum distances from each other
or residential uses. Special regulation of adult uses is necessary to ensure
that the adverse secondary effects would not contribute or enhance criminal
activity in the area of such uses nor will it contribute to the blighting or
downgrading of the surrounding property and lessening of its value.



(Ord. 215, passed 4-15-2002)



§ 112.03  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   Adult uses as defined in this chapter shall be subject to the following
general provisions:



   (A)   Activities classified as obscene are not permitted and are
prohibited. In no instance shall the application or interpretation of this
chapter be construed to allow an activity otherwise prohibited by law.



   (B)   Adult uses, either principal or accessory, shall be prohibited
from locating in any building which is also utilized for residential purposes.



   (C)   An adult use which does not qualify as an accessory use
pursuant to chapter, shall be classified as an adult use-principal.



(Ord. 215, passed 4-15-2002)



§ 112.04  ADULT USE-PRINCIPAL.



   (A)   Adult use-principal shall be a permitted use in the M-1
District, subject to the locational criteria outlined in § 112.03(B) above.



   (B)   Adult use-principal shall be located at least 350 radial feet,
as measured in a straight line from the closest point of the property line of
the building upon which the adult use-principal is located to the property
line of:



      (1)   A zoning district in which residential uses are
specifically listed as a permitted or conditional use;



      (2)   A licensed day care center;



      (3)   A public or private educational facility classified as
an elementary, junior high or senior high;



      (4)   A public library;



      (5)   A public park;



      (6)   Another adult use-principal; or



      (7)   Any church or church related organization.



   (C)   No adult use-principal shall be located in the same building
or upon the same property as another adult use-principal.



   (D)   Adult use-principal shall adhere to the following signing
regulations in addition to the sign regulations of Chapter 154.



      (1)   Sign messages shall be generic in nature and shall only
identify the name of business.



      (2)   Signs shall comply with the requirements of size and
number for the district in which they are located.



   (E)   Adult use-principal shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 12:30
a.m. for its hours of operation. A differing time schedule may be approved by
the City Council, if it can be satisfactorily demonstrated by the operator to
the City Council that all of the following apply:



      (1)   Not adversely impact or affect uses or activities within
350 feet;



      (2)   Will not result in increased policing and related
service calls; and



      (3)   Is critical to the operation of the business.



(Ord. 215, passed 4-15-2002; Am. Ord. 21, 4th Series, passed 1-20-2009)



§ 112.05  ADULT USES-ACCESSORY.



   Adult uses-accessory, shall be permitted in all commercial districts,
provided the accessory use conforms with the provisions of this section.



   (A)   Adult uses-accessory shall:



      (1)   Comprise no more than 10% of the floor area of the
establishment in which it is located;



      (2)   Comprise no more than 20% of the gross receipts of the
entire business operation; and



      (3)   Not involve or include any activity except the sale or
rental of merchandise.



   (B)   Adult usse-accessory shall be restricted from and prohibit
access to minors by the physical separation of such items from areas of
general public access:



      (1)   Movie rentals.  Display areas shall be restricted from
general view and shall be under the control of the persons responsible for
the operation.



      (2)   Magazines.  Publications classified or qualifying as
adult uses shall not be physically accessible to minors and shall be covered
with a wrapper or other means to prevent display of any material other than
the publication title.



      (3)   Other use.  Adult uses-accessory not specifically cited
shall comply with the intent of this section subject to the approval of the
Zoning Administrator.



   (C)   Adult uses-accessory shall be prohibited from both internal
and external advertising and signing of adult materials and products.



(Ord. 215, passed 4-15-2002)



§ 112.06  NON-CONFORMING ADULT USE-PRINCIPAL OR ACCESSORY.



   (A)   Adult uses which are in existence prior to April 15, 2002,
shall be classified as legal non-conforming uses and may continue in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. If an adult use becomes
non-conforming because of rezoning or the establishment of a use listed in §
112.03, the adult use shall be considered legal nonconforming and may
continue in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. In no instance,
shall a legal nonconforming adult use be allowed to structurally expand the
use on the lot on which it is located when the use became legally
nonconforming, or expand the adult use to include another lot on which the
adult use was not located when it became legally nonconforming.



   (B)   If the building in which a legal nonconforming adult use is
located is destroyed by any means to an extent of greater than 50% of its
market value, or if the building in which the legally nonconforming adult use
is vacant for more than 12 months, an adult use shall not be re-established
unless it is in conformance with this chapter.



(Ord. 215, passed 4-15-2002)



§ 112.07  ADULT USES.



   (A)   Prohibition.  It is unlawful for the holder of an on-sale
liquor, 3.2% malt liquor, wine or bottle club license issued under Chapter
111, Alcoholic Beverages, or for any  manager, officer, agent servant, or
employee of such license holder to exhibit, allow or permit on the licensed
premises any adult use defined in Chapter 156.



   (B)   Exceptions.  This section does not apply to any license
holder that, prior to April 15, 2002, lawfully allowed adult uses on the
licensed premises.



(Ord. 21, 4th Series, passed 1-20-2009)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty
of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished not more than the
maximum penalty for a misdemeanor as prescribed by state law.



   (B)   Any violation of this chapter shall be a basis for the
suspension or revocation of the certificate of occupancy for the property or
building in or on which the adult use is located. In the event the City
Council proposes to revoke or suspend a certificate of occupancy, the
property owner shall be notified in writing of the basis for such proposed
suspension or revocation. The City Council shall hold a hearing for the
purpose of determining whether to revoke or suspend the certificate of
occupancy, which hearing shall be within 30 days of the date of the notice.



   (C)   The City Council shall determine whether to revoke or suspend
a certificate of occupancy within 30 days after the close of the hearing or
within 60 days of the dates of the notice, whichever is sooner, and shall
notify the property owner of its decision within that period.



(Ord. 215, passed 4-15-2002)



TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES




      Chapter





         130.   GENERAL OFFENSES




CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES



Section



General Provisions



   130.01   Application



   130.02   Definitions



   130.03   Disorderly conduct



   130.04   Trespass



   130.05   Interference with ambulance service



   130.06   Consumption of alcoholic beverages on public property



   130.07   Consumption of alcoholic beverages upon private parking lots



   130.08   Damage to property; graffiti



   130.09   Discharging firearms



   130.10   Curfew for minors



   130.11   Fireworks



   130.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 130.01  APPLICATION.



   This chapter shall apply to all conduct within the city, whether on
public or private property. Furthermore, this chapter is intended to act as a
localized supplement to Minnesota Statutes concerning crimes and penalties.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 130.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Any beverage containing more than 0.5% alcohol by
volume.



   BODILY HARM. Physical pain or injury, illness or any impairment of
physical condition.



   GREAT BODILY HARM. Bodily injury which creates a high probability of
death or which causes serious permanent disfigurement or which causes a
permanent or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily
member or organ or other serious bodily harm.



   PRIVATE PROPERTY. All real estate which is not public property.



   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Land, buildings, or fixtures owned or leased by the
city, formally dedicated to the public benefit or actually used by the public
without formal dedication but in a manner which creates the appearance of
dedicated public property.



   SUBSTANTIAL BODILY HARM. Bodily injury which involves a temporary but
substantial disfigurement, or which causes a temporary but substantial loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ or which causes a
fracture of any bodily member.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991)



§ 130.03  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   It is unlawful for any person to do any of the following in a public or
private place, while knowing or having reasonable grounds to know that it
will or will tend to alarm, anger or disturb others or provoke an assault or
breach of the peace:



   (A)   Voluntarily enter the water of any lake or river within the
city without being garbed in a bathing suit sufficient to cover the person
and equal to the standards generally adopted and accepted by the public;



   (B)   Violate the exhibition driving provisions of Title VII of this
Code;



   (C)   Cause the making or production of an unnecessary noise by
shouting;



   (D)   Use a flash or spotlight in a manner so as to annoy or
endanger others;



   (E)   Cause damage to any public or private real property or to any
personal property;



   (F)   Urinate in public.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991; Am. Ord. 21, 4th Series, passed 1-20-2009)
Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.04  TRESPASS.



   (A)   Public property. It is unlawful for any person to enter upon
or into any public property which is closed to public access.



   (B)   Private property . It is unlawful for any person to trespass
upon the premises of another without claim of right.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991) Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.05  INTERFERENCE WITH AMBULANCE SERVICE.



   It is unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made a call for
ambulance service without probable cause to believe that an emergency exists
or to neglect to obey any reasonable order of a driver or attendants at an
ambulance call or to interfere with the ambulance service's discharge of its
duties.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991) Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.06  CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   (A)   Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to consume or
possess other than for purposes of transportation any alcoholic beverage in
an unsealed container while on any public property.



   (B)   Exceptions. This section shall not apply to:



      (1)   City parks;



      (2)   Public property where permission has been specifically
granted by the Council.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991) Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.07  CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES UPON PRIVATE PARKING LOTS.



   (A)   Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to consume or
possess in an unsealed container any alcoholic beverages while on any
privately owned parking lot which is clearly sign-posted prohibiting such
possession and consumption.



   (B)   Exceptions. This section shall not apply to a person when the
unsealed container of alcoholic beverage is kept in the trunk of a motor
vehicle if it is equipped with a trunk or in some other area of the motor
vehicle not normally occupied by the driver or passengers if the motor
vehicle is not equipped with a trunk. A utility or glove compartment shall be
deemed to be within the area occupied by the driver or passengers.



(Am. Ord. 121, passed 9-16-1991) Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.08  DAMAGE TO PROPERTY; GRAFFITI.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      GRAFFITI.  In addition to its usual and customary meaning of
defacing walls or structures with messages or slogans, GRAFFITI shall also
mean any letter, numeral, figure, emblem, insignia, picture, outline,
character, spectacle, delineation, announcement, word, phrase, diagram,
symbol, sketch, inscription or representation, wherein the contents thereof
are visible to any member of the general public and which contains references
to sexual activity, diagrams relating to sexual activity or sexual organs,
references to criminal activities or groups which promote or are involved in
criminal activity, swearing or fighting words, defamatory materials about any
person, references to relationships, or any marking of any kind whatsoever
which results in damage to, defacing of, marring of, or discoloring of any
sidewalk, street, or other public surface, any vehicle, any equipment, lamp,
lamp post or other city property, or of the exterior surface of a wall,
fence, door, building or other structure, whether publicly or privately owned.



      OWNER.  Means and includes the owner of record of the subject
property, whether public or private, at the time of the placement or
discovery of the graffiti or at a subsequent time, the beneficial owner under
a land trust, the contract purchaser, or that person or persons or trust in
whose name the general taxes for the last preceding year were paid, except
that OWNER shall not include the city.



   (B)   Conduct prohibited.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to inscribe, draw, or
otherwise place or cause to be placed any graffiti upon the surface of any
building, structure, wall or surface of other property that is publicly or
privately owned.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any parent or legal guardian to
knowingly permit any minor child in his or her custody or control to violate
division (B)(1) of this section.



      (3)   The parent or legal guardian of a minor defendant who
resides with the parent or legal guardian at the time of the offense may be
held liable for any fine or condition of restitution or reparation imposed by
a court upon a minor for violation of this section; provided, that minor has
not paid the fine or made restitution or reparation within the time ordered
by the court; and further provided that the parent or legal guardian has been
served with summons or notice to appear whether in the original cause or in
any subsequent proceedings arising therefrom, including sentencing or
collection actions, as provided by law.



   (C)   Removal by owner.



      (1)   Owner's responsibility.  It shall be the duty of the
owner of the structure or wall or other private property upon which any
graffiti is placed or made to remove, eradicate, or eliminate the inscription
or representation within 30 days of the occurrence unless granted additional
time by the City Council.



      (2)   Notice to remove graffiti.  In the event the owner has
failed to eliminate the graffiti, the owner shall be notified by certified
mail or personal notice that he or she has 30 days from the date of the
notice in which to remove the graffiti.  In the event that charges have been
filed against the person believed responsible for placement of the graffiti
and the owner can show to the city that there is a reasonable likelihood that
the person will be required to make restitution or restore the premises to
its previous condition, the owner may be given additional time to meet the
removal requirements.  In no event shall the owner be granted more than a
total of 6 months' time to remove graffiti, but any extensions shall be based
solely upon a reasonable likelihood of apprehension and conviction of the
person responsible.  In the absence of the reasonable likelihood, the owner
is responsible for removal within the time allowed in divisions (C)(1) and
(2) of this section.



      (3)   List of contractors and cleaning materials.  The city
may make available a list of contractors in the business of removing graffiti
and list of cleaning materials generally recognized in the industry as
effective in the removal of graffiti.  By providing lists of contractors and
cleaning materials, the city does not guarantee the quality or adequacy of
work performed by anyone selected by owner or the effectiveness or safety of
the materials listed, and the city expressly disclaims responsibility or
liability for the quality or adequacy of the work or materials or any claims
for damage or injury arising therefrom.



   (D)   Removal by the city.



      (1)   The city shall have the right but not the duty to remove
graffiti from the exterior of private property if the owner informs the city
of the presence of the graffiti and of the owner's inability to remove it. 
Prior to the city entering any private property to remove graffiti, the owner
must sign a statement authorizing removal by the city and agreeing to pay the
reasonable costs of the removal and to allow the recording of a lien against
the real estate upon which the work was performed if the cost is not paid to
the city within 30 days of the date of the invoice sent to the owner.  The
owner must also sign a release holding the city harmless from any claims or
suits brought for damages pursuant to any adverse or injurious effects of
such chemicals or from the actions taken by the city or its employees to
remove the graffiti prior to the city commencing work on the property.  If
the property owner does not remove the graffiti within the time specified or
extended time requested and granted by the city or if the city is unable to
perform the work at the request of the owner, the owner shall be subject to
the penalties listed in division (E) of this section.



      (2)   If the city performs the graffiti removal pursuant to
division (D)(1) of this section, it shall be entitled to a lien and to file a
notice of lien against the property upon which the work was performed for the
cost of the removal.



   (E)   Penalty.



      (1)   Upon a finding of guilty for violation of division (B)
of this section, an offender shall be punished as provided in § 130.99. 
Additionally, the court may, as a condition of probation, supervision, or
conditional discharge, require that the party guilty of violating the
provisions of division (B) of this section make full and complete restitution
to the owner of the property for expenses incurred in the removal of the
graffiti or, with the consent of the owner, restore the structure, wall,
building or surface to its previous condition.  In addition, the court may
order as a further penalty community service in the form of time to be spent
in cleaning property that has been defaced by graffiti in any location in the
city.



      (2)   Upon a finding of guilty for violation of division
(C)(1) of this section, an offender shall be punished as provided in §
130.99.  Each and every day that graffiti is permitted to remain beyond the
time specified in division (C)(2) of this section shall constitute a separate
violation.



   (F)   Compliance by the city.



      (1)   It is the intention of the city that graffiti discovered
upon city property or public property under the jurisdiction and control of
the city will be removed within the time periods for graffiti removal imposed
upon other governmental bodies and owners of private property under this
section.  The City Council shall have the authority to order and direct the
removal of graffiti.



§ 130.09  DISCHARGING FIREARMS.



   (A)   Discharge of firearms prohibited.  It shall be unlawful to
discharge any gun, rifle, pistol, revolver or other firearm, or any air
rifle, B-B gun, paintball gun or other device for the propulsion of an object
by means of compressed gas or mechanical spring, or any other weapon capable
of doing bodily harm and/or damage to private and/or public property within
the corporate limits.



   (B)   Bow and arrow.  No person shall fire or discharge any bow and
arrow in any part of the corporate limits.



   (C)   Carrying of firearms prohibited. No person shall carry any
gun, rifle, pistol, revolver or other firearm, or any air rifle, B-B gun,
paintball gun or other device for the propulsion of an object by means of
compressed gas or mechanical spring, or any other weapon capable of doing
bodily harm and/or damage, unless such firearm is dismounted, broken apart or
carried in a case in such a manner that it cannot be discharged.



   (D)   Exceptions.  This section shall not prohibit the following:



      (1)   The firing of a military salute.



      (2)   The firing of weapons by persons of the nation's armed
forces acting under military authority.



      (3)   Law enforcement officials in the proper enforcement of
the law.



      (4)   Any person in the proper exercise of the right of
self-defense.



      (5)   Any person otherwise lawfully permitted by proper
federal, state or local authorities to discharge a firearm.



      (6)   The discharging of any bow and arrow, air rifle, B-B gun
or paintball gun within an enclosed building.



   (E)   Severability.  If any provision of this section is declared
by any court of competent jurisdiction to be illegal and in conflict with any
law, the validity of the remaining provisions and their application to other
persons or circumstances shall not be affected.



(Am. Ord. 21, 4th Series, passed 1-20-2009)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.10  CURFEW FOR MINORS.



   (A)   Purpose.  The curfew for minors established by this section
is maintained for four primary reasons:



      (1)   To protect the public from illegal acts of minors
committed during the curfew hours;



      (2)   To protect minors from improper influences that prevail
during the curfew hours, including involvement with gangs;



      (3)   To protect minors from criminal activity that occurs
during the curfew hours; and



      (4)   To help parents control their minor children.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      EMERGENCY ERRAND.  A task that if not completed promptly
threatens the health, safety, or comfort of the minor or a member of the
minor's household.  The term shall include, but shall not be limited to,
seeking urgent medical treatment, seeking urgent assistance from law
enforcement or fire department personnel, and seeking shelter from the
elements or urgent assistance from a utility company due to a natural or
human-made calamity.



      PLACES OF AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAINMENT OR REFRESHMENT.  Those places
that include, but are not limited to, movie theaters, pinball arcades,
shopping malls, nightclubs catering to minors, restaurants, and pool halls.



      PRIMARY CARE or PRIMARY CUSTODY.  The person who is responsible
for providing food, clothing, shelter, and other basic necessities to the
minor.  The person providing primary care or custody to the minor shall not
be another minor.



      SCHOOL ACTIVITY.  An event which has been placed on a school
calendar by public or parochial school authorities as a school sanctioned
event.



   (C)   Hours.



      (1)   Minors under the age of 16 years.  No minor under the
age of 16 years shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks,
playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings; nor in
or upon places of amusement, entertainment or refreshment; nor in or upon any
vacant lot, between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the following day.



      (2)   Minors ages 16 years to 18 years.  No minor of the ages
of 16 or 17 years shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks,
playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings; nor in
or upon places of amusement, entertainment or refreshment; nor in or upon any
vacant lot, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. the following
day.



   (D)   Effect on control by adult responsible for minor.  Nothing in
this section shall be construed to give a minor the right to stay out until
the curfew hours designated in this section if otherwise directed by a
parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and custody
of the minor; nor shall this section be construed to diminish or impair the
control of the adult person having the primary care or custody of the minor.



   (E)   Exceptions.  The provisions of this section shall not apply
in the following situations:



      (1)   To a minor accompanied by his or her parent or guardian,
or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor;



      (2)   To a minor who is upon an emergency errand at the
direction of his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the
primary care and custody of the minor;



      (3)   To a minor who is in any of the places described in this
section if in connection with or as required by an employer engaged in a
lawful business, trade, profession, or occupation; or to a minor traveling
directly to or from the location of the business, trade, profession or
occupation and the minor's residence.  Minors who fall within the scope of
this exception shall carry written proof of employment and proof of the hours
the employer requires the minor's presence at work.



      (4)   To a minor who is participating in or traveling directly
to or from an event which has been officially designated as a school activity
by public or parochial school authorities; or who is participating in or
traveling directly to or from an official activity supervised by adults and
sponsored by the city, a civic organization, school, religious institution,
or similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor and with the
permission of the minor's parent, guardian, or other adult person having the
primary care and custody of the minor.



      (5)   To a minor who is passing through the city in the course
of interstate travel during the hours of curfew.



      (6)   To a minor who is attending or traveling directly to or
from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free
speech, freedom of assembly, or freedom of religion.



      (7)   To minors on the sidewalk abutting his or her residence
or abutting the residence of a next- door neighbor if the neighbor does not
complain to the city's designated law enforcement provider about the minor's
presence.



      (8)   To a minor who is married or has been married, or is
otherwise legally emancipated.



   (F)   Duties of person legally responsible for minor.  No parent,
guardian, or other adult having the primary care or custody of any minor
shall permit any violation of the requirements of this section by the minor.



   (G)   Duties of other persons.  No person operating or in charge of
any place of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment shall permit any minor
to enter or remain in his or her place of business during the hours
prohibited by this section unless the minor is accompanied by his or her
parent, guardian or other adult person having primary care or custody of the
minor, or unless one of the exceptions to this section applies.



   (H)   Defense. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this
section that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly
notified the city's designated law enforcement provider that a minor was
present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused
to leave.



   (I)   A law enforcement officer must look into whether a minor has
an affirmative defense before making an arrest.



Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.11  FIREWORKS.



   (A)   The use, display, possession, discharge or sale of any
fireworks not expressly permitted by M.S. § 624.20, Subd. 1(c), as it may be
amended from time to time, is strictly prohibited.



   (B)   All use, display or discharge of those non-explosive,
non-aerial pyrotechnic entertainment devices only containing the limited
amounts of pyrotechnic chemical compositions described in and permitted by
M.S. § 624.20, Subd. 1(c), as it may be amended from time to time,
hereinafter referred to as permitted consumer fireworks, is strictly
prohibited in:



      (1)   The area on, below, above or within or in close
proximity to: recreational areas, roadways, streets, highways, bicycle lanes,
pedestrian paths, sidewalks, rights-of-way, lakes, rivers, waterways and all
other property owned or leased by the city, the county in which the city is
located, the State of Minnesota or the federal government and located in
whole or in part within the city limits;



      (2)   Private property within the city limits that has
conspicuously posted a written sign or notice that no fireworks discharge is
allowed;



      (3)   Within 300 feet of any consumer fireworks retail sales
facility or storage area that has posted a written sign or notice that no
fireworks discharge is allowed; and



      (4)   Any property, area, or structure that, by its physical
condition or the physical conditions in which it is set, would constitute a
fire or personal safety hazard.



   (C)   All other use, display or discharge of permitted consumer
fireworks must be conducted in a manner that minimizes the risk of fire or
injury to other persons or property.



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Violation a misdemeanor.  Every person who violates a
section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he or she
performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when
such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or performs an act
prohibited or declared unlawful by a code adopted by reference in this
chapter, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as a misdemeanor
except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.



   (B)   Curfew penalties.



      (1)   Minors.  Any minor found to be in violation of §
130.03 may be adjudicated delinquent and shall be subject to the
dispositional alternatives set forth in M.S. § 260.185, as it may be amended
from time to time.



      (2)   Adults.  Any adult person found to be in violation of
§ 130.03 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Am. Ord. 8, 4th Series, passed 1-16-2007)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE




      Chapter





         150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS





         151.   RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY LICENSING CODE





         152.   MOBILE HOME PARKS





         153.   FLOOD PLAIN REGULATION





         154.   SIGN REGULATIONS





         155.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS





         156.   ZONING CODE





         157.   SHORT TERM RENTALS




CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   150.01   Building Code adopted



   150.02   Building permits



   150.03   Plans and specifications



   150.04   Fees, charges and bond requirements



   150.05   Inspections



   150.06   Powers and duties of Building Inspector



   150.07   Underground utility construction



   150.08   Sanitary facilities on construction sites



   150.09   On-site refuse containment



Unsafe Buildings



   150.20   Definition and abatement



   150.21   Notice to owner



   150.22   Posting of signs



   150.23   Right to demolish



   150.24   Costs



   150.25   Unlawful act



   150.26   Conflicts



 



   150.98   Violations



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 150.01  BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.



   (A)   Codes adopted by reference. The Minnesota State Building Code,
as adopted by the Commissioner of Administration pursuant to M.S. §§ 16B.59
to 16B.75, as it may be amended from time to time, including all of the
amendments, rules and regulations established, adopted and published from
time to time by the Minnesota Commissioner of Administration, through the
Building Codes and Standards Division is adopted by reference with the
exception of the optional chapters, unless specifically adopted in this
section. The Minnesota State Building Code is incorporated in this section as
if fully set out herein.



   (B)   Application, administration and enforcement.



      (1)   The application, administration, and enforcement of the
code shall be in accordance with Minnesota State Building Code. The code
shall be enforced within the extraterritorial limits permitted by M.S. §
16B.62, Subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time, when so established
by this chapter.



      (2)   The code enforcement agency of this municipality is the
City of North Mankato.



      (3)   This code shall be enforced by the Minnesota Certified
Building Official designated by this city to administer the code (M.S. §
16B.65, Subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time).



   (C)   Permits and fees. The issuance of permits and the collection
of fees shall be as authorized in M.S. § 16B.62, Subd. 1, as it may be
amended from time to time. Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by
this code in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the municipality in
§ 150.04. In addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits
issued for work governed by this code in accordance with M.S. § 16B.70, as
it may be amended from time to time.



   (D)   Violation and penalties. A violation of the code is a
misdemeanor (M.S. § 16B.69, as it may be amended from time to time).



(1975 Code, § 4.01)  (Am. Ord. 229, passed 6-2-2003)



§ 150.02  BUILDING PERMITS.



   (A)   Permits required. It is unlawful to erect, construct, enlarge,
alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish any building or
structure, or part or portion thereof, including, but not limited to, the
plumbing, electrical, ventilating, heating or air conditioning systems
therein, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a separate
building or plumbing permit for each such building, structure or mechanical
component from the city; provided, however, that no building permit shall be
required for an alteration costing less than $300 if no structural alteration
of a building is involved. A building permit is required for any retaining
wall which exceeds 4 feet in height or is located within 25 feet of any
ravine breakline. The property owner or contractor shall submit a site plan
indicating the size and location of the retaining wall as well as
construction plans for Building Inspector approval prior to construction.



   (B)   Application. The applicant shall first file an application for
a building permit in writing on a form furnished by the city for that
purpose. Every application shall contain such information as may be deemed
necessary for the proper enforcement of the City Code or other law. An
application for a building permit shall also constitute an application for a
certificate of occupancy and land use in accordance with Ch. 156.



   (C)   Issuance. The application (including plans and specifications
filed by an applicant) for a permit shall be reviewed by the city. Such plans
shall be reviewed by the city for compliance with the laws under its
jurisdiction. If the city is satisfied that the work described in the
application for a permit and the plans filed therewith conform to the
requirements of the City Code and other pertinent laws, and the fee has been
paid, it shall issue a permit to the applicant. Such approved plans and
specifications shall not be changed, modified, or altered without
authorization from the city, and all work shall be done in accordance with
the approved plans. A permit may be issued for the construction of part of
the building or structure before the entire plans and specifications for the
whole building or structure have been submitted or approved provided adequate
information and detailed statements have been filed complying with all
pertinent requirements of the City Code and other laws. The holder of such
permit  shall proceed at his own risk without assurance that the permit for
the entire building or structure will be granted.



   (D)   Expiration. Every residential remodeling building permit shall
expire if the exterior work authorized by such permit is not completed within
180 days following the issuance of the permit. Every new residential
construction building permit shall expire if the exterior work authorized by
such building permit is not completed within 365 days following the issuance
of the permit. Before such work can be resumed, a new permit shall be
obtained. The fee shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for
such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original
plans and specifications for such work. For both residential remodeling and
new residential construction projects, administrative building permit
extensions of up to 60 days may be granted for projects which can demonstrate
hardship as a result of inclement weather, material shortages or such other
events that may reasonably be deemed an exigent circumstance.



   (E)   Suspension or revocation. The city may, in writing, suspend or
revoke a permit whenever the permit is issued in error, or on the basis of
incorrect information, supplied by the applicant, or in violation of any
provision of the City Code or other law.



   (F)   Plan review.  The Zoning Administrator or Building Official
shall have the ability to review an application for a building or sign permit
for a period of 14 calendar days after an application is made to ensure
compliance with all applicable ordinances and building codes.



   (G)   Survey drawing. For every new residential, commercial or
industrial building constructed, a survey drawing prepared by a licensed
surveyor showing the location of all buildings, parking areas, and storm
water detention areas shall be submitted as part of the building permit
application process.



(1975 Code, § 4.03)  (Am. Ord. 219, passed 6-3-2002; Am. Ord. 34, 4th
Series, passed 1-18-11; Am. Ord. 86, 4th Series, passed 4-3-2017)  Penalty,
see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Completion of exterior work; municipal enforcement, see M.S. §
326B.121.



§ 150.03  PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Requirement. With each application for a building permit, and
when required by the city for enforcement of any provisions of the City Code
or other law, two sets of plans and specifications shall be submitted. The
city may require plans and specifications to be prepared or approved by an
engineer or architect pursuant to state law.



   (B)   Information on plans and specifications.  Plans and
specifications shall be drawn to scale upon suitable paper and shall be of
sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed and
show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of the City Code and
all relevant laws, rules and regulations. The first sheet of each set of
plans shall give the street address of the work and the name and address of
the owner and person who prepared them. Plans shall include a plot plan
showing the location of the proposed building and every existing building on
the property. In lieu of detailed specifications, the city may approve
references on the plans to a specific section or part of the City Code or
other laws. Computations, stress diagrams and other data sufficient to show
the correctness of the plans shall be submitted when required by the
administrative authority.



   (C)   Retention of plans. One set of approved plans, specifications
and computations shall be retained by the city. Plans submitted for checking,
for which no permit is issued, and on which no action is taken by the
applicant for 90 days, shall be returned to the last known address of the
applicant; to renew action on such plans, a payment of a new plan review fee
shall be required.



   (D)   Validity. The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of
plans and specifications shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an
approval of, any violation of the City Code or other law. No permit presuming
to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the City Code or
other law shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which it
authorizes is lawful.



   (E)   Corrections. The issuance of a permit based upon plans and
specifications shall not prevent the city from thereafter requiring the
correction of errors in said plans and specifications or from preventing
building or construction operations being carried on thereunder when in
violation of the City Code or other law.



(1975 Code, § 4.04)



§ 150.04  FEES, CHARGES AND BOND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Basic fee. Basic fees for building permits and inspections
shall be adopted by resolution of the Council and may be amended from time to
time in the same manner; provided, that a schedule of such fees, together
with the effective date or dates thereof, shall be kept on file in the office
of the Building Inspector, available for distribution upon request thereof,
and uniformly enforced as the same become effective. If such fees are based
upon a determination of value or size of the project, a determination thereof
shall be made by the city. Such fee schedule may provide for a separate
plumbing or electrical permit and inspection fee where the work to be done is
so confined.



   (B)   Start without permit. Where work for which a permit is
required is started or pursued prior to issuance of a permit, an
investigative fee in the amount of the building fee, not including the state
surcharge, will be added to the building cost due at the time the permit is
issued. The payment of such increased fee shall not relieve any persons from
fully complying with the requirements of the law in the execution of the
work, nor from any penalties prescribed herein.



   (C)   Plan review fees. A plan review fee shall be paid at the time
of submitting plans for all industrial, commercial and residential dwellings
over 4 units. Such plan review fee shall be determined by resolution of the
Council.



   (D)   Special requirements for moving buildings.



      (1)   Application. In addition to the other required
information to be furnished in the application for a building permit, the
applicant shall provide the approximate size and weight of the structure or
building proposed to be moved, together with the places from and to which it
is proposed to move the same and the route to be followed.



      (2)   Charges. In addition to other fees payable, the
applicant shall pay in advance and prior to issuance of a permit all labor
and material costs, including, but not limited to, police, utility changes
and repairs.



      (3)   Bond required. Before any such permit shall be granted,
a bond, approved by the City Attorney, in the amount of $10,000 shall be
deposited with the Building Inspector conditioned to indemnify the city for
damage to any street or other public property. This requirement may be waived
if, in the discretion of the City Administrator, there is no substantial risk
of damage to city facilities. 



      (4)   Subdivision application. This division applies to a
building or other structure proposed to be moved from a point of origin
within the city and is to a point of destination within the city, or whether
the movement is merely through the city with both a  point of origin and
destination without the city, provided that a public street, or other public
property, are used for such movement.



      (5)   Move.  In no event shall a dwelling or garage be moved
into the city limits from another jurisdiction.



(1975 Code, § 4.05) (Am. Ord. 86, 4th Series, passed 4-3-2017)



§ 150.05  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Requirement. All construction or work for which a permit is
required shall be subject to inspection by the city and certain types of
construction may require continuous inspection. A survey of the lot may be
required by the city to verify compliance of the structure with approved
plans.



   (B)   Inspection record card. Work requiring a building permit shall
not be commenced until the permit holder or his or her agent shall have
acquired an inspection record card to be placed in a conspicuous location on
the front premises and in such position as to allow the city conveniently to
make the required entries thereon regarding the inspection of the work. This
card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the
certificate of occupancy has been issued.



   (C)   Approvals required. No work shall be done on any part of the
building or structure beyond the point indicated in each successive
inspection without first obtaining the written approval of the city. Such
written approval shall be given only after an inspection shall have been made
of each successive step in the construction as indicated by each of the
inspections required. There shall be a final inspection and approval on all
buildings when completed and ready for occupancy.



   (D)   Called inspections. No reinforcing steel or structural
framework of any part of any building or structure shall be covered or
concealed in any manner without first obtaining the approval of the city. The
city, upon notification from the permit holder or his or her agent, shall
make the following inspections of Type V buildings and shall either approve
that portion of the construction as completed or shall notify the permit
holder or his or her agent wherein the same fails to comply with the law.



      (1)   Foundation inspection shall be made after trenches are
excavated and forms erected and when all materials for the foundation are
delivered on the job. When concrete from central mixing plant (commonly
termed "transit mixed") is to be used, materials need not be on the job;



      (2)   Frame inspection shall be made after the roof, all
framing, fire-blocking, and bracing are in place and all pipes, chimneys, and
vents are complete;



      (3)   Wallboard inspection shall be made after all wallboard,
interior and exterior, is in place and all materials are delivered to the
job, but before wallboard joints and fasteners are taped and finished;



      (4)   Final inspection shall be made after the building is
completed and ready for occupancy.



   (E)   Other inspections. In addition to the called inspections
specified above, the city may make or require any other inspections of any
construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of the City
Code and other laws. For the purpose of determining compliance the city may
cause any structure to be reinspected.



(1975 Code, § 4.07)



§ 150.06  POWERS AND DUTIES OF BUILDING INSPECTOR.



   In addition to those enumerated in the Title III of the City Code, the
Building Inspector shall have the following powers and duties.



   (A)   Right of entry. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the
Building Inspector or his or her duly authorized representative may enter at
reasonable times any building, structure, or premises in the city to perform
any duty imposed upon him or her by the City Code.



   (B)   Stop orders. Whenever any building work is being done contrary
to the provisions of the City Code or the applicable Building Code, the
Building Inspector may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on
any persons engaged in doing or causing such work to be done, and any such
person shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the Building
Inspector to proceed with the work.



   (C)   Liability. The Building Inspector, or any employee charged
with the enforcement of the City Code, acting for the city in good faith and
without malice in the discharge of his or her duties, shall not thereby
render himself or herself liable personally, and he or she is relieved from
all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property
as a result of any act required or by reason of any act or omission in the
discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against the Building Inspector or
employee because of such act or omission performed by him or her in the
enforcement of any provisions of the City Code shall be defended by the City
Attorney until final determination thereof.



(1975 Code, § 4.08)



§ 150.07  UNDERGROUND UTILITY CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Underground construction required. All utility lines hereafter
installed, constructed or otherwise  placed within the city for electric,
telephone, T.V. cable or other like or similar services to serve residential,
commercial and industrial customers in newly platted areas, and which utilize
metallic or non-metallic conductors, whether owned, installed or constructed
by the supplier, consumer or any party, shall be installed and placed
underground, subject only to the exceptions hereinafter stated; however,
aboveground placement, construction, modification or replacement of meters,
gauges, transformers, street lighting and service connection pedestals shall
be allowed. The requirements of this section shall apply equally outside of
the corporate limits of the city coincident with city jurisdiction of
platting, subdivision regulation or comprehensive planning as may now or in
the future be allowed by law. All companies installing and operating lines
such as those described herein shall be referred to as "utility companies"
for purposes of this section.



   (B)   Exceptions to application. The following exceptions to the
strict applicability of this section shall be allowed upon the conditions
stated.



      (1)   Transmission lines. Aboveground placement, construction,
modification or replacement of those lines commonly referred to as "high
voltage transmission lines" upon which the conductor’s normal operating
voltage equals or exceeds 23,000 volts (phase to phase) shall be allowed;
provided, however, that 60 days prior to commencement of construction of such
a project, the city shall be furnished notice of the proposed project and,
upon request, the utility company involved shall furnish any relevant
information regarding such project to the city. This section shall not be
construed as waiving the requirements of any other ordinance or regulation of
the city as the same may apply to any such proposed project.



      (2)   Technical and economic feasibility. Aboveground
placement, construction, modification or replacement of lines shall be
allowed in residential, commercial and industrial areas where the Council,
following consideration and recommendation by the Planning Commission, finds
that:



         (a)   Underground placement would place an undue
financial burden upon the landowner or the utility company or deprive the
landowner of the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights; or



         (b)   Underground placement is impractical or not
technically feasible due to topographical, subsoil or other existing
conditions which adversely affect underground utility placement.



      (3)   Temporary service. Aboveground placement of temporary
service lines shall only be allowed:



         (a)   During the new construction of any project for a
period not to exceed 24 months;



         (b)   During any emergency to safeguard lives or
property within the city;



         (c)   For a period of not more than 7 months when soil
conditions make excavation impractical.



   (C)   Repair and maintenance of existing installations. Nothing in
this section shall be construed to prevent repair, maintenance, replacement
or modification of existing overhead utility lines.



   (D)   Developer responsibility. All owners, platters or developers
are responsible for complying with the requirements of this section.



   (E)   Placement.



      (1)   All utility lines shall be placed within appropriate
utility easements so as to cause minimum conflict with other underground
services. Whenever feasible, all utilities shall be placed within the same
trench.  All electrical transformers shall be placed in such a manner as not
to conflict with municipal fire hydrants, valves or other appurtenances.



      (2)   All utility companies shall submit annually to the
Building Inspector current maps revealing locations of underground
installations, whether such installations were installed prior to the
effective date of this section or hereafter.



(1975 Code, § 4.40)  (Am. Ord. 484, passed 3-2-1970)



§ 150.08  SANITARY FACILITIES ON CONSTRUCTION SITES.



   Unless sanitary facilities are available on site, all construction
sites shall have temporary facilities on site. The sanitary facilities shall
be maintain in a clean and functional condition-temporary facilities shall be
removed upon completion of the construction project.



(Ord. 102, 4th series, passed 4-2-2018)



§ 150.09  ON-SITE REFUSE CONTAINMENT.



   All construction and demolition contractors shall provide on-site
refuse receptacles containers for loose debris, paper, building material
waste and other refuse. Contents within the receptacle shall be contained
with a cover, netting or other means. The containers shall be emptied after
being filled. All excess constructions materials and soils shall be removed
by the contractor upon completion of the construction project.



(Ord. 102, 4th series, passed 4-2-2018)



UNSAFE BUILDINGS



§ 150.20  DEFINITION AND ABATEMENT.



   All buildings or structures which are structurally unsafe or not
provided with adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are
otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to an existing use
constitute a hazard to safety or health, or public welfare, by reason of
inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, or
abandonment, as specified in the UBC, another provision of the City Code, or
any other law, are, for the purpose of this section, unsafe buildings. All
such unsafe buildings are declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated
by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in accordance with the
procedure specified herein.



(1975 Code, § 4.09, Subd. 1)



§ 150.21  NOTICE TO OWNER.



   The Building Inspector shall examine or cause to be examined every
building or structure or portion thereof reported as dangerous or damaged
and, if such is found to be an unsafe building, the Building Inspector shall
give to the owner of such building or structure written notice stating the
defects therein. This notice may require the owner or person in charge of the
building or premises, within 48 hours, to commence either the required
repairs or improvements or demolition and removal of the building or
structure or portions thereof, and all such work shall be completed within 90
days from the date of notice, unless otherwise stipulated by the Building
Inspector. If necessary, such notice also shall require the building,
structure, or portion thereof to be vacated forthwith and not reoccupied
until the required repairs and improvements are completed, inspected, and
approved by the Building Inspector. Proper service of such notice shall be by
personal service upon the owner of record, if he shall be found within the
city. If he is not found therein such service may be made upon said owner by
registered mail or certified mail, provided, that if such notice is by
registered mail or certified mail, the designated period within which the
owner or person in charge is required to comply with the order of the
Building Inspector shall begin as of the date he receives such notice.



(1975 Code, § 4.09, Subd. 2)



§ 150.22  POSTING OF SIGNS.



   The Building Inspector shall cause to be posted at each entrance to
such building a notice to read: "DO NOT ENTER, UNSAFE TO OCCUPY. Building
Department, City of North Mankato." Such notice shall remain posted until the
required repairs, demolition, or removal are  completed. Such notice shall
not be removed without written permission of the Building Inspector, and no
person shall enter the building except for the purpose of making the required
repairs or of demolishing the building.



(1975 Code, § 4.09, Subd. 3)



§ 150.23  RIGHT TO DEMOLISH.



   In case the owner shall fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with the
notice to repair, rehabilitate, or to demolish and remove the building or
structure or portion thereof, the Council may order the owner of the building
prosecuted as a violator of the provisions of this section and may order the
Building Inspector to proceed with the work specified in such notice. A
statement of the cost of such work shall be transmitted to the Council, who
shall cause the same to be paid and levied as a special assessment against
the property.



(1975 Code, § 4.09, Subd. 4)



§ 150.24  COSTS.



   Costs incurred under § 150.23 shall be paid out of the General Fund.
Such costs shall be charged to the owner of the premises involved as a
special assessment on the land on which the building or structure is located
and shall be collected in the manner provided for special assessments.



(1975 Code, § 4.09, Subd. 5)



§ 150.25  UNLAWFUL ACT.



   It is unlawful for the owner of any property to suffer or permit an
unsafe building as defined herein to remain thereon.



(1975 Code, § 4.09, Subd. 6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.26  CONFLICTS.



   The Council may proceed either under state law, the provisions of this
section, or a combination of both.



(1975 Code, § 4.09, Subd. 7)



§ 150.98  VIOLATIONS.



   Every person who violates a section, division, or provision of this
chapter when he performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or
fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or
performs an act prohibited or declared unlawful or fails to act when such
failure is prohibited or declared unlawful by a Code adopted by reference by
this chapter, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a
misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.



(1975 Code, § 4.99)



CHAPTER 151:  RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY LICENSING CODE



Section



   151.01   Title



   151.02   Purpose



   151.03   Scope



   151.04   Discrimination and private contracts



   151.05   Definitions



   151.06   Applications



   151.07   Action of application for rental license



   151.08   Residential rental license fees



   151.09   Sale/transfer of ownership of licensed rental dwelling



   151.10   License suspension or revocation



   151.11   Conduct on licensed premises



   151.12   Posting



   151.13   Zoning changes



   151.14   Off-street parking



   151.15   Offender transitional housing



   151.16   Inspections



   151.17   Agent required



   151.18   Rental density



   151.19   Temporary rental licenses



   151.20   Required tenant occupancy



 



   151.99   Penalty



§ 151.01  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be referred to as the "Residential Rental Property
Licensing Code."



(Ord. 234, passed 12-1-2003; Am. Ord. 264, passed 11-21-2005)



§ 151.02  PURPOSE.



   The city believes that providing for public health, safety, and welfare
of its citizens mandates the existence of a rental property licensing program.



(Ord. 234, passed 12-1-2003; Am. Ord. 264, passed 11-21-2005)



§ 151.03  SCOPE.



   This chapter applies to all buildings which are rented in whole or in
part as a dwelling for persons other than the property owner's "family" as
defined therein. It includes accessory structures such as garages and storage
buildings. This chapter does not apply to Minnesota Department of Health
licensed rest homes, convalescent care facilities, and nursing homes, nor to
hotels and motels.



(Ord. 234, passed 12-1-2003; Am. Ord. 264, passed 11-21-2005)



§ 151.04  DISCRIMINATION AND PRIVATE CONTRACTS.



   This chapter shall be enforced in a nondiscriminatory manner and
exclusively for the purpose of promoting public welfare. The city neither
expressly nor by implication assumes any obligations or liabilities
respecting such private rights or disputes, including those which involve or
arise out of the nonconformity of any premises in the city to the provisions
of this chapter.



(Ord. 234, passed 12-1-2003; Am. Ord. 264, passed 11-21-2005)



§ 151.05  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICANT. Any person making an application for a license under this
chapter.



   APPLICATION. A form with blanks or spaces thereon, to be filled in and
completed by the applicant as his or her request for a license, furnished by
the city and uniformly required as a prerequisite to the consideration of the
issuance of a license for the rental of residential property.



   DWELLING UNIT.   Any building, structure or enclosure, including any
mobile home, wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living,
sleeping, cooking or eating purposes by human occupants, rented or offered
for rent by any person to any other persons for use for residential purposes
by such other person or persons.  DWELLING UNIT does not include rest homes,
convalescent homes, nursing homes, hotels, motels, dormitories or facilities
licensed by the State of Minnesota as institutional occupancies.



   DORMITORY. Buildings or spaces in buildings where group sleeping
accommodations are provided; or a series of closely associated rooms without
individual cooking facilities and with common toilet and bathroom facilities.



   FAMILY.   An individual or 2 or more persons related by blood,
marriage, or adoption, including foster children and bona fide domestic
servants.



   LICENSE. A document issued by the city to an applicant permitting him
or her to rent residential property.



   LICENSE FEE. The money paid to the city pursuant to an application and
prior to issuance of a license to rent residential property.



   LICENSEE. An applicant who, pursuant to his or her application, holds a
valid, current, unexpired and unrevoked license from the city allowing him or
her to rent residential property.



   LONG TERM HOTEL DWELLING UNIT. Any dwelling unit in any hotel, as
defined by M.S. § 157.01, which dwelling unit is held out or available to
the public for sleeping or residential purposes for periods of 1 week or more.



   OCCUPANT.   Any person residing in a dwelling or dwelling unit.



   OFFENDER TRANSITIONAL HOUSING.   A dwelling unit as defined above,
dormitory, residential facility, or lodging facility as defined by the North
Mankato City Code, intended, or used principally to provide short-term
supervised housing to more than 1 offender and/or sex offender, as defined by
Minnesota statute and rule, who are on supervised release or conditional
release, and who are receiving housing assistance, either directly or
indirectly, and supervision from the Minnesota Department of Corrections, or
designee, and/or as part of the Minnesota Sex Offender Program, and/or who
are required to live in the dwelling, dormitory, residential facility, or
lodging facility as a condition of release and supervision program. OFFENDER
TRANSITIONAL HOUSING does not include housing declared by state law to be a
permitted single-family residential use under M.S. § 462.357, Subd 7. The
term SHORT-TERM shall mean a period of time not exceeding 12 months or as
otherwise established by Minnesota statute and rules. A dwelling unit owned
by or leased by the offender, or by a member of the offender's immediate
family, shall not be considered offender transitional housing.



   OPERATOR, MANAGER, or CARETAKER. Any person who has charge, care or
control of a structure, or part thereof, in which rental dwelling units are
let.



   OWNER.   Any person, firm, corporation or agent, who alone, jointly or
severally with others, shall be in actual possession of, or have charge, care
or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit.



   RENT. Any consideration paid for the exclusive use of the dwelling
unit, including but not limited to money, services, or a combination thereof
paid or delivered at fixed intervals periodically agreed upon.



   RENTAL PROPERTY. Living units rented on a month to month basis or
greater. Such property may include single-family homes, duplexes, triplexes
or multi-family units. Exempt from such definition shall be motels, hotels,
boarding houses, bed and breakfast facilities and any facility exempt from
city regulation due to state or federal rules and regulations.



   ROOMING HOUSE DWELLING UNIT.   Any dwelling unit in any building or
structure, which building or structure is used or held out to be a place
where sleeping accommodations are furnished to the public as regular roomers
for periods of 1 week or more.



(Ord. 234, passed 12-1-2003; Am. Ord. 264, passed 11-21-2005; Am. Ord. 60,
4th Series, passed 9-2-2014)



§ 151.06  APPLICATIONS.



   All applications shall be made as follows:



   (A)   All applications shall be made at the office of the City
Clerk, upon forms which have been approved by motion of the City Council;



   (B)   All such applications must be subscribed, sworn to, and
include, but not be limited to, the following:



      (1)   Applicant’s name, age and citizenship;



      (2)   Applicant’s present address and phone number and
length of time at that address;



      (3)   Address of property to be rented;



      (4)   Sketch of property to be rented identifying all rental
units by number;



      (5)   Parking plan showing the size and location of all
off-street parking spaces;



      (6)   Name(s) of each occupant of each rental unit;



      (7)   Name of person (if other than applicant) responsible for
the rental unit;



      (8)   Whether or not applicant has ever been convicted of a
felony or misdemeanor, including violation of a city ordinance but excluding
traffic violations, and, if so, the date and place of conviction and the
nature of the offense;



      (9)   Such other information as the Council shall deem
necessary considering the nature of the use for which the license application
is made.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any applicant to intentionally make a false
statement or omission upon any application form. Any false statement in such
application, or any willful omission to state any information called for on
such application form shall, upon discovery of such falsehood work an
automatic refusal of license, or if already issued, shall render any license
or permit issued pursuant thereto, void.



   (D)   The City Clerk shall, upon receipt of each application
completed in accordance herewith, forthwith investigate the truth of
statements made therein.



   (E)   Applications for renewal licenses may be made in such
abbreviated form as the Council may by resolution adopt.



   (F)   Applications shall be void 30 days after the date of
application. Any fees paid will be non-refundable.



(Ord. 234, passed 12-1-2003; Am. Ord. 264, passed 11-21-2005; Am. Ord. 63,
4th Series, passed 1-5-2015)



§ 151.07  ACTION ON APPLICATION FOR RENTAL LICENSE.



   Upon receipt of a completed application and payment of all license
fees, the City Clerk, or his or her designee, shall issue a license to the
applicant for the specified property. All residential rental property in
North Mankato must obtain a license by January 1, 2003. Such licenses will be
valid for a period of 1 year unless canceled or revoked pursuant to this
chapter. From January 1, 2004, forward, all licensees will be required to
obtain annual renewal of their residential rental licenses on or before
January 1 of each year. If by January 1 of each year, a rental license has
not been renewed, a $100 reinstatement fee for each property will be charged
in addition to the annual license fee.



(Ord. 234, passed 12-1-2003; Am. Ord. 264, passed 11-21-2005; Am. Ord. 34,
4th Series, passed 1-18-2011; Am. Ord. 43, 4th Series, passed 1-17-2012; Am.
Ord. 63, 4th Series, passed 1-5-2015)



§ 151.08  RESIDENTIAL RENTAL LICENSE FEES.



   (A)   License fee. The annual rental license fee shall be
established by resolution of the Council. A $25 non-refundable application
fee is required for each new rental license application.



   (B)   License expiration. Each license issued pursuant to this
section shall have a term of 1 year and shall expire on December 31. Payment
of license fees is due and payable on or before the date of expiration of the
license. All rental licenses, for which payment of license fees is over 30
days past due shall be automatically canceled. Reissuance of a rental license
for any property with a canceled license shall be handled as if the property
were a new license. Such issuance will require the property to comply with
all codes in effect at the time of the new license application.



(Ord. 234, passed 12-1-2003; Am. Ord. 264, passed 11-21-2005; Am. Ord. 63,
4th Series, passed 1-5-2015)



§ 151.09  SALE/TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OF LICENSED RENTAL DWELLING.



   Upon the sale of any licensed rental dwelling(s), the existing rental
license becomes void, with the exception of the application fee.  Should the
subsequent owner wish to continue rental of any previously licensed dwelling,
it is necessary to apply for transfer of a  rental license including a
physical inspection of the dwelling(s) and property by the Building Official
or Building Inspector.



(Ord. 30, 4th Series, passed 1-4-2010; Am. Ord. 63, 4th Series, passed
1-5-2015)



§ 151.10  LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   (A)   Notification. Prior to suspension or revocation, the licensee
(or his or her designated agent) and all occupants of units potentially
subject to suspension or revocation shall be notified in writing pursuant to
the terms of this chapter at least 20 days prior to a hearing on the matter.



   (B)   Hearing. A hearing shall be held before the Council or a
hearing examiner appointed by the Council. The hearing shall be conducted to
meet the licensee’s and occupant's due process rights, including:



      (1)   Allowing interested parties, or their attorneys, the
right to present evidence, witnesses and to cross-examine all adverse
witnesses; and



      (2)   Making a complete record of all proceedings, including
findings of fact and conclusions  of law.



   (C)   Suspension, revocation or other penalty. Every operating
license issued under the provisions of this chapter is subject to suspension,
revocation or such penalty as the City Council may determine for the entire
rental dwelling or for individual rental dwelling units. A rental license may
also be suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons:



      (1)   The license was procured by misrepresentation of
material facts, by fraud, by deceit, or by bad faith;



      (2)   The applicant or one acting on his or her behalf made
oral or written misstatements or misrepresentations of material facts in or
accompanying the application;



      (3)   The activities of the licensee create a serious danger
to the public health, safety, or welfare.



   (D)   Effect of suspension or revocation. In the event a rental
license is suspended or revoked by the City Council it shall be unlawful for
the owner or his or her duly authorized agent to thereafter permit any new
occupancies of vacant, or thereafter vacated rental units, until such time as
a valid rental license is restored to the affected units.  The affected
unit(s) shall have a rental inspection.  The unit(s) will be considered a
new rental and shall comply to all codes in effect at the date of the
inspection.



   (E)   Failure to obtain license.  If it is determined that a rental
unit is being operated without a valid license, an immediate inspection shall
be conducted. It shall be unlawful for an owner, designated agent, or
operator, after notice has been sent first class mail, to continue operation
of a rental dwelling unit without submitting an application for a license
under this chapter, along with the necessary fee. Once an application has
been made, it shall be unlawful for the owner, or his or her duly authorized
agent, to permit any new occupancies of vacant or thereafter vacated rental
units until such time as the license is issued.



(Ord. 234, passed 12-1-2003; Am. Ord. 264, passed 11-21-2005; Am. Ord. 63,
4th Series, passed 1-5-2015)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.11  CONDUCT ON LICENSED PREMISES.



   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to take
appropriate action following conduct by occupant(s) or guest of the
occupant(s) which is in violation of any of the following:



      (1)   Anytime, day or night, that the premises are involved in
any of the following:



         (a)   Unlicensed sale of intoxicating liquor or
non-intoxicating malt beverages.



         (b)   Furnishing intoxicating liquor or non-intoxicating
malt beverages by persons under the age of 21 years.



         (c)   Consumption of intoxicating liquor or
non-intoxicating malt beverages by persons under the age of 21 years.



         (d)   Vice crimes.



         (e)   Sale or use of illegal drugs by any person on the
premises.



         (f)   Storage of unlicensed or inoperable vehicles,
trailers, boats, RVs and campers.



         (g)   Allowing grass or weeds to exceed 6 inches in
height.



         (h)   Failure to remove ice or snow on adjacent
sidewalks within 48 hours after snow or ice has ceased to fall.



         (i)   Parking of any vehicles in front yard areas,
except permitted driveways.



         (j)   Failure to pay monthly utility bill by the due
date.



         (k)   Failure to comply with § 92.21 Building
Maintenance and Appearance after notification by the city.



         (1)   Failure to make corrective state building code or
city code changes after notification by the city.



      (2)   Anytime, day or night, that the premises are involved in
a manner affecting the neighborhood for any of the following:



         (a)   Disorderly conduct.



         (b)   Disturbing the peace.



         (c)   Obstructing an officer.



         (d)   Assault (including domestic assault).



         (e)   Criminal damage to property.



         (f)   Vice crimes.



      (3)   Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. for any of
the following:



         (a)   Where the police respond initially and describe
the activity as "loud and intrusive" or in any manner affecting the
tranquility of the neighborhood (such as, excessive littering, public
urination, and the like) and persons involved refusing to comply with police
directive to curtail the behavior within 10 minutes.



         (b)   Where the police respond a second time and
describe the activity as "loud  and intrusive" or in any manner affecting
the tranquility of the neighborhood (such as, excessive littering, public
urination, and the like) on both occasions.



         (c)   Where the police respond on 3 separate dates and
describe the activity as "loud and intrusive" or in any manner affecting the
tranquility of the neighborhood (such as, excessive littering, public
urination, and the like).



      (4)   Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. for any 1
or more of the following:



         (a)   Where police describe the noise level outside of
the confines of the dwelling unit as "loud and intrusive."  This description
should give some indication of the distance that the noises are heard.



         (b)   Where people are using profanity that can be heard
outside the confines of the dwelling unit.



         (c)   Where music, either from the confines of the
dwelling unit, the yard area of the dwelling unit or any parking area defined
for the dwelling unit, can be heard from the street, alley or neighboring
yards.



         (d)   Where a gathering is going on either in and/or out
of the dwelling unit in a manner that involves any of the following:



            1.   Disruption of the neighbors, such as, revving
of cars, squealing of tires, loud shouting, and the like.



            2.   Littering.



            3.   Inappropriate behavior, such as, urinating in
yards, persons passed out, and the like.



            4.   Damaging of property: and where after
investigation the officer(s) can show that the inappropriate activity was
directly related to the licensed premises. Proof may include, but is not
limited to, direct observation by officers, admissions by persons present or
testimony/statements by complainants and witnesses.



         (e)   Where officers are unable to personally verify the
existence of any of the criteria listed in 1. through 4. above, but
complainants/witnesses are willing to testify to 1 or more of those facts at
a criminal or civil proceeding.



   (B)   The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall be
responsible for enforcement and administration of this section.



   (C)   Upon determination by the Chief of Police that a licensed
premises was involved in a violation of division (A) of this section, the
Chief of Police shall notify the licensee by first class mail of the
violation, direct the licensee to take steps to prevent further violations
and issue a fine of $200 to the licensee to be paid within 14 days after
notification is issued. Failure to pay fine will result in immediate
revocation of the rental license. A copy of said notice shall be sent by
first class mail to the occupant in violation of division (A) of this section.



   (D)   Upon a second violation within 12 months of division (A) of
this section involving a guest or an occupant of a licensed premises, the
notice provided under division (C) of this section shall require the licensee
to submit a written report of the action taken to prevent further violations
on the premises and pay a fine of $400 to be paid within 14 days after
notification is issued. Failure to pay fine will result in immediate
revocation of the rental license. This written report shall be submitted to
the Police Chief within 5 days of request of the report and shall detail all
actions taken by the licensee in response to all notices regarding violations
to division (A) of this section within the preceding 12 months. If the
licensee fails to comply with the requirements of the section, the rental
dwelling license for the individual licensed premises may be denied, revoked,
suspended, or such other penalty imposed by the City Council. An action to
deny, revoke, suspend or renew a license under this section shall be
initiated by the City Council at the request of the Police Chief.



   (E)   If a third or subsequent violation of division (A) of this
section involving a guest of or an occupant of a licensed premises occurs
within 12 months after any 2 previous instances for which notices were sent
to the licensee regarding the same licensed premises, the rental dwelling
license for the individual rental unit may be denied, revoked, suspended, or
such other penalty not imposed by the City Council. An action to deny, revoke
or suspend a license or impose any other penalty under this section shall be
initiated by the City Council at the request of the Police Chief.



   (F)   No adverse license action shall be imposed if the violation to
division (A) of this section occurred during the pendency of eviction
proceedings (unlawful detainer) or within 30 days of notice  given by the
licensee to an occupant to vacate the premises, where the violation was
related to conduct by that occupant, other occupants, or the occupant's
guests. Eviction proceedings shall not be a bar to adverse license action,
however, unless they are diligently pursued by the licensee. Further, an
action to deny, revoke, suspend, or not renew a license based upon violations
of this section may be postponed or discontinued at any time if it appears
that the licensee has taken appropriate measures which will prevent further
violations to division (A) of this section.



   (G)   A determination that the licensed premises has been used in
violation of  division (A) of this section shall be made by the Council upon
substantial evidence to support such a  determination. It shall not be
necessary that criminal charges be brought to support a determination of
violation to division (A) of this section, nor shall the facts of dismissal
or acquittal of criminal charges operate as a bar to adverse license action
under this section.



(Ord. 234, passed 12-1-2003; Am. Ord. 264, passed 11-21-2005; Am. Ord. 8, 4th
Series, passed 1-16-2007; Am. Ord. 17, 4th Series, passed 1-17-2008; Am. Ord.
21, 4th Series, passed 1-20-2009; Am. Ord. 80, 4th Series, passed 9-6-2016;
Am. Ord. 102, 4th Series, passed 4-2-2018)



§ 151.12  POSTING.



   All licensees must post on the rental premises a copy of their rental
license.



(Ord. 234, passed 12-1-2003; Am. Ord. 264, passed 11-21-2005)



§ 151.13  ZONING CHANGES.



   On May 2, 2005 and May 16, 2005, the City Council adopted ordinances
which rezoned properties in both lower and upper North Mankato, which may
have affected certain rental properties and caused them to be
non-conforming.  After the dates of adoption of these ordinances, all rental
dwellings which were currently licensed may continue to operate as a
non-conforming use, if affected by this zoning change.  If there is a lapse
in a rental license or a change in occupancy to a lesser number of unrelated
persons in a non-conforming use, the lesser number shall be the controlling
number.



(Ord. passed 5-2-2005; Ord. passed 5-16-2005; Am. Ord. 264, passed
11-21-2005; Am. Ord. 8, 4th Series, 1-16-2007; Am. Ord. 17, 4th Series,
passed 1-17-2008)



§ 151.14  OFF-STREET PARKING.



   (A)   Garages and off-street parking spaces on licensed rental
properties shall be made available to tenants residing on the property.



   (B)   All off-street parking areas shall be hard-surfaced, using
concrete, asphalt or paver brick material.



   (C)   Parking ratio. All new rental units licensed after the
effective date of this section shall provide off-street parking according to
the following:



      (1)   For one and two-family dwellings in R-A, R-1, R-1S and
R-2 zoning districts off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each
dwelling unit based on the following ratio of square footage of sleeping
rooms to required parking stalls.



 


Sleeping Rooms Square Footage:

 

Parking Stalls:




70 to 119

 

2




120 to 169

 

2




170 to 219

 

3




220 to 269

 

4




270 and greater

 

5




 



      (2)   For a one-family dwelling, not less than 2 off-street
parking stalls shall be provided and not more than 5 off-street parking
stalls shall be required. For a two-family dwelling, not less than 4 parking
stalls shall be provided and not more than 10 parking stalls shall be
required.



(Ord. 34, 4th Series, passed 1-18-11; Am. Ord. 80, 4th Series, passed
9-6-2016)



§ 151.15  OFFENDER TRANSITIONAL HOUSING.



   (A)   Purpose.  In order to provide for the public safety; provide
protection and security for crime victims; maintain neighborhood stability;
and facilitate supervision for offenders, the City of North Mankato finds
necessary to regulate the locations within the city where offender
transitional housing can be established subject to the limitations of this
Code.



   (B)   Separation and concentration in zoning districts.



      (1)   Separation in zoning districts. Offender transitional
housing may be established in a zoning district only on a parcel that is at
least as far as the distances indicated in the table below from another
existing, or approved but not yet constructed, offender transitional housing
use in any zoning district:



 


Zoning Designation Separation Required

 

Separation Required



R-1 and PUDs with underlying R-1 zoning
 
No less than 1,000 feet


R-2 and PUDs with underlying R-2 zoning
 
No less than 800 feet


All other residential districts   
 
No less than 600 feet


All other zoning districts
 
No less than 500 feet



 



      (2)   Concentration in residential zones. In residentially
zoned areas (R-1 through R-3 and PUDs with underlying residential zoning), a
proposed offender transitional housing use may not cause the number of
offender transitional housing uses within a radius of 1.5 times the required
separation distance of the proposed offender transitional housing use to
exceed 0.5% of the total number of dwellings for developed neighborhoods
within that radius, or 0.5% of the planned dwellings or permissible dwellings
within that radius for partly undeveloped or undeveloped neighborhoods.



   (C)   Offender transitional housing in non-residential zones.  In
non-residential zones where dwelling and/or lodging units are permitted, a
proposed offender transitional housing use that is within 500 feet of a
residential zone may not cause the sum of the population capacity of offender
transitional housing to exceed 10% of the sum of dwelling units and lodging
units in parcels within a radius of 500 feet of a proposed offender
transitional housing use, except that where the sum of dwelling and lodging
units within 500 feet is fewer than 100, the population capacity of offender
transitional housing units shall not exceed 10 persons.



   (D)   Offender transitional housing for sex offenders.



      (1)   Any offender transitional housing providing or intending
to provide housing to a designated sex offender as defined by state law or
administrative rule must meet the separation requirements provided in this
division. Except where otherwise specified, the separation distances shall be
measured from the property lines of both the offender housing and the
facility and/or property from which it shall be separated.



      (2)   Separation by a distance of not less than 1,000 feet is
required from the following facilities:



         (a)   Public parks in existence at the date of
application for a license under this subdivision;



         (b)   A licensed family daycare or child daycare
facility in existence at the date of application for a license under this
subdivision;



         (c)   Public or private nursery schools, elementary
schools, secondary schools, and post-secondary schools, in existence at the
date of application for a license under this subdivision;



         (d)   A state licensed residential facility as
referenced in M.S. § 462.357, Subd. 7, and in existence at the date of
application for a license under this subdivision.



      (3)   The residents of the offender transitional housing shall
be limited to only those offenders that were convicted of an offense while
residents of Nicollet County and the residents shall only reside in the
premises for a period not to exceed 12 months.



   (E)   Offender transitional housing license.



      (1)   An offender transitional housing use must obtain a
license prior to any occupancy of such use. The license shall be subject to
the occupancy restrictions of the underlying zoning district. In
non-residential districts a license shall only be issued if the underlying
zoning district permits residential uses.



      (2)   Previously licensed rental properties may only be used
for offender transitional housing if the property conforms to the occupancy
restrictions of the underlying zoning district. For the purposes of this
section, properties proposed for offender transitional housing shall be
considered a new rental license and a license shall only be granted if the
property conforms to the Residential Rental Property Licensing Code.



      (3)   The license shall be subject to revocation if conditions
of approval are violated or if it is determined to be a detrimental use per
§ 151.11 of this Code. If an offender transitional housing use is
discontinued for a period of 12 consecutive months, lapses, or if a license
is revoked, there shall be no presumed right to reinstatement and any use at
the location shall be considered in the same manner as a new use or as
classified by § 151.13 of this Code, whichever is most restrictive.



      (4)   Prior to the establishment of offender transitional
housing, the state agency responsible for the supervision of the offender
shall send notice to all property owners within 500 feet of the property to
be used for offender transitional housing.



      (5)   The notice shall state the intent of the state agency to
establish offender transitional housing and the place and time of a public
meeting, to be held within the city limits of the City of North Mankato, at
which meeting the state agency will provide details to the public regarding
the proposed offender transitional housing.



      (6)   The rental license for a dwelling used for offender
transitional housing shall contain the contact information for the state
agency and a local agent that is employed by the state agency. At the public
meeting, the name and contact information of the local contact/agent shall be
supplied to the attendees.



   (F)   Existing offender transitional housing.  Offender
transitional housing use existing on the date of the enactment of this
section shall immediately obtain a license under this division and comply
with the other provisions of this division within 12 months of adoption of
this section. If the property currently used for offender transitional
housing does not conform to the provisions of this section, it shall cease
operation within 12 months of the adoption of this division or adjust the
operation of the offender transitional housing to comply with this division.



(Ord. 60, 4th Series, passed 9-2-2014)



§ 151.16  INSPECTIONS.



   Upon receipt of an application for a rental license, the city shall
forward a copy of such application to the inspection official. Upon receipt
of such application the inspection official shall inspect the property to be
licensed to determine whether such property complies with the provisions of
applicable codes and statutes. Upon issuance of a rental strike according to
the provisions of § 151.11 an inspection will be conducted of both the
interior and exterior of the premises by the inspection official. If any city
code violations are present, corrective action must be taken by the property
owner. No rental license shall be issued by the city unless the property
complies with the provisions of codes and statutes that pertain to the
property.



(Ord. 63, 4th Series, passed 1-5-2015; Am. Ord. 80, 4th Series, passed
9-6-2016)



§ 151.17  AGENT REQUIRED.



   Each license holder of a dwelling unit within the city, in which
license holder does not reside within a 30 mile radius of the city, as
measured from the Veterans Memorial Bridge, shall appoint an agent residing
within that area, upon which agent the city may serve notices pertaining to
the administration of this section or of any provisions of the City Code
pertaining to such dwelling unit, which service shall be as effective as if
made upon such license holder. In cases where an agent is employed, the
license holder shall provide the City Clerk with the full name, address and
telephone number of such agent(s). A license holder shall provide written
notice to the City Clerk, with the required information, whenever the agent
for a licensed property is changed. The written notice shall be provided to
the City Clerk within 48 hours of such change(s).



(Ord. 63, 4th Series, passed 1-5-2015)



§ 151.18  RENTAL DENSITY.



   (A)   In R-A, R-1, R-1S and R-2 zoning districts, no more than 10%
of the single-family lots on any block shall be eligible to obtain a rental
license, unless a temporary license is granted by the City Council as
provided herein. Table 1 indicates how many single-family lots per block are
able to be licensed as a rental property based on the number of lots that
exist in a block.



 


Table 1




Lots/Block

 

Rental Units Allowed






1-14

 

1




15-24

 

2




25-34

 

3




35-44

 

4




45-54

 

5




55-64

 

6




65-74

 

7




75-84

 

8




85-94

 

9





 



   (B)   The following guidelines shall apply to determine eligible
blocks and lots.



      (1)   For the purposes of this subchapter, a BLOCK shall be
defined as an area of land enclosed within the perimeter of streets,
watercourses, public parks, municipally owned lots and city boundaries.



      (2)   This subchapter shall apply to legally conforming lots
of record and legally nonconforming lots of record. For the purposes of this
subchapter, lots of record may also be referred to as PROPERTIES, PROPERTY or
LOTS.



      (3)   If a block contains more than one type of zoning
district, only R-A, R-1, R-1S and R-2 zoning district lots shall be included
in the calculation of the total number of lots per block.



      (4)   Legal nonconforming rental property shall be allowed to
continue as long as the legal nonconforming use complies with §§ 151.13 and
156.052 of the Zoning Code.



      (5)   Commercial or industrial uses located in an R-A, R-1,
R-1S and R-2 zoning districts shall not be included in the calculation of the
total number of lots per block.



      (6)   Properties that are exempt pursuant to division (A) of
this section shall not be included in the calculation of the total number of
lots per block.



   (C)   If the number of rental properties meets or exceeds the
permitted number of rental properties per defined block on the effective date
of this section, no additional rental licenses shall be approved for the
block, unless a temporary license is granted by the City Council as provided
herein. Existing rental licenses may be renewed; however, should a rental
license not be renewed, or if the rental license is revoked or lapses, the
rental license shall not be reinstated unless it is in conformance with this
section and other applicable sections of the city code.



   (D)   Exceptions.



      (1)   Parcels zoned CBD, R-3, R-4, OR-1, B-1, B-2, B-3, M-1,
M-2, I-1, TUD, P-1.



      (2)   Single-family homes or duplexes in which the owner
resides within a portion of the building are exempt unless an unrelated
person resides within the owner’s dwelling unit. If the building is a
duplex, only that portion of the building in which the owner resides alone or
with related persons is exempt. The other portion of the duplex requires a
rental license. Should a duplex transfer ownership, it is eligible to receive
a rental license for the dwelling unit which was formally owner- occupied.



      (3)   Rental licenses for state licensed residences shall be
exempt from this subdivision. If the property is no longer licensed by the
State of Minnesota, a new rental license application shall be submitted and
reviewed for compliance with this division and other applicable city and
Building Code sections.



   (E)   Properties eligible to receive a rental license in R-A, R-1,
R-1S, and R-2 zoning districts will be determined as follows:



      (1)   Any property zoned R-A, R-1, R-1S, RS, and R-2 is
eligible to receive a rental license until the number of single-family and
two-family dwellings issued rental licenses exceeds 10% within the block it
is located in.



      (2)   This division shall apply to legally conforming
properties of record and legally nonconforming properties of record, as
defined in Ch. 156, in existence at that time of the effective date of this
section or approved by new subdivision of unplatted and undeveloped property
after the effective date of this section.



   (F)   For the purposes of this division, the following shall apply:



      (1)   Properties licensed for rental purposes on the effective
date of this section shall be included in the calculation of the number of
permitted rental properties.



      (2)   Existing rental licenses may be renewed or transferred
per §§ 151.07, 151.08 and 151.09.



(Ord. 80, 4th Series, passed 9-6-2016)



§ 151.19  TEMPORARY RENTAL LICENSES.



   A temporary rental license may be granted by the city for unlicensed
properties to an owner of a property for a period not to exceed 12 months for
the following circumstance(s):



   (A)   The property is listed for sale and the owner and the
owner’s family are not residing at the property.



   (B)   The owner and the owner’s family are not residing at the
property and the occupants are providing a caretaking function for the
property.



   (C)   The City Administrator or his or her designee is granted
authority to extend the temporary rental license for 2 consecutive 6 month
periods as long as the home is actively marketed for sale.



   (D)   Twelve months from the date of issuance, a temporary rental
license shall expire and is not subject for renewal unless granted an
extension by the City Administrator or his or her designee as outlined in
division (C) of this section.



(Ord. 80, 4th Series, passed 9-6-2016)



§ 151.20  REQUIRED TENANT OCCUPANCY.



   In no event shall a property owner make application for a rental
license without the intent of renting the dwelling(s). In no circumstance
will a rental license be issued without the owner first submitting a tenant
list documenting who will reside in rental property.



(Ord. 80, 4th Series, passed 9-6-2016)



§ 151.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor and is subject
to all penalties provided for such violations.



   (B)   It is a misdemeanor for any person to prevent, delay, or
provide false information to any city official, or his or her representative,
while they are engaged in the performance of their duties as set forth in
this chapter.



   (C)   In addition to bringing criminal charges for violation of this
chapter, the city may seek a civil injunction against any licensee or
occupant who violate any terms of this chapter.



   (D)   All applicants must include in any lease (written or oral) a
copy of this chapter and must further advise all tenants that a violation of
this code by the applicant (landlord) or any occupant of the premises could
result in termination or revocation of the rental license and immediate
eviction of all tenants.



(Ord. 234, passed 12-1-2003; Am. Ord. 264, passed 11-21-2005)



CHAPTER 152:  MANUFACTURED MOBILE HOME DWELLING PARKS



Section



General Provisions



   152.01   Purpose



   152.02   Recognition of Uniform Code



   152.03   Definitions



   152.04   Permit



   152.05   Licensees



   152.06   Inspection



   152.07   Notices, hearings and orders



   152.08   Park management



   152.09   Nonconformance



Regulations



   152.20   Environmental, open space and access requirements



   152.21   Water supply



   152.22   Sewage disposal



   152.23   Service building and other community service facilities



   152.24   Refuse handling



   152.25   Insect and rodent control



   152.26   Fuel supply and storage



   152.27   Fire protection



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 152.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this section is to promote health, safety, order,
convenience and general welfare by enforcing minimum standards for mobile
home parks, the location and use of mobile homes and the design,
construction, alteration and arrangement of homes on the lots, authorizing
the inspection of mobile home parks, the licensing of operators and fixing
penalties for violations.



(1975 Code, § 4.50, Subd. 1)



§ 152.02  RECOGNITION OF UNIFORM CODE.



   Those certain codes known as the Uniform Mobile Homes Building Code
contained in or promulgated under M.S. Ch. 327, as it may be amended from
time to time, are recognized as the lawful standards relating to the
construction, sale, maintenance, alteration or installation of mobiles homes
in the city. The codes are in effect and in full force as if set out at
length herein, except where the provisions of this section are inconsistent
therewith, this section shall be controlling and govern.



§ 152.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DRIVEWAY.  A minor private way used by vehicles and pedestrians on a
mobile home lot.



   LICENSE.  A written license issued by the Council allowing a person to
operate and maintain a mobile home park under the provisions of this section
and regulations issued hereunder.



   MANUFACTURED MOBILE HOME DWELLING. A structure, transportable in one or
more sections, which in the traveling mode is 8 body feet or more in width or
40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, it is 320 or more
square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to
the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning,
and electrical systems contained therein; except that the term includes any
structure which meets all the requirements and with respect to which the
manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary and
complies with the standards established under M.S. Ch. 327.31, as it may be
amended from time to time, and which structure conforms to the requirements
of the Manufactured Home Building Code. Any reference to the term MOBILE HOME
shall automatically be construed to refer to the term MANUFACTURED MOBILE
HOME DWELLING.



   MOBILE HOME LOT.  A parcel of land for the placement of a single
mobile home and the exclusive use of its occupants.



   MOBILE HOME PARK.  A contiguous parcel of land which has been
developed for the placement of mobile homes and is owned by an individual, a
firm, trust, partnership, public or private association or corporation.



   MOBILE HOME STAND. That part of an individual lot which has been
reserved for the placement of one mobile home unit.



   PARK MANAGEMENT.  The person who owns or has charge, care or control
of the mobile home park.



   PARK STREET.  A private way which affords principal means of access to
individual mobile home lots or auxiliary buildings.



   PERMIT.  A written permit or certification issued by the Building
Inspector permitting the construction, alteration and extension of any
permanent structure within the mobile home park under the provisions of this
section and regulations issued hereunder.



   SERVICE BUILDING.  A structure housing toilet, lavatory and such other
facilities as may be required by this section.



   SEWER CONNECTION.  The connection consisting of all pipes, fittings
and appurtenances from the drain outlet of the mobile home to the inlet of
the corresponding sewer riser pipe of the sewerage system serving the mobile
home park.



   SEWER RISER PIPE.  That portion of the sewer lateral which extends
vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at each mobile home lot.



   WATER CONNECTION. The connection consisting of all pipes, fittings and
appurtenances from the water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the
distribution system within the mobile home.



   WATER RISER PIPE. That portion of the water supply system serving the
mobile home park which extends vertically to the ground elevation and
terminates at a designated point at each mobile home lot.



(1975 Code, § 4.50, Subd. 3)  (Am. Ord. 23, passed 8-16-1982; Am. Ord. 24,
passed 10-18-1982)



§ 152.04  PERMIT.



   (A)   Valid permit. It is unlawful for any person to construct,
alter or extend any mobile home park or structures within the park that are
permanent in nature within the limits of the city unless he or she holds a
valid permit issued by the Building Inspector in the name of such person for
the specific construction, alteration or extension proposed, where permanent
means structures that are not on wheels or mobile.



   (B)   Applications. All applications for permits shall contain the
following:



      (1)   Name and address of applicant;



      (2)   Location and legal description of the mobile home park;
and



      (3)   Complete engineering plans and specifications of the
proposed park, including, but not limited to, the following:  the area and
dimensions of the tract of land; topography sketch of land; the number,
location and size of all mobile home lots; the location and width of roadways
and walkways; the location of water and sewer lines and riser pipes; plans
and specifications of the water supply and refuse and sewage disposal
facilities; plans and specifications of all buildings constructed or to be
constructed within the mobile home park; the location and details of lighting
and electrical systems; a landscaping plan approved by the city; and park
ground area and recreation equipment be shown on the landscaping plan.



   (C)   Fee.  All applications for a permit shall be accompanied by a
fee which shall be based on total valuation of the work to be done. Such fees
shall be in accordance with established building permit fees required in the
city.



   (D)   Review of applications. The Planning Commission shall review
all applications for permits issued hereunder and shall hold such hearings as
they may deem proper with respect thereto. The findings and recommendations
of the Planning Commission shall be forwarded to the Council for appropriate
action.



   (E)   Denial. Any person whose application for permit under this
section has been denied may request and shall be granted a hearing on this
matter before the Planning Commission.



(1975 Code, § 4.50, Subd. 4)



§ 152.05  LICENSES.



   (A)   License required. It is unlawful for any person to operate any
mobile home park within the limits of the city unless currently licensed by
the state for such operation and unless he holds a valid license issued
annually by the Council in the name of such person for the specific mobile
home park. All applications for licenses shall be made to the Council. The
Council shall issue a license upon compliance by the applicant with
provisions of this section.



   (B)   License transfer. Every person holding a license shall give
notice in writing to the Building Inspector within 72 hours after having
sold, transferred, given away, or otherwise disposed of interest in or
control of any mobile home park. Such notice shall be made to the Building
Inspector to include the name and address of the person succeeding to the
ownership or control of such mobile home park. Upon application in writing
for transfer of the permit, the permit shall be transferred.



   (C)   Applications and renewals.



      (1)   Application for original licenses shall be in writing,
signed by the applicant, accompanied by an affidavit of the applicant as to
the truth of the application with a fee of $100 and shall contain:  the
applicant’s name and address; the location and legal description of the
mobile home park; and a site plan of the mobile home park, showing all mobile
home lots, structures, roads, walkways and other service facilities.



      (2)   Applications for renewals of licenses shall be made in
writing by the holders of the licenses, shall be accompanied by a fee of $50,
and shall contain any change in the information submitted since the original
license was issued or the latest renewal granted.



   (D)   Suspension or revocation. Whenever, upon inspection of any
mobile home park, the Building Inspector finds that conditions or practices
exist which are in violation of any provision of this section, the Building
Inspector shall give notice in writing to the person to whom the license was
issued that conditions or practices shall be corrected within a 30-day period
of time specified in the notice by the Building Inspector. At the end of such
period of time the Building Inspector shall reinspect such mobile home park
and, if such conditions or practices have not been corrected, the Council and
the City Clerk will give notice in writing of such suspension to the person
to whom the license is issued. Upon receipt of notice of such suspension,
such person shall cease operation of such mobile home park.



(1975 Code, § 4.50, Subd. 5)



§ 152.06  SUSPENSION.



   (A)   Compliance. The Building Inspector is authorized and directed
to make such inspections as are necessary to determine satisfactory
compliance with this section, including the power to enter at reasonable
times upon any private or public property for the purposes.



   (B)   Registration record. The Building Inspector, the Chief of
Police, or their duly authorized representatives shall have the power to
inspect the register containing a record of all residents of the mobile home
park.



   (C)   Access. It shall be the duty of the park management to give
the Building Inspector free access to all lots at reasonable times for the
purpose of inspection.



   (D)   Repairs. It shall be the duty of every occupant of a mobile
home park to give the owner thereof or his or her agent or employee access to
any part of such mobile home park at reasonable times for the purpose of
making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with
this section.



(1975 Code, § 4.50, Subd. 6)



§ 152.07  NOTICES, HEARINGS, AND ORDERS.



   (A)   Notice.  Whenever the Building Inspector determines that
there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of
any provision of this section, the Building Inspector shall give notice of
such alleged violation to the person to whom the permit or license was
issued, as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:



      (1)   Be in writing;



      (2)   Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;



      (3)   Allow 30 days time for the performance of any act it
requires. If work cannot be completed in the 30-day period, extensions may be
granted if reasons for hardship do prevail and can be verified;



      (4)   Be served upon the owner or his or her agent as the case
may require, provided that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been
properly served upon such owner or agent when a copy thereof has been sent by
registered mail to his or her last known address, or when he or she has been
served with such notice by any method authorized or required by the laws of
this state.



   (B)   Hearing. Any person affected by any notice which has been
issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this section
may request and shall be granted a hearing of the same before the Planning
Commission.



   (C)   Emergency. Whenever the Building Inspector finds that an
emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public
health, he or she may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the
existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he
or she may deem necessary to meet the emergency, including the suspension of
the permit or license. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section,
such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order
is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the
Building Inspector shall be afforded a hearing before the Planning Commission
as soon as possible. Pending any such hearing, such emergency orders shall be
in full force and effect until and unless later removed, modified or changed
by the Building Inspector, Planning Commission or the Council.



(1975 Code, § 4.50, Subd. 7)



§ 152.08  PARK MANAGEMENT.



   (A)   Responsibilities of the park management.



      (1)   The person to whom a license for a mobile home park is
issued shall operate the park in compliance  with this section and shall
provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities, and
equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.



      (2)   The park management shall notify park occupants of all
applicable provisions of this section and inform them of their duties and
responsibilities under this section.



      (3)   It shall be the duty of the operator of the mobile home
park to keep a register containing a record  of all mobile home owners and
occupants located within the park. The register shall contain the following
information:  the name and address of each mobile home occupant; the name
and address of the owner of each mobile home and motor vehicle by which it is
towed; the make, model, year and license number of each mobile home and motor
vehicle; the state, territory or country issuing such license; and the date
of arrival and departure of each mobile home.



      (4)   Every agreement to rent or lease a mobile home space or
lot shall be documented in writing as provided by law.



   (B)   Availability of register. The park shall keep the register
available for inspection at all times by law enforcement officers, public
health officials and other officials whose duty necessitates acquisition of
the information contained in the register. The register record for each
occupant registered shall not be destroyed for a period of 3 years following
the date of departure of the registrant from the park.



(1975 Code, § 4.50, Subd. 16)



§ 152.09  NONCONFORMANCE.



   (A)   Any mobile home which does not meet the ground anchoring (tie
down) requirements of this section and was lawfully existing prior to the
enactment thereof may be maintained and continued until December 31, 1976.



   (B)   Any mobile home park which does not meet the community
disaster shelter requirements of this section and was lawfully existing prior
to the enactment thereof may be maintained and continued for a period of not
more than 3 years.



(1975 Code, § 4.50, Subd. 17)



REGULATIONS



§ 152.20  ENVIRONMENTAL, OPEN SPACE AND ACCESS REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   General requirements. Condition of soil, ground water level,
drainage, and topography shall not create hazards to the property or the
health and safety of the occupants. The site should not be exposed to
objectionable smoke, noise, odors, or other adverse influences and no portion
subject to unpredictable or sudden flooding.



   (B)   Area. Minimum total park area shall be 10 acres.



   (C)   Soil and ground cover requirements. Exposed ground surfaces in
all parts of every mobile home park shall be paved or covered with stone,
screenings, or other solid material or protected with a vegetative growth
that is capable of preventing soil erosion and of eliminating objectionable
dust.



   (D)   Site drainage requirements. The ground surface in all parts of
every mobile home park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface
water in a safe, efficient manner.



   (E)   Use requirements.



      (1)   No part of any park shall be used for nonresidential
purposes, except such uses that are required for the direct servicing and
well-being of park residents and for the management and maintenance of the
park.



      (2)   Nothing contained in this subsection shall be deemed as
prohibiting the sale of a mobile home located on a mobile home stand and
connected to the pertinent utilities.



   (F)   Required separation between mobile homes.



      (1)   Mobile homes shall be separated from each other and from
other buildings and structures by at least  20 feet or the sum of the
heights of both trailer units, whichever is greater. Mobile homes placed
end-to-end must have minimum clearance of 15 feet.



      (2)   An accessory structure such as an awning, cabana,
storage cabinet, carport, windbreak and porch  which has a floor area
exceeding 25 feet and has an opaque top or roof shall, for purposes of all
separation requirements, be considered to be part of the mobile home.



      (3)   Minimum lot sizes shall not be less than 5,000 square
feet.



   (G)   Open space. A minimum of 500 square feet per mobile home shall
be provided for definable play areas and open space within the mobile home
park. Such areas of open space and play area shall not be areas included
within any setback nor shall they include any areas of less than 20 feet in
length or width.



   (H)   Required setbacks, buffer strips and screening.



      (1)   All mobile homes shall be located at least 30 feet from
any property boundary line abutting upon a public street or highway and at
least 20 feet from other property boundary lines.



      (2)   There shall be a minimum distance of 15 feet between the
mobile home stand and abutting park street.



      (3)   All mobile home parks located adjacent to residential,
recreational, commercial or industrial land uses shall provide screening such
as fences, shrubs, and trees along the property boundary line separating the
park and such uses and shall be maintained in a neat and orderly fashion.



   (I)   Cluster development. Cluster development shall be encouraged;
in such cases, the Planning Commission and Council may vary or modify the
strict application and requirements of divisions (F), (G) and (H) of this
section as applied herein to more readily accommodate this development
concept.



   (J)   Average density. Notwithstanding the type of development
concept used, the maximum density shall be 7 mobile homes per acre.



   (K)   Accessory buildings.



      (1)   One accessory building for outside storage of equipment
and refuse is required.



      (2)   The accessory buildings shall be a minimum of 48 square
feet and designed of weather resistant material that will enhance the general
appearance of the lot.



   (L)   Park street system and car parking.



      (1)   General requirements.  All mobile home parks shall be
provided with safe and convenient vehicular access from abutting public
streets or roads to each mobile home lot.  Such access shall be provided by
streets, driveways or other means.



      (2)   Park entrance. Entrances to mobile home parks shall be
designed to minimize congestion and hazards and allow free movement of
traffic on adjacent streets. No parking shall be permitted on the park
entrance street for a distance of 100 feet from its point of beginning.



      (3)   Internal streets. Surfaced roadways shall be of adequate
width to accommodate anticipated traffic  and in any case shall meet the
following minimum requirements:



         (a)    All streets except minor streets shall be a
minimum of 30 feet in width from face of curb to face of curb. Streets
without curb shall be considered minor streets;



         (b)   Dead-end streets shall be limited in length to 500
feet and shall be provided at the closed end  with a cul-de-sac having an
outside roadway diameter of at least 100 feet. All dead-end streets shall be
marked with approved signs at the entrance to the dead-end street;



         (c)   Minor streets 25 feet in width shall be acceptable
only if less than 500 feet long and serving less than 8 mobile homes or of
any length if mobile home lots abut on one side only.



      (4)   Car parking. Off-street parking areas for the use of
park occupants and guests. Such areas shall be furnished at a rate of at
least 2 car spaces for each mobile home lot, of which at least one-half of
the spaces may be in compounds. All off-street parking areas shall be paved
concrete or bituminous surface or crushed rock treated with oil so it is
dust-free.



      (5)   Required illuminating of park street systems. All parks
shall be furnished with lighting units so  spaced and equipped with
luminaries placed at such mounting heights as will provide the following
average maintained levels of illumination for the safe movement of
pedestrians and vehicles at night:



         (a)   All parts of the park street systems:  0.6 foot
candle;



         (b)   Potentially hazardous locations, such as major
street intersections and steps or stepped ramps:  individually illuminated,
with a minimum of 0.6 foot candle.



      (6)   Street construction and design standards.



         (a)   Pavements.  All streets shall be provided with a
paved concrete or bituminous surface. Pavement edges shall be protected to
prevent raveling of the wearing surface and shifting of the pavement base.
Street surfaces shall be maintained, free of cracks, holes and other hazards.



         (b)   Grades. Longitudinal grades of all streets shall
range between 0.4% and 8.00%. Transverse grades (crown) of all streets shall
be sufficient to insure adequate transverse drainage.



         (c)   Storm sewers. If conditions warrant, an adequate
storm sewer system shall be provided to dispose of all runoff water. The
storm sewer system may be connected to existing city storm sewer system upon
city approval.



         (d)   Intersections. Within 50 feet of an intersection,
streets shall be at right angles. A distance of at least 85 feet shall be
maintained between the center lines of offset intersection streets.
Intersections of more than 2 streets at 1 point shall be avoided.     



   (M)   Walks.



      (1)   General requirements. All parks shall be provided with
safe, convenient, all-season pedestrian access of adequate width for intended
use, durable and convenient to maintain, between individual mobile homes, the
park streets and all community facilities provided for park residents. Sudden
changes in alignment and gradient shall be avoided.



      (2)   Common walk system. A common walk system shall be
provided and maintained between locations where pedestrian traffic is
concentrated. The common walks shall have a minimum width of 4-1/2 feet.



      (3)   Individual walks. All mobile homes shall be connected to
common walks, to paved streets, or to paved driveways or parking spaces
connecting to a paved street. The individual walks shall have a minimum width
of 2 feet.



   (N)   Patio. Each mobile home lot shall have a 4 inch concrete patio
with minimum dimensions of 9 feet by 20 feet.



   (O)   Trees. A minimum of 1 tree per lot is required. In open area
and park area, a minimum of 20 trees per acre is required.



   (P)   Skirt. All mobile homes shall have skirts around the entire
trailer made of metal, plastic, fiberglass or comparable, noncombustible
material approved by the Building Inspector and shall be painted to match the
appropriate trailer so that it will enhance the general appearance thereof.



   (Q)   Tie downs. All mobile homes shall be securely anchored to the
ground pursuant to such standards relating to support systems and ground
anchoring systems, as approved by the city.



(1975 Code, § 4.50, Subd. 8)



§ 152.21  WATER SUPPLY.



   All mobile homes shall be serviced by the city water system. All mobile
home park water systems shall be approved in writing by the State of
Minnesota Department of Health as provided by law.



(1975 Code, § 4.50, Subd. 9)



§ 152.22  SEWAGE DISPOSAL.



   All mobile homes shall be serviced by the city sanitary sewer system.
All mobile home park sanitary sewer systems shall be approved in writing by
the State of Minnesota Department of Health as provided by law.



(1975 Code, § 4.50, Subd. 10)



§ 152.23  SERVICE BUILDINGS AND OTHER COMMUNITY SERVICE FACILITIES.



   (A)   General. The requirements of this section shall apply to
service buildings, recreation buildings and other community service
facilities such as management offices, repair shops, storage areas, sanitary
facilities, laundry facilities, indoor recreation areas, and commercial uses
supplying essential goods or services for the exclusive use of park occupants.



   (B)   Structural requirements for buildings. All portions of the
structure shall be properly protected from  damage by ordinary uses and by
decay, corrosion, termites, and other destructive elements. Exterior portions
shall be of such materials and be so constructed and protected as to prevent
entrance or penetration of moisture and weather.



   (C)   Barbecue pits, fireplaces, stoves and incinerators. Cooking
shelters, barbecue pits, fireplaces, woodburning stoves and incinerators
shall be so located, constructed, maintained and used as to minimize fire
hazards and smoke nuisances both on the property on which used and on
neighboring property and shall comply with all appropriate ordinances, laws
or other regulations.



   (D)   Community disaster shelter. Every mobile home park shall
provide a community disaster shelter of sufficient design capacity as
approved by the city pursuant to applicable rules, regulations and law
pertaining to same.



(1975 Code, § 4.50, Subd. 11)



§ 152.24  REFUSE HANDLING.



   The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the mobile home park
shall be so conducted as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage,
insect breeding, accident or fire hazards or air pollution.



(1975 Code, § 4.50, Subd. 12)



§ 152.25  INSECT AND RODENT CONTROL.



   (A)   Grounds, buildings and structures. Grounds, buildings and
structures shall be maintained free of insect and rodent harborage and
infestation. Extermination methods and other measures to control insects and
rodents shall conform with the requirements of the City Health Code.



   (B)   Parks. Parks shall be maintained free of accumulation of
debris which may provide rodent harborage or breeding places for flies,
mosquitoes and other pests.



   (C)   Storage areas. Storage areas shall be so maintained as to
prevent rodent harborage, lumber, pipe and other building material shall be
stored at least 1 foot above ground.



   (D)   Screens. Where the potential for insect and rodent infestation
exists, all exterior openings in or beneath any structure shall be
appropriately screened with wire mesh or other suitable materials.



   (E)   Brush, weeds and grass. The growth of brush, weeds and grass
shall be controlled to prevent harborage of ticks, chiggers and other noxious
insects. Parks shall be so maintained as to prevent the growth of ragweed,
poison ivy, poison oak, poison sumac, and other noxious weeds considered
detrimental to health. Open areas shall be maintained free of heavy
undergrowth of any description.



(1975 Code, § 4.50, Subd. 13)



§ 152.26  FUEL SUPPLY AND STORAGE.



   Natural gas piping systems shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with applicable codes and regulations governing such systems, and
no outside or buried fuel tanks will be allowed.



(1975 Code, § 4.50, Subd. 14)



§ 152.27  FIRE PROTECTION.



   (A)   Litter, rubbish, and the like. Mobile home parks shall be kept
free of litter, rubbish and other flammable material.



   (B)   Fire extinguishers - community service buildings. Portable
fire extinguishers rated for classes A, B and C fires shall be kept visible
in service buildings and at other locations conveniently and readily
accessible for use for all of the occupants and shall be maintained in good
operating condition. Their capacity shall be not less than 10 pounds.



   (C)   Fire extinguishers - mobile homes. Each mobile home owner
shall provide and keep in usable condition a portable fire extinguisher rated
for classes A, B and C fires. The extinguisher capacity shall not be less
than 5 pounds. No mobile home may be parked for more than 3 days without such
a fire extinguisher in the mobile  home.



   (D)   Fires. Fires shall be made only in stoves, indoor incinerators
and other equipment intended for such purposes.



   (E)   Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed if the park
water supply system is capable to serve them in accordance with the following
requirements:



      (1)   The water supply system shall permit the operation of
standard city fire hydrants;



      (2)   Fire hydrants, if provided, shall be located within 300
feet of any mobile home, service building or other structure in the park.



(1975 Code, § 4.50, Subd. 15)



CHAPTER 153:  FLOOD PLAIN REGULATION



Section



   153.01   Statutory authorization



   153.02   Purposes and findings of fact



   153.03   Jurisdiction



   153.04   Official Zoning Map



   153.05   Compliance



   153.06   Abrogation and greater restriction



   153.07   Definitions



   153.08   Use of the Flood Plain District



   153.09   Administration



§ 153.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   The Legislature of the State of Minnesota has, in M.S. Ch. 462, as it
may be amended from time to time, granted authority to the city to adopt
zoning ordinances and subdivision regulations. The Legislature of the State
of Minnesota has in M.S. Ch. 103F, as it may be amended from time to time,
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations
designed to minimize flood losses.



(Ord. 109, passed 9-18-1989; Am. Ord. 187, passed 6-21-1999)



§ 153.02  PURPOSES AND FINDINGS OF FACT.



   The Council finds:



   (A)   A portion of the lands within the regulatory jurisdiction of
North Mankato is subject to recurrent flooding by overflow of streams and
other water courses causing hazard to life and property, disruption of
commerce and governmental services, unsanitary conditions, and the
interruption of transportation and communication, all of which are
detrimental to the health, safety, welfare and property of the occupants of
flood plain areas and the people;



   (B)   It is the purpose of this section to promote the public
health, safety and general welfare by minimizing the losses described in
division (A) of this section, preventing fraud and victimization and
qualifying the city for flood insurance.



(Ord. 109, passed 9-18-1989)



§ 153.03  JURISDICTION.



   The jurisdiction of this section shall include all lands within the
corporate limits of the city designated as areas subject to inundation by the
"Flood Insurance Study Nicollet County, Minnesota and Incorporated Areas,"
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, dated July 21, 1999.
More specifically, this section applies to all land shown within zone AE on
the Flood Insurance Rate Map, revised July 21, 1999, a copy of which is on
file in the Office of the City Clerk.



(Ord. 109, passed 9-18-1989;  Am. Ord. 187, passed 6-21-1999)



§ 153.04  OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.



   The Official Zoning Map, together with all explanatory materials
thereon, and attached thereto, is adopted by reference and declared to be a
part of this section. The explanatory materials shall include the "Flood
Insurance Study Nicollet County, Minnesota and Incorporated Areas" and Flood
Insurance Rate Map panels 27103C0410 G, 27103CO415 G, 27103CO416 G, and
27103CO417 G, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated
July 21, 1999. For the purposes of this section, the Official Zoning Map is
the Flood Insurance Rate Map panels revised July 21, 1999, and on file in the
Office of the City Clerk.



(Ord. 109, passed 9-18-1989;  Am. Ord. 187, passed 6-21-1999)



§ 153.05  COMPLIANCE.



   No structure or land shall hereafter be used, no land shall be
subdivided, and no structure shall be located, extended, converted or
structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this section
and other applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction
of this section.



(Ord. 109, passed 9-18-1989)



§ 153.06  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTION.



   It is not intended by this section to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this
section imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this section shall
prevail. This section shall take precedent over and repeal other 
inconsistent City Code provisions to the extent that it imposes additional
restrictions upon land use.



(Ord. 109, passed 9-18-1989)



§ 153.07  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, words or phrases shall be interpreted
so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage and so as to
give this chapter its most reasonable application.



   Words and phrases used in this chapter shall be defined as provided in
Minn. Regs. 6120.5000 and as specifically defined below.



   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings and other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations or
storage of materials or equipment.



   FLOOD PLAIN. The areas adjoining a watercourse which have been or
hereafter may be covered by the regional flood.



   REGIONAL FLOOD. A flood which is representative of large floods known
to have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what
can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the
100-year recurrence interval. Regional flood is synonymous with the term
"base flood" in the Flood Insurance Study.



   STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached
to the ground or  on-site utilities, including, but not limited to,
buildings, factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes,
and travel trailers/vehicles.



(Ord. 109, passed 9-18-1989)



§ 153.08  USE OF THE FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT.



   The following uses have a low flood damage potential and do not
obstruct flood flows. These uses shall be permitted within the Flood Plain
District to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other City Code
provision and provided they do not require structures, fill, or storage of
materials or equipment. In addition, no use shall adversely affect the
capacity of channels or floodways or any tributary to the main stream or of
any drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or system. All other uses
shall be prohibited:  private and public recreational uses, such as picnic
grounds, boat launching ramps, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, fishing
areas, and hiking trails.



(Ord. 109, passed 9-18-1989)



§ 153.09  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   Development permits required. No person shall erect,
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, improve, move, or demolish any building or
structure without first obtaining a permit for each building or structure. No
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling
operations shall be commenced until a permit has been obtained from the city.



   (B)   Duties of the City Planner. The City Planner shall review all
development permit applications to determine whether the proposed use lies in
the Flood Plain District. Permit applications for uses to be located in the
Flood Plain District shall not be granted unless they comply with the
provisions of § 153.08.



   (C)   State and federal permits. Prior to granting a building
permit, or processing an application for a conditional use permit or
variance, the Zoning Administrator shall determine that the applicant has
obtained all necessary state and federal permits.



   (D)   Interpretation of district boundaries. Where interpretation is
needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the Flood Plain District
as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, as for example where there appears
to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, the
City Council shall make the necessary interpretation based on elevations on
the regional (100-year) flood profile contained in the Flood Insurance Study
and other available technical data.



   (E)   Variances.



      (1)   Applications for variances to the provisions of this
chapter shall be evaluated in accordance with procedures in § 156.085. No
variance shall have the effect of allowing any use prohibited in the Flood
Plain District.



      (2)   No such variance shall become effective without the
approval of the Council. A copy of the application for the proposed variance
shall be submitted to the Commissioner of Natural Resources sufficiently in
advance so that the Commissioner will receive at least 10 days notice of the
hearing. A copy of all decisions granting variances shall be forwarded to the
Commissioner of Natural Resources within 10 days of such action.



   (F)   Amendments. All amendments to this chapter, including
amendments to the Official Zoning Map, must be submitted to and approved by
the Commissioner of Natural Resources prior to adoption.  Changes in the
Official Zoning Map also require prior approval by the Federal Insurance
Administration.



   (H)   Separability. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the
North Mankato City Council that the several positions of this chapter are
separable in accordance with the following:



      (1)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any
provision of this chapter to be invalid, such judgement shall not effect any
other provision of this chapter, not specifically included in  said
judgement;



      (2)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge
invalid the application of any provision of this chapter to a particular
property, building, or structure, such judgement shall not effect the
application of the provision to any other property, building, or structure
not specifically included in said judgement.



   (I)   Conflicting ordinances repealed. All ordinances and parts of
ordinances in conflict herewith are repealed.



(Ord. 109, passed 9-18-1989)



CHAPTER 154:  SIGN REGULATIONS



Section



   154.01   Legislative intent



   154.02   Objectives



   154.03   Definitions



   154.04   General regulations



   154.05   Prohibited signs



   154.07   Sign permit applications



   154.08   Fees



   154.06   Permitted signs



   154.09   General sign regulations



   154.10   B-1, Neighborhood Business District



   154.11   B-2, Community Business District



   154.12   B-3, General Commercial District



   154.13   Central Business District



   154.14   OR-1, Office/Residential District



   154.15   I-1, M-1 and M-2 Industrial Districts



   154.16   Signs not requiring a permit



   154.17   Variances



   154.18   Nonconforming signs; continuation of existing signs



   154.98   Violation



§ 154.01  LEGISLATIVE INTENT.



   This chapter is enacted to promote the comprehensive and uniform
standards relating to signs.



(Ord. 90, passed 9-21-1987)



§ 154.02  OBJECTIVES.



   It shall be the intent of the provisions of this chapter to achieve the
following objectives:



   (A)   To establish standards which would permit businesses in the
city a reasonable and equitable opportunity to identify themselves;



   (B)   To preserve and promote civic beauty and not allow signs which
would detract from this objective because of unusual size, shape, height,
location, condition, cluttering, or illumination;



   (C)   To insure that signs in the city shall not create a safety
hazard;



   (D)   To preserve and protect the value of land and buildings and to
preserve and protect landscapes.



(Ord. 90, passed 9-21-1987)



§ 154.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCESSORY SIGN.  A sign which is necessary for the use of the
property, contains no advertising information, does not exceed 6 square feet
in area, and is used for matters pertaining to directions, parking,
emergencies, and matters of a similar nature. Examples include but are not
limited to identification and informational signs.



   BANDED AREA.  That portion of a building generally located along the
front which is constructed for purposes of attaching building signs in a
consistent and coordinated manner.



   BANNER.  A temporary sign attached to and not projecting more than 18
inches from the exterior wall of a building.



   BENCH SIGN.  A sign attached to or part of a sitting bench.



   BUILDING SIGN. A business sign attached to any face of a building.



   BUSINESS SIGN.  An exterior sign attached to any face of a building
which identifies the business or profession conducted on the premises. This
sign pertains to the major functions or the name of the business and the
trade names of primary products or goods manufactured or sold on the premises.



   CANOPY SIGN.  A sign printed on a fabric hood or cover which projects
from the wall of a building and  may or may not be retracted, folded, or
collapsed against the face of the building.



   CHANGEABLE COPY.  A sign or portion of a sign with separate inset
letters and/or symbols which can easily be removed and are periodically
changed.



   CONSTRUCTION/DEVELOPMENT SIGN.  A sign used temporarily at the
construction site identifying the developer, contractor, and/or builder.



   DOUBLE FACED SIGN.  A sign displaying identical information on
opposite sides with the angle between the 2 sides no greater than 30 degrees.



   DYNAMIC DISPLAY.  Any characteristics of a sign that appear to have
movement or that appear to change, caused by any method other than physically
removing and replacing the sign or its components, whether the apparent
movement or change is in the display, the sign structure itself, or any other
component of the sign. This includes a display that incorporates a technology
or method allowing the sign face to change the image without having to
physically or mechanically replace the sign face or its components. This also
includes any rotating, revolving, moving, flashing, blinking or animated
display and any display that incorporates rotating panels, LED lights
manipulated through digital input, "digital ink" or any other method or
technology that allows the sign face to present a series of images or
displays.



   FLASHING SIGN.  Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is
not stationary, constant in intensity, or constant in color at all times when
the sign is in use. A sign providing public service information such as time,
temperature, or similar information shall not be considered a flashing sign.



   GRADE OF ELEVATION.  The lowest point of elevation of the finished
surface of the ground, paving, or sidewalk within the area between the sign
and 10 feet from the sign.



   GROUND SIGN.  A free-standing sign erected upon or supported by the
ground and not attached to any  building.



   IDENTIFICATION SIGN.  A sign which bears the name and/or address of
the occupant of the building.



   ILLUMINATED SIGN.  Any sign which has characters, letters, figures,
design, or outline illuminated by electric lights or illuminous tubes as part
of the sign proper.



   INFORMATIONAL/DIRECTIONAL SIGN.  A sign erected upon private property
to provide locational directions or building functions and is attached to the
building. These signs may indicate parking areas, wash bays, drive-up
windows, and the like.



   JOINT IDENTIFICATION SIGN.  A sign which identifies the name of a
commercial or industrial complex consisting of 2 or more separate businesses.
The sign may include a listing of businesses.



   MARQUEE SIGN.  A permanent structure not made of cloth fabric that
projects over the entrance to a building and is often equipped with a sign
board.



   MENU BOARD.  A sign listing drive-up food items in conjunction with a
restaurant.



   MONUMENT SIGN.  A ground sign intended to permanently identify by name
a residential development.



   MOVING DEVICE.  A device which moves or rotates to attract attention
for advertising purposes.



   MULTI-OCCUPANCY BUILDING.  A building designed to be occupied by 2 or
more separate businesses.



   OFF-PREMISES ADVERTISING SIGN.  A sign which directs attention to a
business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered
elsewhere than on the premises.



   PENNANT.  A small flag used for decorative purposes or to attract
attention.



   POLITICAL CAMPAIGN SIGN.  A sign posted by a bonafide candidate for
political office or by a person or group promoting a political issue or
political candidate.



   PORTABLE SIGN.  A sign so designed as to be movable from one location
to another and not permanently attached to the ground or to any immobile
structure. A portable sign may consist of a mobile structure such as a semi
truck trailer or other device whose primary function during a specific time
period is to serve as a sign.



   PROMOTIONAL SIGN.  A temporary sign which shall not exist for more
than 30 days which promotes civic events or promotions, limited to city
celebrations, firemen’s functions and special school events.



   PYLON SIGN.  A ground sign erected upon a single post or posts that
converge at a common base with the posts not more than 15 feet apart with the
display portion mounted on top thereof. Clearance between the ground and
bottom of the sign must be at least 12 feet.



   REAL ESTATE SIGN.  A sign intended to aid with the sale, rental, or
lease of real property.



   ROOF LINE.  That line at which an exterior wall surface of a building
departs from the vertical plane.



   REVOLVING SIGN.  A sign which rotates at a constant rate of
revolutions per minute.



   SIGN. A name, identification, description, display, illustration,
structure, or device which is fixed to or painted or represented directly or
indirectly upon a building or other outdoor surface or piece of land which
directs the attention to an object, product, place, activity, person,
institution, organization, or business.



   SIGN HEIGHT.  The vertical distance measured from the grade elevation
to the highest point of the sign.



   SIGN SETBACK.  The shortest distance between a property or public
right-of-way line and the surface of a sign.



   TEMPORARY SIGN.  Any sign which is erected for a limited time and/or
special purpose, including but not limited to banners, portable, and movable
signs.



(Ord. 90, passed 9-21-1987; Am. Ord. 17, 4th Series, passed 1-17-2008)



§ 154.04  GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Access. No sign shall be erected or maintained so as to
prevent or deter ingress or egress from any door, window, or fire escape.
Signs shall not be attached to stand pipes, fire escapes, or fences.



   (B)   Building signs - location.



      (1)   In multi-tenant buildings, building signs shall be
within the banded area. Where a banded area does not exist, a City Building
Official shall determine an appropriate location.



      (2)   In flat-roofed buildings or hip-roofed buildings, the
building sign shall not be above the front outside wall unless located within
the banded area.



      (3)   Building signs shall be located along any side
considered to be the front of the building, or in the alternative, along a
side where the site directly abuts a public street.



      (4)   Roof signs are prohibited.



      (5)   Building signs may project up to 18 inches to
accommodate mounting.



   (C)   Compliance with ordinance. No sign shall be erected,
installed, constructed, or painted in the city except in compliance with this
chapter.



   (D)   Double faced signs. Signs less than 30 degrees shall be
considered as 1 sign. When the sign is constructed so that the faces are not
back-to-back, the angle shall not exceed 30 degrees. If the angle is greater
than 30 degrees, the total area of the full sign shall be added together when
calculating the area of the sign.



   (E)   Enforcing officer. The City Building Official, Inspector, or
any other city employee duly appointed by the City Administrator shall be the
enforcing officer for this chapter.



   (F)   Interference. No sign shall be hazardous or unsafe, block the
efficient movement of traffic, or use words which might be construed as
traffic controls such as stop, caution, or warning. No sign nor guys shall
interfere with utility equipment.



   (G)   Maintenance.



      (1)   All signs shall be maintained in good condition and
areas around them kept free from debris, tall bushes, high weeds, and from
anything else which would be a nuisance. In addition, all parts and supports
shall be properly painted. Any sign or structure which has rotted, unsafe,
deteriorated, defaced or otherwise altered shall be repainted, repaired or
replaced by the licensee, owner, or agent of the owner upon written notice by
the city.



      (2)   All business signs shall be removed from the building
and property by the owner of such property within 30 days after the business
or use is terminated. Framework that conforms to the ordinance and is
expected to be used for a future business sign may be permitted to remain.



      (3)   All signs shall contain current information. Outdated
signs or signs with outdated information shall be removed by the owner. The
entire surrounding area shall be cleared of  all debris and unsightly
projections and  protrusions.



   (H)   Preventing adverse effect on adjacent property.  Exposed
backs of all signs and the sign structure  must be painted a neutral color
and otherwise maintained so as not to have an adverse effect on the adjacent
property.



   (I)   Projecting signs. Except as otherwise provided, no projecting
signs shall extend more than 18 inches from the face of a building over a
public right-of-way. Exceptions include canopy signs and certain signs in the
Central Business District.



   (J)   Right-of-way. Except as permitted in the Central Business
District, no sign shall be placed in the public right-of-way, attached to
rocks, trees, utility poles, or fences. Signs located over public
right-of-way or public or private accesses shall be a minimum of 8 feet above
grade level.



   (K)   Temporary signs. The display of temporary signs is subject to
the following:



      (1)   The display of any temporary sign shall be limited to 1
continuous 30-day period in any 4- month period.



      (2)   Not more than 3 temporary sign permits may be issued per
year for any individual business.



      (3)   Temporary signs are limited to 24 square feet in size.



      (4)   The location of freestanding temporary signs is subject
to setback regulations.  No temporary sign is permitted in any public
right-of-way.



      (5)   A temporary sign permit is good for 30 calendar days
from date of issuance.



      (6)   At any time no more than 1 temporary sign shall be
displayed per business.



(Ord. 90, passed 9-21-1987; Am. Ord. 30, 4th Series, passed 1-4-2010; Am.
Ord. 63, 4th Series, passed 1-5-2015)



§ 154.05  PROHIBITED SIGNS.



   The following signs shall be prohibited:



   (A)   All off-premises advertising signs including billboards;



   (B)   Fence signs;



   (C)   Flashing signs;



   (D)   Signs which interfere with traffic signs, signals or devices;



   (E)   Marquee signs;



   (F)   Painting directly on exterior walls, except for public art
murals approved by the city;



   (G)   Paper, cardboard, or similar signs, notices, or flyers pasted,
tacked, or otherwise attached to the exterior wall of any building, utility
poles or traffic signs;



   (H)   Permanent or temporary signs overhanging the public
right-of-way or boundary of adjacent property, except traffic signs erected
by the city, county, or state;



   (I)   Revolving beacons and sequential flashers;



   (J)   Revolving signs;



   (K)   Roof signs;



   (L)   Where a business is located over more than 1 parcel or lot,
the business shall not be entitled to additional signs nor a multiplicity of
square footage of signage by virtue thereof;



   (M)    Lighted signs in residential zoning districts, except
churches or schools;



   (N)   Signs or advertising painted or attached to vehicles parked on
a property not intended to be moved for a period of 48 hours or more;



   (O)   Dynamic display signs over 125 square feet;



   (P)   Dynamic display signs in residential zoning districts; and



   (Q)   Dynamic display off-premises signs.



(Ord. 90, passed 9-21-1987; Am. Ord. 8, 4th series, passed 1-16-2007; Am.
Ord. 17, 4th series, passed 1-17-2008; Am. Ord. 109, 4th series, passed
9-17-2018)



§ 154.06  PERMITTED SIGNS.



   If they conform to and meet the general regulations contained in this
chapter, the following signs may be erected or maintained as shown for each
zoning district or land use when specified.



   (A)   General. The following signs shall require a permit:



      (1)   Building, pylon, ground signs.



      (2)   Menu boards.



      (3)   Temporary signs.



      (4)   Monument signs.



      (5)   Identification signs.



      (6)   Joint identification signs.



      (7)   Canopy signs.



      (8)   General business signs.



      (9)   Replacement signs.



   (B)   Building, pylon, ground signs.



      (1)   Building signs. Refer to the requirements in each zoning
district.



      (2)   Pylon signs. The single side of any pylon sign in any
zoning district shall not exceed the maximum size requirements within each
zoning district, including changeable copy board. Clearance of a pylon sign
must be a minimum of 12 feet. The maximum height of a pylon sign is 30 feet.
Where an abutting state or federal highway is more than 5 feet above the
average grade of the commercial property, the pylon sign may be increased in
height by an amount equal to the difference between the average grade of the
commercial property in the vicinity of the sign and the average grade of the
highway in the vicinity of the sign. The applicant is responsible for
providing necessary elevation data at the time  of permit application.



      (3)   Ground signs. Maximum height permitted is as follows.
Eight feet if in the required setback area for structures in the zoning
district.



      (4)   Maximum number and square footage. Where building,
pylon, or ground signs are permitted under this chapter, the maximum square
footage permitted shall not be interpreted to permit a multiplicity of signs
within the maximum square footage. Where a business occupies more than 1
zoning lot, the maximum number of signs permitted shall not be interpreted to
permit a multiplicity of signs or multiplicity of signs within the maximum
square footage.



   (C)   Menu boards. Menu boards shall be permitted under the
following conditions.



      (1)   A maximum of 2 menu boards shall be permitted with a
restaurant providing drive-up window service.



      (2)   A menu board shall be a maximum of 36 square feet in
area.



   (D)   Temporary signs. Changeable copy signs designed to be
temporary are limited to 24 square feet in size.



   (E)   Monument signs. A monument sign intended to permanently
identify a residential development shall  be permitted under the following
conditions:



      (1)   There shall be an entity established to the satisfaction
of the city, such as a homeowner’s association, which shall clearly be
responsible for the perpetual maintenance of the monument sign and its
environs with corresponding powers to raise maintenance capital; or



      (2)   In the alternative, there shall be a $1,000 fee paid to
the city and a ground easement surrounding the monument sign granted to the
city in order that the city may remove the monument sign and its environs if
it is not maintained or if it otherwise becomes necessary to remove the sign.



      (3)   A monument sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in area.



      (4)   Monument signs shall be a minimum of 50 feet from any
existing or future residence.



      (5)   The city, at the discretion of the City Council, may
deny a permit for a monument sign where it is determined that the monument
sign may create an undue burden upon the city by virtue of its size,
location, building  materials, or potential need for maintenance.



   (F)   Identification signs.



      (1)   Ground signs and building signs are permitted.



      (2)   Maximum height 6 feet, if in the required setback area
for structures in that zoning district.



      (3)   Maximum square footage:  32.



   (G)   Joint identification signs. Area identification signs shall be
located in the following manner.



      (1)   The signs must be located on the property of the complex
it is identifying.



      (2)   The sign must be located along a public street frontage
but not in the public right-of-way.



      (3)   The sign must be located a minimum of 50 feet from any
other identification sign or pylon sign.



      (4)   No more than one area identification sign is permitted
for a particular complex.



      (5)   Business identification signs may be used to list the
businesses within the complex but are limited to 6 square feet each.



   (H)   Canopy signs.



      (1)   Each canopy may contain one sign per business.



      (2)   The square footage of a sign on a canopy shall be
calculated by measuring the area included in the smallest rectangle that can
be made to circumscribe any message, figure or symbol. Where the messages,
figures, or symbols involve any configuration that cannot be readily
circumscribed by a single rectangle, then the sign area shall be calculated
as the sum of the fewest number of connecting rectangles that can be made to
circumscribe the same.



      (3)   Where the building abuts the public sidewalk, then
canopy signs may extend into the right-of-way up to within 2 feet of the curb
or to the curb side of such sidewalk, whichever is closer to the building.



      (4)   Minimum clearance:  8 feet.



(Ord. 90, passed 9-21-1987)



§ 154.07  SIGN PERMIT APPLICATION.



   The application for a sign permit shall be made upon forms provided by
the city and shall state or have attached to them the following information:



   (A)   Name, address and telephone number of the applicant and owner
of the sign;



   (B)   A site plan describing the location of the property, existing
buildings and locations of all proposed signs including setbacks;



   (C)   A scaled drawing of the sign to include dimensions and square
footage calculations;



   (D)   A site plan describing the position of the sign or other
advertising structures in relation to nearby buildings or structures if
requested by the City Building Official;



   (E)   A blueprint or ink drawing of the plans and specifications of
the sign;



   (F)   A copy of stress sheets and calculations showing the structure
as designed or dead load and wind velocity in the amount required by this
chapter and all other provisions of this code and ordinances of the city, if
requested by the City Building Official;



   (G)   Name of person erecting the structure;



   (H)   Such other information as the city may require.



(Ord. 90, passed 9-21-1987)



§ 154.08  FEES.



   Permit fees for signs shall be as follows.



   (A)   Business signs. For each sign permitted there shall be an
initial fee as specified in § 150.04 of the City Code.



   (B)   Failure to obtain a permit.  A double fee will be charged if
a sign is erected without first obtaining a permit for such sign.



(Ord. 90, passed 9-21-1987)



§ 154.09  GENERAL SIGN REGULATIONS.



   For R-A, R-1, R-1S, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Residential Zoning Districts:



   (A)   Permitted signs.



      (1)   Monument sign.



      (2)   Ground sign.



      (3)   Building sign.



   (B)   Minimum setbacks.



      (1)   Monument sign; 10 feet.



      (2)   Ground sign; 10 feet.



   (C)   Maximum square footage.



      (1)   Monument sign; 50 square feet.



      (2)   Building sign; 50 square feet.



      (3)   Ground sign; 50 square feet.



   (D)   Maximum number of signs.  Maximum of 1 sign permitted.



§ 154.10  B-1, NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted signs.



      (1)   Building sign.



      (2)   Ground sign.



      (3)    Menu boards



      (4)   Temporary sign.



      (5)   Monument sign.



      (6)   Identification sign.



      (7)   Joint identification sign.



      (8)   General business sign.



      (9)   Canopy sign.



   (B)   Minimum setbacks.



      (1)   Ground sign; 10 feet.



      (2)   Temporary sign; 10 feet.



      (3)   Monument sign; 10 feet.



      (4)   Identification sign; 10 feet.



      (5)   Joint identification sign; 10 feet.



      (6)   General business sign; 10 feet.



   (C)   Maximum square footage.



      (1)   Single occupant; 40 square feet.



      (2)   Multi-occupant:



         (a)   40 square feet per business; or



         (b)   60 square feet for ground signs.



   (D)   Maximum number of signs.



      (1)   Single occupant:



         (a)   1 ground sign; and



         (b)   1 business sign.



      (2)   Multi-occupant;



         (a)   1 ground sign per building; or



         (b)   1 business sign per occupant.



§ 154.11  B-2, COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Permitted signs.



      (1)   Building sign.



      (2)   Ground sign.



      (3)   Pylon sign.



      (4)   Menu boards.



      (5)   Temporary sign.



      (6)   Monument sign.



      (7)   Identification sign.



      (8)   Joint identification sign.



      (9)   General business sign.



      (10)   Canopy sign.



   (B)   Minimum setbacks.



      (1)   Ground sign; 10 feet.



      (2)   Temporary sign; 10 feet.



      (3)   Monument sign; 10 feet.



      (4)   Identification sign; 10 feet.



      (5)   Joint identification sign; 10 feet.



      (6)   General business sign; 10 feet.



      (7)   Pylon sign: 5 feet.



   (C)   Maximum square footage.



      (1)   Single occupant; 125 square feet.



      (2)   Multi-occupant:



         (a)   40 square feet per business; or



         (b)   110 square feet per ground or pylon sign.



   (D)   Maximum number of signs.



      (1)   Single occupant:



         (a)   2 business signs; and either



         (b)   l pylon or 1 ground sign.



      (2)   Multi-occupant:



         (a)   2 business signs per business; and either



         (b)   1 pylon sign or 1 ground sign.



(Am. Ord. 8, 4th Series, passed 1-16-2007)



§ 154.12  B-3, GENERAL COMMERCIAL.



   (A)   Permitted signs.



      (1)   Building sign.



      (2)   Ground sign.



      (3)   Pylon sign.



      (4)   Menu boards.



      (5)   Temporary sign.



      (6)   Monument sign.



      (7)   Identification sign.



      (8)   Joint identification sign.



      (9)   General business sign.



      (10)   Canopy sign.



   (B)   Minimum setbacks.



      (1)   Ground sign: l0 feet.



      (2)   Temporary sign: 10 feet.



      (3)   Monument sign: 10 feet.



      (4)   Identification sign: 10 feet.



      (5)   Joint identification sign: 10 feet.



      (6)   General business sign: 10 feet.



      (7)   Pylon sign: 5 feet.



   (C)   Maximum square footage.



      (1)   Single occupant: 150 square feet.



      (2)   Multi-occupant under 20,000 square feet:



         (a)   60 square feet per business.



         (b)   110 square feet for ground or pylon signs.



      (3)   Multi-occupant over 20,000 square feet:



         (a)   60 square feet per business.



         (b)   260 square feet for ground or pylon signs.



   (D)   Maximum number of signs.



      (1)   Single occupant.



         (a)   Two business signs; and either;



         (b)   One ground or one pylon sign;



         (c)   A business may use one ground and one pylon sign
subject to:



            1.   Business is immediately adjacent to two
public roadways one of which is a U.S. Trunk Highway;



            2.   The pylon sign shall be adjacent to the U.S.
Trunk Highway;



            3.   The pylon sign is not within 200 feet of
another pylon sign;



            4.   The lot size of the business shall not be
less than one acre;



      (2)   Multi-occupant under 20,000 square feet:



         (a)   Two business signs per occupant; and either;



         (b)   One ground or one pylon sign; or



         (c)   A business may use one ground and one pylon sign
subject to:



            1.   Business is immediately adjacent to two
public roadways one of which is a U.S. Trunk Highway;



            2.   The pylon sign shall be adjacent to the U.S.
Trunk Highway;



            3.   The pylon sign is not within 200 feet of
another pylon sign; and



            4.   The lot size of the business shall not be
less than one acre.



(Am. Ord. 63, 4th series, passed 1-5-2015; Am. Ord. 91, 4th series, passed
6-5-2017)



§ 154.13  CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted signs.



      (1)   Building sign.



      (2)   Ground sign.



      (3)   Pylon sign.



      (4)    Menu boards.



      (5)   Temporary sign.



      (6)   Monument sign.



      (7)   Identification sign.



      (8)   Joint identification sign.



      (9)   General business sign.



      (10)   Canopy sign.



   (B)   Minimum setbacks.



      (1)   Ground sign; 10 feet.



      (2)   Temporary sign; 10 feet.



      (3)   Monument sign; 10 feet.



      (4)   Identification sign; 10 feet.



      (5)   Joint identification sign; 10 feet.



      (6)   General business sign; 10 feet.



      (7)   Pylon sign: 5 feet.



   (C)   Maximum square footage.



      (1)   Single occupant: 100 square feet.



      (2)   Multi-occupant: 125 square feet.



   (D)   Maximum number of signs.



      (1)   Single occupant.



         (a)   1 business sign; and either



         (b)   1 ground or 1 pylon sign.



      (2)   Multi-occupant.



         (a)   1 business sign per occupant; and either



         (b)   1 ground or 1 pylon sign.



   (E)   Overhanging signs.



      (1)   General business signs are permitted to encroach upon
the public right-of-way a maximum of 4 feet when the front of the building
abuts a property line.



      (2)   Overhang signs must be attached to the front of the
building.



      (3)   Maximum height is 16 feet. Minimum clearance is 12 feet.



   (F)   Temporary sandwich board signs.



      (1)   Permitted in the 200, 300, 400 and 500 blocks of
Belgrade Avenue.



      (2)   The total square footage per sign shall not exceed 12
square feet or 6 square feet per side.



      (3)   One sign permitted per business.



      (4)   Signs shall be only placed in front of the location the
sign serves.



      (5)   Signs shall be used during the hours of operation of the
business the sign serves.



(Am. Ord. 8, 4th Series, passed 1-16-2007; Am. Ord. 19, 4th Series, passed
7-7-2008; Am. Ord. 21, 4th Series, passed 1-20-2009)



§ 154.14  OR-1, OFFICE/RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted signs.



      (1)   Building sign.



      (2)   Ground sign.



      (3)   Temporary sign.



      (4)   Monument sign.



      (5)   Identification sign.



      (6)   Joint identification sign.



      (7)   General business sign.



      (8)   Canopy sign.



   (B)   Minimum setbacks.



      (1)   Ground sign: 5 feet from front property line or 16.5
feet from the curb line, whichever is greater.



      (2)   Temporary sign: 5 feet from front property line or 16.5
feet from the curb line, whichever is greater.



      (3)   Monument sign: 5 feet from front property line or 16.5
feet from the curb line, whichever is greater.



      (4)   Identification sign: 5 feet from front property line or
16.5 feet from the curb line, whichever is greater.



      (5)   Joint identification sign: 5 feet from front property
line or 16.5 feet from the curb line, whichever is greater.



      (6)   General business sign: 5 feet from front property line
or 16.5 feet from the curb line, whichever is greater.



      (7)   The minimum side yard setback for any ground sign shall
be 10 feet.



   (C)   Maximum square footage.



      (1)   Single occupant: 80 square feet.



      (2)   Multi-occupant: 80 square feet plus an additional 20
square feet per occupant.



      (3)   Ground signs are limited to a size of 50 square feet.



   (D)   Maximum number of signs.



      (1)   Single occupant.



         (a)   1 business sign; and



         (b)   1 ground sign.



      (2)   Multi-occupant.



         (a)   1 business sign per occupant; and



         (b)   1 ground sign.



§ 154.15  I-1, M-1 AND M-2 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Permitted signs.



      (1)   Building sign.



      (2)   Ground sign.



      (3)   Menu boards.



      (4)   Temporary sign.



      (5)   Monument sign.



      (6)   Identification sign.



      (7)   Joint identification sign.



      (8)   General business sign.



      (9)   Canopy sign.



      (10)   Pylon sign.



   (B)   Minimum setbacks.



      (1)   Ground sign: 10 feet.



      (2)   Temporary sign: 10 feet.



      (3)   Monument sign: 10 feet.



      (4)   Identification sign: 10 feet.



      (5)   Joint identification sign: 10 feet.



      (6)   General business sign: 10 feet.



      (7)   Pylon sign: 5 feet.



   (C)   Maximum square footage.



      (1)   Buildings under 25,000 square feet are permitted 200
square feet of total signage.



      (2)   Buildings 25,001 to 200,000 square feet are permitted
400 square feet of total signage.



      (3)   Buildings over 200,000 square feet are permitted 600
square feet of total signage.



      (4)   No freestanding or building sign shall exceed 150 square
feet in size.



   (D)   Maximum number of signs.



      (1)   Single occupant building.



         (a)   2 business signs; and either 1 ground or 1 pylon
sign permitted on lots with 1 street frontage.



         (b)   Lots with 2 street frontages are permitted the use
of 1 ground or 1 pylon sign.



      (2)   Multi-occupant building.



         (a)   2 business signs per occupant; and either 1 ground
or 1 pylon sign permitted on lots with 1 street frontage.



         (b)   Lots with 2 street frontages are permitted the use
of 1 ground and 1 pylon sign.



(Am. Ord. 19, 4th series, passed 7-7-2008; Am. Ord. 21, 4th series, passed
1-20-2009; Am. Ord. 30, 4th series, passed 1-4-2010; Am. Ord. 63, 4th series,
passed 1-5-2015; Am. Ord. 92, 4th series, 6-5-2017)



§ 154.16  SIGNS NOT REQUIRING A PERMIT.



   The following signs do not require a permit or payment of fees but must
conform to the accompanying standards.



   (A)   Construction/development signs.



      (1)   One temporary construction sign shall be permitted on
each property in any zoning district during construction.



      (2)   One temporary development sign shall be permitted for
each platted subdivision.



      (3)   Construction signs shall only be permitted during
construction or remodeling, and shall be removed before the building is
occupied, or after remodeling has been completed.



      (4)   In residential districts or districts abutting a
residential zone, construction/development signs shall be located at least 50
feet from any existing dwelling unit and must conform to the standard
residential setback requirements for that zone.



      (5)   In residential districts, development signs shall be
removed when the subdivision is 75% sold out or the structure is 75% rented
or sold.



      (6)   Where more than one builder is involved in a residential
subdivision, there shall be only one sign as described above which may list
the builders for the subdivision.



      (7)   Construction signs are limited to 32 square feet maximum
and development signs are limited to 80 square feet maximum.



   (B)   City, county, state, or federal signs.



   (C)   Garage sales.



      (1)   Signs advertising garage sales shall be limited to a
maximum of 3 days for each sale. There shall be no more than 3 sales each
calendar year for a household and signs shall not exceed 2 square feet in
area.



      (2)   Garage sale signs are prohibited in public
right-of-ways, on utility poles, trees, street signs traffic signs, and the
like.



   (D)   Home occupation signs. Limited to 2 square feet.



   (E)   Identification sign. Limited to no more than 6 square feet.
These signs may be used as business listings on joint identification signs.
These identification signs shall not be used in computing the maximum
permitted sign area for a business.



   (F)   Identification signs - rear entrance. Rear entrance
identification signs not exceeding 6 square feet in copy area shall be
permitted as building signs located adjacent to the rear entrance to an
individual business in order to identify the location for deliveries. These
identification signs shall not be considered in computing the maximum
permitted sign area for a business.



   (G)   Informational/directional signs.



      (1)   Up to 5 on-site directional signs per site, shall be
permitted in any commercial or industrial district for the purpose of
directing vehicular or pedestrian traffic in a safe and convenient manner as
follows:



 


Zoning District

 

Maximum Size



B-1, B-2, B-3, OR-1 and CBD
 
6 sq. ft.


I-1, M-1 and M-2
 
Buildings over 25,000 sq. ft. - 10 sq. ft.

Building under 25,000 sq. ft. - 6 sq. ft.



 



      (2)   Informational signs attached to a building shall be
permitted in order to locate building functions such as a car wash bay,
drive-up window, or to indicate additional parking. Signs may indicate store
hours and the like.



      (3)   Informational signs shall meet the building sign
requirements for maximum height and shall be in addition to any other
business signs permitted by this chapter.



   (H)   Real estate sign.



      (1)   One temporary sign advertising buildings or land for
rent or for sale shall be permitted in the front yard, side yard subject to
setback requirements, or window of such building. The sign shall be removed
within 10 days after the property is rented or the closing of the sale. Real
estate signs of any kind shall not be located in the public right-of-way.



      (2)   In Residential Districts, signs shall not exceed 6
square feet in area.



      (3)   In all industrial and commercial districts, real estate
signs no larger than 20 square feet are permitted.



   (I)   Political campaign sign.



      (1)   Signs are limited to 4.5 square feet in residential
districts and 18 square feet in commercial and industrial districts.



      (2)   Each sign must contain the name and address of persons
responsible for the sign and that person is responsible for its removal.



      (3)   These signs shall remain for no longer than 45 days
prior to and 10 days after the election for which they were intended.



      (4)   All signs shall be confined to private property and
shall not be attached to trees, utility poles, rocks, the exterior of
buildings or within any public street right-of-way.



   (J)   Promotional sign. Signs for civic events.



   (K)   Trespass signs. Trespass signs and signs of a similar,
restrictive nature may be permitted on private property but not to exceed 2
square feet in area.



   (L)   Summary. The following is a summary of signs not requiring a
permit.



   SIGNS NOT REQUIRING A PERMIT



 


Type of Sign




Sign Type

 

Ground

 

Building

 

Maximum Square Footage





Construction
 

1

 


 
32


Development
 

1

 


 
80 sq. ft.


Garage sales
 

1

 


 
2 sq. ft.


Home occupation
 


 

1

 
2 sq. ft.


Identification -

   Rear entrance

   Area identification listings
 


 




1



1

 

6 sq. ft.

6 sq. ft.


Informational/directional
 

5*

 
See division (G)(1)


Political
 

1

 

1

 
Residential districts - 4.5 sq. ft., all others 18 sq. ft.


Real estate
 

1 or

 

1

 
R-1, R-2, R-3, & R-4 platted for single family homes - 6 sq. ft. R-3, R-4 not
platted or developed for single family homes, all commercial, industrial and
manufacturing districts - 20 sq. ft.


Trespass
 

1

 

1

 
2 sq. ft.




 



*Combined total for ground and building



(Ord. 90, passed 9-21-1987; Am. Ord. 34, 4th Series, passed 1-18-2011; Am.
Ord. 43, 4th Series, passed 1-17-2012)



§ 154.17  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Authorized.  To provide reasonable flexibility in the sign
regulations, the City Council may approve a variance or a sign not otherwise
permitted by these regulations where such exception would not be inconsistent
with the legislative intent and objectives of this chapter.



   (B)   Procedure.



      (1)   Application for a variance shall be made following the
process outlined in § 156.055.



      (2)   Conditions for granting a variance shall be made
following the standards outlined in § 156.085.



   (C)   Fee.  All requests for variances shall be made in writing to
the city on the form provided by the city and the request shall include a fee
as determined by the Council. All information required when applying for a
sign permit as outlined in § 154.06 shall be required before the request for
a variance is considered by the City Council.



(Ord. 90, passed 9-21-1987)



§ 154.18  NONCONFORMING SIGNS; CONTINUATION OF EXISTING SIGNS.



   Existing signs, other than temporary signs, may be kept as and where
they were then located effective the date of adoption of this chapter, even
though they may not conform to these regulations. These signs may continue to
exist except in the following conditions:



   (A)   No nonconforming sign shall be reconstructed after total
destruction or partial destruction exceeding 50% of its replacement value.



   (B)   When a business sign is removed for any reason, then any
subsequent signs, including the removed sign, must conform to this chapter.



(Ord. 90, passed 9-21-1987)



§ 154.98  VIOLATIONS.



   If an authorized agent of the city finds any sign in violation of the
terms of this chapter, such violations shall be punishable as a misdemeanor.



   (A)   Criminal.



      (1)   Violators will be notified by first class mail of the
violation.



      (2)   Violators will be allowed 10 business days to conform to
this chapter.



      (3)   If after 10 days the sign is still in violation, the
City Attorney shall begin formal legal proceedings.



   (B)   Civil.  The city reserves the right to pursue any civil
remedy authorized by law. In pursuing such civil remedy, the cost incurred by
the city attributable to such procedure, including staff time and
attorney’s fees shall be chargeable to the violator.



(Ord. 90, passed 9-21-1987)



CHAPTER 155:  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   155.01   Purpose



   155.02   Jurisdiction



   155.03   Application



   155.04   Approval necessary



   155.05   Interpretation



   155.06   Protective covenants



   155.07   Definitions



   155.08   Registered land surveys and conveyance by metes and bounds



   155.09   Compliance



   155.10   Variances



   155.11   Property iron location prior to sale of real estate



Procedure



   155.25   Sixty day review process



   155.26   Conditional approval of preliminary plat



   155.27   Final plat approval



   155.28   Subdivider representation



   155.29   Preliminary plat data required



   155.30   Final plat data required



Design Standards



   155.45   Blocks



   155.46   Streets, alleys and sidewalks



   155.47   Lots



   155.48   Easements



   155.49   Stormwater design criteria



   155.50   Public sites and open spaces



Basic Improvements



   155.65   General



   155.66   Drainage



   155.67   Street improvements



   155.68   Sanitary sewer improvements



   155.69   Water distribution improvements



   155.70   Public utilities



 



   155.98   Violations



   155.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 155.01  PURPOSE.



   In order to safeguard the best interests of the city and to assist the
subdivider in harmonizing his or her interests with those of the city at
large, this chapter is adopted in order that adherence to same will bring
results beneficial to both parties. Because each new subdivision becomes a
permanent unit in the basic unit structure of the expanding community, and to
which the community will be forced to adhere, and because piecemeal planning
of subdivisions will bring on undesirable disconnected patchwork of pattern
and poor circulation of traffic unless its design and arrangement is
correlated to a Comprehensive Plan of the city aiming at a unified scheme of
community interests, all subdivision of land hereafter submitted for approval
to the Council shall, in all respects, fully comply with the regulations
hereinafter set forth in this chapter. It is the purpose of this chapter to
make certain regulations and requirements for the platting of land within the
city pursuant to the authority contained in M.S. Chs. 429, 462, 471 and 505,
as they may be amended from time to time, which regulations the Council deems
necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of this community.



(1975 Code, § 12.01, Subd. 1)



§ 155.02  JURISDICTION.



   The regulations herein governing plats and the subdivision of land
shall apply within the corporate limits of the city and the unincorporated
area within 2 miles of its limits; provided that where a municipality lies
less than 4 miles from the limits of North Mankato, these regulations shall
apply only to a line equidistant from North Mankato and the municipality; and
provided further, that the governing body or bodies of unincorporated areas
adjacent to the city have not adopted ordinances for the regulation of
subdivision of land or platting.



(1975 Code, § 12.01, Subd. 2)



§ 155.03  APPLICATION.



   Any plat hereafter made for each subdivision or each part thereof lying
within the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be prepared, presented for
approval, and recorded as herein prescribed. The regulations contained herein
shall apply to the subdivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land into 2 or
more lots, tracts or other subdivision of land for the purpose of sale or of
building development, whether immediate or future, including the
resubdivision or replatting of land or lots and including condominium floor
plans. These regulations shall further apply to any parcel of land being
developed upon which includes an existing or future public right-of-way or
easement according to the Comprehensive Plan of the city that has not been
previously dedicated.



(1975 Code, § 12.01, Subd. 3)  (Am. Ord. 81, passed 5-19-1986)



§ 155.04  APPROVAL NECESSARY.



   Before any plat shall be recorded or be of any validity, it shall have
been approved by the Council as having fulfilled the requirements of this
chapter.



(1975 Code, § 12.01, Subd. 4)



§ 155.05  INTERPRETATION.



   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall
be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the aforesaid
intents. Where the provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions
than those of any statute, provisions of the City Code, or other regulation,
the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling. Where the provisions of
any statute, provisions of the City Code, or other regulation impose
greater  restrictions than this chapter, the provisions of such statute,
provisions of the City Code, or other regulation shall be controlling.
Integration with the zoning provisions of the City Code is necessary and
shall be required to the extent applicable.



(1975 Code, § 12.01, Subd. 5)



§ 155.06  PROTECTIVE COVENANTS.



   Protective covenants are recognized as a means of contractually binding
private parties in the development of land areas. Where the requirements
included in a protective covenant are greater than the requirements of this
chapter, the protective covenant shall be controlling. Where the requirements
included in a protective covenant are less than the requirements of this
chapter, this chapter shall be controlling.



(1975 Code, § 12.01, Subd. 6)



§ 155.07  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALLEY.  A public right-of-way less than 30 feet in width which
provides a secondary access to abutting property.



   BLOCK.  An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded
by streets, or by streets and the exterior boundary or boundaries of the
subdivision, or a combination of the above with a river or lake.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.  The group of maps, charts and texts that make up
the comprehensive long-range plan of the city.



   DESIGN STANDARDS.  Specifications to land owners or subdividers for
the preparation of plats, both preliminary and final, indicating among other
things the optimum, minimum or maximum dimensions of such items as
right-of-way, blocks, easements and lots.



   EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land
for the purpose of constructing and maintaining utilities, including, but not
limited to sanitary sewers, watermains, electric lines, telephone lines,
storm sewer or storm drainage ways and gas lines.



   FINAL PLAT.  A drawing or map of a subdivision meeting all the
requirements of the city and in such form as required by law for purposes of
recording.



   LOT. A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for
building development or for transfer of ownership.



   MARKER.  A metal "T" type fence post extending at least 1-1/2 feet
below and 3 feet above the finished grade. Where required, markers shall be
located within 6 inches of monuments.



   MONUMENT. A durable metal rod or pipe, one-half inch or larger in
diameter extending at least 1-1/2 feet below the finished grade, or any
similarly set and dimensioned monuments approved in writing by the city. All
monuments to be located at quarter section points within the subdivision or
on its perimeter shall be approved in writing by the city. All monuments
shall be placed flush with the finished grade except that those located
within a dedicated public right-of-way may be placed at sub-grade level.



   OWNER.  A natural person, partnership, firm, association, public or
quasi-public corporation, private corporation, or a combination of any of
them.



   PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS.  Public lands and open spaces in the city used
for recreational purposes.



   PERCENTAGE OF GRADE.  Percentage of grade on street centerline is the
distance vertically (up and down) from the horizontal in feet and tenths of a
foot for each 100 feet or horizontal distance.



   PEDESTRIAN WAY.  A public or private right-of-way across a block or
within a block to provide access, to be used by pedestrians and which may be
used for the installation of utility lines.



   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the city.



   PRELIMINARY PLAT.  A tentative drawing or map of a proposed
subdivision meeting requirements herein enumerated.



   PROTECTIVE COVENANTS.  Contracts made between private parties as to
the manner in which land may be used, with the view to protecting and
preserving the physical and economic integrity of any given area.



   STREET.  A public right-of-way affording primary access by pedestrians
and vehicles to abutting properties, whether designated as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place or
however otherwise designated.



   STREETS, THOROUGHFARES.  Streets used primarily for heavy traffic and
serving as an arterial traffic way between the various districts of the
community, as shown on the Comprehensive Plan; arterial streets.



   STREETS, COLLECTORS.  Those streets that carry traffic from minor
streets to the major system of thoroughfares and highways, including the
principal entrance streets of residential districts, as shown on the
Comprehensive Plan.



   STREET, MINOR.  Streets which are used primarily for access to
abutting properties.



   STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS.  Minor streets which are parallel and
adjacent to thoroughfares and highways, and which provide access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.



   STREET, CUL-DE-SAC.  Minor streets with only one outlet and having an
appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.



   STREET, WIDTH.  The shortest distance between lines of lots
delineating the street right-of-way.



   SUBDIVISION.  A described tract of land which is to be or has been
divided into 2 or more lots or parcels, for the purpose of transfer of
ownership or building development, or, if dedication of right-of-way is
involved, a parcel of land intended for development. The term includes
resubdivision and where it is appropriate to the context, relates either to
the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.



   SUBDIVIDER.  Any person, individual firm, association, syndicate,
co-partnership, corporation, trust or other legal entity commencing
proceedings under this chapter to effect a subdivision of land.



   TANGENT.  A straight line which is perpendicular to the radius of a
curve where a tangent meets a curve.



   VERTICAL CURVE.  The surface curvature on a street, road or highway
centerline located between lines of different percentage of grade.



(1975 Code, § 12.02)



§ 155.08  REGISTERED LAND SURVEYS AND CONVEYANCE BY METES AND BOUNDS.



   (A)   Registered land surveys. It is the intention of this chapter
that all registered land surveys in the city should be presented to the
Planning Commission in the form of a preliminary plat in accordance with the
standards set forth in this chapter for preliminary plats. Unless approval is
obtained from the Planning Commission and the Council in accordance with the
standards set forth in this chapter, certificates of occupancy will be
withheld for buildings on tracts which have been so subdivided by registered
land surveys and the city may refuse to take over tracts as streets or roads
or to improve, repair or maintain any such tracts unless approved.



   (B)   Restrictions on filing and recording conveyances. Pursuant to
the provisions of M.S. § 462.358, as it may be amended from time to time, no
conveyance of land to which these regulations are applicable shall be filed
or recorded, if the land is described in the conveyance by metes and bounds
or by reference to an unapproved registered land survey made after April 21,
1961, or to an unapproved plat made after these regulations become effective.
The foregoing provisions do not apply to a conveyance if the land described:



      (1)   Separate parcel.  Was a separate parcel of record April
1, 1945, or the date of adoption of subdivision regulations under Laws 1945,
Chapter 287, whichever is later; or



      (2)   Prior agreement.  Was the subject of a written
agreement to convey entered into prior to such time; or 



      (3)   Large parcels. Was a separate parcel of not less than
2-1/2 acres in area and 150 feet in width on January 1, 1966, or is a single
parcel of land of not less than 5 acres and having a width of not less than
300 feet. In any case in which compliance with the foregoing restrictions
will create an unnecessary hardship and failure to comply does not interfere
with the purpose of these subdivision regulations, the Council may waive such
compliance by adoption of a resolution to that effect and the conveyance may
then be filed or recorded. Any owner or agent of the owner of land who
conveys a lot or parcel in violation of the provision of this subsection
shall forfeit and pay to the city a penalty of not less than $100 for each
lot or parcel so conveyed. The city may enjoin such conveyance or may recover
such penalty by a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction.



(1975 Code, § 12.08)



§ 155.09  COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   Conditions for recording. No plat of any subdivision shall be
entitled to record in the County Register of Deeds office or have any
validity until the plat thereof has been prepared, approved, and acknowledged
in the manner prescribed by this chapter.



   (B)   Regulation conformance. Electric and gas distribution lines or
piping, roadways, curbs, walks and other similar improvements shall be
constructed only on a street, alley, or other public way or easement which is
designated on an approved plat, or properly indicated on the official map of
the city, or which has otherwise been approved by the Council. No building
shall be erected unless the same is to be located upon a parcel of land
abutting a street or highway which has been designated upon an approved plat,
or which has been otherwise approved by the Council, and unless the building
conforms to the established building line. No building shall be erected upon
any lot or parcel conveyed in violation of the provisions of this chapter
until such lot or parcel is conveyed in accordance thereto.



(1975 Code, § 12.09)



§ 155.10  VARIANCES.



   (A)   General. The Planning Commission may recommend a variance from
the provisions of this chapter when, in its opinion, undue hardship may
result from strict compliance. In granting any variance, the Commission shall
prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable for the
public interest. In making its findings, as required herein below, the
Planning Commission shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of
land and the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons who
reside or work in the proposed subdivision, and the probable effect of the
proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity.



   (B)   Circumstances. No variance shall be granted unless the
Planning Commission finds:



      (1)   Extraordinary circumstances. That there are special
circumstances or conditions affecting said property such that the strict
application of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of
the reasonable use of his or her land;



      (2)   Necessary. That the variance is necessary for the
preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner;



      (3)   Not detrimental. That the granting of the variance will
not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in
the territory in which property is situated.



(1975 Code, § 12.11)



§ 155.11  PROPERTY IRON LOCATION PRIOR TO SALE OF REAL ESTATE.



   It shall be the responsibility of any buyer of land to complete and
submit a property line identification disclosure statement to the City of
North Mankato within 5 days of the date of sale of the property.



(Am. Ord. 8, 4th Series, passed 1-16-2007)



PROCEDURE



§ 155.25  SIXTY DAY REVIEW PROCESS.



   (A)   Consistency with state law.  Notwithstanding anything in this
chapter to the contrary, the provisions of M.S. § 15.99, as it may be
amended from time to time, and the following sections shall govern the
process for making decisions under this chapter.  To the extent to which
these sections conflict with the provisions of M.S. § 15.99, as it may be
amended from time to time, the provisions of that statute shall apply.



   (B)   Applications. 



      (1)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this
chapter, all applications for any condition use permit, rezoning, variance,
or for any other city approval required by this chapter, or to amend this
chapter, shall be made in writing on a form provided by the city.  The
Zoning Administrator is authorized to reject in writing any incomplete
application within 15 business days of receipt if the application is
incomplete, stating the reasons for its rejection, including what information
is missing.  This rejection shall be sent by first-class mail to the
application.  Every application shall contain the legal description of the
property and a statement of the specific permit or action being sought. 
Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the city from requesting
additional information from the application upon which to base a decision.



      (2)   If a dispute arises over a specific fee imposed by the
city, the amount of the fee must be deposited and held in escrow, and the
person aggrieved by the fee may appeal to district court, as provided by M.S.
§ 462.361, as it may be amended from time to time.  The application shall
proceed as if the fee had been paid, pending a decision of the court.



   (C)   Final actions. 



      (1)   As required by M.S. § 15.99, as it may be amended from
time to time, the following provisions apply to the process for approving or
denying applications for a zoning change, conditional use permit, variance,
or any other application which requires a city approved under this chapter.



      (2)   The city shall take final action to approve or deny any
application described above within 60 days of receiving an application,
unless the application is not accepted under division (A).  If the city
cannot take action to approve or deny the application within 60 days of
receiving the application, the Zoning Administrator is authorized before the
end of the initial 60-day period, to make a one-time extension of the time
for taking action by providing written notice by first-class mail to the
applicant of the extension, the reasons for the extension, and its
anticipated length, which may not exceed an additional 60 days unless
approved by the applicant ins writing.



      (3)   When the final action to approve or disapprove an
application is to be taken by the City Council or the Planning Commission, if
a vote on a properly made motion to approve the application fails for any
reason, the failure shall constitute a denial of the application.  A denial
of an application because of a failure to approve a motion does not preclude
an immediate submission of a same or similar application.



      (4)   Except as provided in subsection (4), if the application
is denied by the City Council or Planning Commission, whichever body has the
authority to make the final decision to approve or deny an application, it
must state the reasons for denial on th record and provide the applicant in
writing a statement of the reasons for the denial.  The written statement
must be consistent with the reasons stated in the record at the time of the
denial.  The written statement must be provided to the applicant.



   (D)   Additional extensions of time.  M.S. § 15.99, as it may be
amended from time to time, provides for certain exceptions to the time limits
established in division (C).  These exceptions are as follows.  If the
provisions of M.S. § 15.99, as it may be amended from time to time are
inconsistent with this section, then the provisions of that statute shall
apply.



      (1)   The time limit in division (C) is extended if a state
statute, federal law, or court order requires a process to occur before the
city acts on the application, and the time periods prescribed in the state
statute, federal law, or court order make it impossible to act on the
application within 60 days.  In cases described in this subsection, the
deadline is extended to 60 days after completion of the last process required
in the applicable statute, law, or order.  Final approval of the city
receiving an application is not considered a process for purposes of this
subsection.



      (2)   The time limit in division (C) is also extended if an
application submitted to a state agency requires prior approval of a federal
agency; an application submitted to the city, requires prior approval of a
state or federal agency.  In cases described in this subsection, the
deadline for action is extended to 60 days after the required prior approved
is granted.



   (E)   Applications for subdivision approval and building permits. 
Divisions (A), (B) and (C) shall  not apply to any request for action under
the city’s subdivision regulations or under M.S. § 462.358 or Ch. 505, as
they may be amended from time to time.  Neither shall they apply to a
request for a building permit.



§ 155.26  CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   A preliminary plat shall be submitted as follows.



   (A)   Planning Commission. The preliminary plat shall be submitted
to the Planning Commission at least 20 days prior to a Commission meeting at
which consideration is requested. The Planning Commission shall hold a public
hearing on all proposed preliminary plats. Notice of said hearing shall be
published in the official newspaper at least 10 days prior to the date of the
hearing. Notice shall indicate the time, place and purpose of the hearing,
including an easily understood description of the area to be subdivided.
Recommendations for approval or disapproval of a preliminary plat will be
conveyed to the subdivider in writing within 10 days after the meeting of the
Planning Commission at which such plat was considered. In case the plat is
recommended for disapproval, the subdivider shall be notified of the reason
for such action and what requirements will be necessary to meet the approval
of the Commission.



   (B)   City Council. After review and approval or denial of the
preliminary plat by the Planning Commission, such preliminary plat, together
with the recommendations of the Planning Commission, shall be submitted to
the Council for consideration. Approval or disapproval of the preliminary
plat will be conveyed to the subdivider in writing within 10 days after the
meeting of the Council at which such plat was considered. In case the plat is
disapproved, the subdivider shall be notified of the reason for such action
and what requirements will be necessary to meet the approval of the Council.
The approval of the preliminary plat does not constitute an acceptance of the
subdivision, but is deemed to be an authorization to proceed with the
preparation of the final plat. The approval of a preliminary plat shall be
effective for a period of 1 year, unless an extension is granted by the
Council. The subdivider may file a final plat limited to such portion of the
preliminary plat which he proposed to record and develop at the time,
provided that such portion must conform to all requirements of this chapter.
If some portion of the preliminary plat has not been submitted for final plat
approval within this period, a preliminary plat must again be submitted to
the Planning Commission and the Council for approval.



(1975 Code, § 12.03, Subd. 1)



§ 155.27  FINAL PLAT APPROVAL.



   A final plat shall be submitted as follows.



   (A)   Planning Commission. The final plat shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission at least 20 days prior to a Commission meeting at which
consideration is requested. Approval or disapproval of the final plat will be
conveyed to the subdivider in writing within 10 days after the meeting of the
Planning Commission at which such plat was considered. In case the plat is
disapproved, the subdivider shall be notified of the reason for such action
and what requirements shall be necessary to meet the approval of the
Commission.



   (B)   City Council. After review and approval or denial of the final
plat by the Commission, such final plat, together with the recommendations of
the Planning Commission shall be submitted to the Council for approval. If
approved, such approval shall be deemed acceptance of all streets, alleys,
easements or other public ways, and parks or other open spaces dedicated to
public purposes. If disapproved, the grounds for any refusal to approve a
plat shall be set forth in the proceedings of the Council and reported to the
person or persons applying for such approval.



   (C)   Zoning Administrator.  At the discretion of the Zoning
Administrator, request for preliminary and final plats may occur
simultaneously.



(1975 Code, § 12.03, Subd. 2)



§ 155.28  SUBDIVIDER REPRESENTATION.



   Upon request the subdivider or a duly authorized representative shall
be present at all meetings held on the preliminary or final plat he or she
has submitted for consideration. The subdivider shall be notified of this
requirement in writing at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
Absence of the subdivider or a duly authorized representative, once properly
notified, shall be sufficient cause to recommend denial of the plat.



(1975 Code, § 12.03, Subd. 3)



§ 155.29  PRELIMINARY PLAT DATA REQUIRED.



   The owner or subdivider shall prepare and submit a preliminary plat,
together with any necessary supplementary information as follows.



   (A)   Filing. The preliminary plat shall be filed as follows.



      (1)   Secretary. Five copies of any proposed subdivision shall
be filed with the Secretary of the Planning Commission.



      (2)   Other officials. Under each of the following conditions,
one additional copy shall be provided to and transmitted by the Secretary of
the Planning Commission to the official referred to herein:



         (a)   When such land abuts a county highway, the
Nicollet County Highway Engineer;



         (b)   When such land abuts a state trunk highway, the
State Highway Commissioner;



         (c)   When such land abuts a natural lake or waterway,
the Department of Natural Resources Commissioner.



      (3)   Transmittal. Such transmittal shall include advice to
the effect that any recommendations for consideration should be received
within 15 days after receipt by him or her of such a plat. Final action on
such a plat shall not be taken until such written recommendations have been
received or until the 15 days have elapsed.



   (B)   Contents. The preliminary plat shall contain the following
information.



      (1)   Name.  Proposed name of subdivision; names shall not
duplicate or too closely resemble names of existing subdivisions. The city
retains final authority for selection of subdivision and all street names
within the subdivision.



      (2)   Location. Location of boundary lines in relation to a
known section, quarter section or quarter-quarter section lines and any
adjacent corporate boundaries, comprising a legal description of the property.



      (3)   Developer, designer. Names and addresses of the
developer and the designer making the plat. 



      (4)   Scale. Scale of plat, not less than 1 inch to 100 feet,
except in unusual circumstances, written permission may be obtained for use
of a smaller scale: date and northpoint.



      (5)   Existing conditions. Location, width and name of each
existing or platted street or other public way, railroad, and utility
right-of-way, parks and other public open spaces, and permanent buildings,
within and adjacent to the proposed subdivision.



      (6)   Topography. Topography with contour intervals of not
more than 5 feet related to United States Geological Survey datum; also the
location of water courses, ravines, bridges, lakes, wooded areas, approximate
acreage, and other such features as may be pertinent to subdivision.



      (7)   Proposed public areas. The location and width of
proposed streets, roadways, alleys, pedestrian ways and easements. Location
and size of proposed parks, playgrounds, churches, or school sites or other
special uses of land to be considered for dedication to public use, or to be
reserved by deed of covenant for the use of all property owners in the
subdivision and any conditions of such dedication or reservation.



      (8)   Zoning chapter compliance. Layout, numbers and
approximate dimensions of lots and the number or letter of each lot or block.
Building setback lines with dimensions. Indication of any lots on which a use
other than residential is proposed by the subdivider. The zoning districts,
if any, on and adjacent to the tract.



      (9)   Flood plain management. Sufficient documentation that
all provisions of the City Code and other laws relating to the improvement or
subdivision of shoreline or designated flood plain areas of land have or will
be met.



      (10)   Protective covenants. Identify and submit any
protective covenants affecting the land for which subdivision is proposed.



      (11)   Other information. Upon request of the Planning
Commission, supplementary information shall be submitted; such supplementary
information may include the following:  two copies of profiles for each
proposed streets, showing existing grades and proposed approximate grades and
gradients on the center line. The location of proposed culverts and bridges
shall also be shown. Vicinity sketch, at a legible scale, to show the
relation of the plat to its surroundings.



   (C)   Filing fee. The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a fee
as established by the Council. Such fees to be used for the expenses of the
city in connection with the review, inspection, approval or disapproval of
the plat which may thereafter be submitted.



   (D)   Compliance review. All preliminary plats submitted to the
Planning Commission and Council shall be accompanied by sufficient
documentation certified by the Secretary of the Planning Commission which
indicates the apparent compliance of said plat with the regulations contained
herein.



(1975 Code, § 12.04)



§ 155.30  FINAL PLAT DATA REQUIRED.



   The owner or subdivider shall submit a final plat together with any
necessary supplementary information.



   (A)   Filing. One reproducible copy of a final plat shall be filed
with the city, together with 3 additional copies as required for approval by
Nicollet County.



   (B)   Contents. The final plat shall contain the following
information.



      (1)   Regulations. The final plat prepared for recording
purposes shall be prepared in accordance with provisions of Minnesota State
Statutes and Nicollet County regulations.



      (2)   Name. Name of subdivision; names shall not duplicate or
too closely approximate the name of any existing subdivision. The city
retains final authority for selection of subdivision and all street names
within the subdivision.



      (3)   Location of parcel. Location by section, township,
range, county and state, and including descriptive boundaries of the
subdivision, based on an accurate traverse, giving angular and linear
dimensions which must mathematically close. The allowable error of closure on
any portion of a final plat shall be one foot in 7,500.



      (4)   Monuments and related data. Monuments shall be set at
all angle and curve points on the outside boundary lines of the plat and also
at all block and lot corners and at all intermediate points on the block and
lot lines indicating changes of direction in the lines. The plat shall
indicate that all monuments have been set. There shall be shown on the plat
all survey and mathematical information and data necessary to locate all
monuments and to locate and retrace any and all interior and exterior
boundary lines appearing thereon. The outside boundary lines of the plat
shall be correctly designated on the plat and shall show bearings on all
straight lines, or angles at all angle points, and central angle and radii
and arc length for all curves. All distances shall be shown between all
monuments as measured to the nearest hundredth of a foot. All quarter section
points within the subdivision or on its perimeter shall be located and
monuments set pursuant to § 155.07. In situations where conditions prohibit
the placing of markers in the locations prescribed above, offset markers will
be permitted. 



      (5)   Markers. A metal marker shall be set on each lot corner
at the time the monuments are placed. Such markers shall not be moved or
removed until final inspection has been completed and permission granted by
the Building Inspector.



      (6)   Location of lots and similar features.  Location of
lots, streets, public highways, alleys, parks and other features, with
accurate dimensions in feet and decimals of feet, with the length of radii or
arcs of all curves, and with all other information necessary to reproduce the
plat on the ground. Dimensions shall be shown from all angle points and
points of curve to lot lines. Ditto marks shall not be used on the plat for
any purpose.



      (7)   Numbered or lettered. Lots shall be numbered clearly.
Blocks are to be numbered and should be shown clearly in the center of the
block. Outlots shall be designated alphabetically.



      (8)   Outlots for public purposes.  Outlots shall be
dedicated to the public for purposes of access, erosion control and
stormwater management.



      (9)   Streets. The exact locations, widths, and names of all
streets to be dedicated.



      (10)    Easements. Location and width of all easements to be
dedicated.



      (11)   Boundary lines. Boundary lines and description of
boundary lines of any areas other than streets and alleys which are to be
dedicated or reserved for public use.



      (12)   Streets; dedication. Statement dedicating all streets,
alleys and other public areas not previously dedicated as follows:  streets,
alleys and other public areas shown on this plat and not heretofore dedicated
to public use are so dedicated.



      (13)   Easements; dedication. Statement, dedicating all
easements as follows.  Easements for installation and maintenance of
utilities and drainage facilities are reserved over, under and along the
strips marked "utility easements."



      (14)   Other information. Name and address of developer and
surveyor making the plat. Scale of plat (the scale to be shown graphically
and in feet per inch), date and north point. In any instance where a river,
stream, creek, lake or pond constitutes a boundary line within or of the
plat, a survey line shall be shown pursuant to Minnesota Statutes.



   (C)   Certifications. Certifications shall be required on final
plats as follows.



      (1)   Owner and mortgage holder. Notarized certification by
owner, and by any mortgage holder of record, of the adoption of the plat and
the dedication of streets and other public areas as shown thereon.



      (2)   Land surveyor. Notarized certification by a registered
land surveyor to the effect that the plat represents a survey made by him or
her and that monuments, markers, highways and wetlands shown therein exist as
located and that all dimensional and geodetic details are correct. Such form
shall be as follows:



   SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE



I,                                       , Registered Land
Surveyor, State of Minnesota, do hereby certify that this survey was made at
the request of the owners of the property platted, that all measurements
including dimensional details are correct as shown thereon, that monuments
have been set for the guidance of future surveys and that there are no
marshlands or public highways within the platted area except as shown thereon.



                                                  
             



   Reg. No.                                 



      (3)   Taxes and special assessments.  Certification by the
County Auditor that there are no delinquent taxes or special assessments on
the platted parcel and transfer of taxes and special assessments shall be
made in accordance thereto. Such form shall be as follows:



   COUNTY AUDITOR



   NICOLLET COUNTY, MINNESOTA



I hereby certify that there are no delinquent taxes or special assessments on
the land described herein and the transfer of taxes and special assessments
has been made in accordance thereto this                 day of    
                    ,            .



                                                  
 



   County Auditor



   Nicollet County, Minnesota



      (4)   Title opinion. Certification by a licensed attorney that
the owner and mortgage holder as represented on the plat represent all
ownership interests in the land encompassed by the plat. Such form shall be
as follows:



   TITLE OPINION



I,                                         , licensed
attorney, State of Minnesota, do hereby certify that the owner and mortgage
holder as indicated hereon represent all ownership interests in the land
encompassed by this plat.



                                                  
 



      (5)   Approval. Space for certification of approval to be
filled in by the signatures of the Chairperson and Secretary of the Planning
Commission and the Mayor and City Clerk. Such form shall be as follows:



   APPROVAL



Approved by the Planning Commission of the City of North Mankato this    
                day of                         ,      
    .



   Signed:                                          
                                     



      Chairperson



   Attest:                                          
                                       



      Secretary



The form of approval by the City Council is as follows:



Approved by the City of North Mankato, Minnesota, this              
          day of                             ,        
    .



   Signed:                                         
                           



      Mayor



   Attest:                                         
                             



      City Clerk



      (6)   Filing. Space for certification of the Register of
Deeds. Such form shall be as follows:



   REGISTER OF DEEDS



   NICOLLET COUNTY, MINNESOTA



I hereby certify that this instrument was filed in my office for record on
this the                         day of                
                      , at               o'clock     
.m. and that it was duly recorded on page               of book    
              of                              .



                                                  
       



   Register of Deeds



   Nicollet County, Minnesota



   (D)   Supplemental documents and information.  Additional
supplemental documents and information may be requested, including, but not
limited to:



      (1)   Street profiles. A complete set of street profiles
showing grade lines as constructed.



      (2)   Private restriction. Copies of any private restrictions
affecting the subdivision or any part thereof.



   (E)   Compliance review. All final plats submitted to the Planning
Commission and Council shall be accompanied by documentation certified by the
Secretary of the Planning Commission which indicates the apparent compliance
of the plat with the regulations contained herein.



(1975 Code, § 12.05)



DESIGN STANDARDS



§ 155.45  BLOCKS.



   (A)   Block length. In general, intersecting streets, determining
block lengths, shall be provided at such intervals as to serve cross-traffic
adequately and to meet existing streets. Where no existing plats control, the
blocks in residential subdivisions shall normally not exceed 1,320 feet in
length, except where topography or other conditions justify a departure from
this maximum. In blocks longer than 800 feet, pedestrian ways and or
easements through the block may be required near the center of the block.
Blocks for business or industrial use should normally not exceed 600 feet in
length.



   (B)   Block width. The width of the block shall normally be
sufficient to allow two tiers of lots of appropriate depth. Blocks intended
for business or industrial use shall be of such width as to be considered
most suitable for  their respective use, including adequate space for
off-street parking and deliveries.



(1975 Code, § 12.06, Subd. 1)



§ 155.46  STREETS, ALLEYS AND SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   Comprehensive Plan. The arrangement of thoroughfares and
collector streets shall conform as nearly as possible to the North Mankato
Comprehensive Plan. Except for cul-de-sacs, streets normally shall connect
with streets already dedicated in adjoining or adjacent subdivisions or
provide for future connections to the adjoining unsubdivided tracts or shall
be a reasonable projection of streets in the nearest subdivided tracts. The
arrangement of thoroughfares and collector streets shall be considered in
their relation to the reasonable circulation of traffic, to topographic
conditions, to run-off of storm water, to public convenience and safety, and
in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the area to be served.



   (B)   Marginal streets, cul-de-sacs and dead ends.  Minor streets
should be so planned as to discourage their use by non-local traffic. Dead
end streets are prohibited, but cul-de-sacs will be permitted where
topography or other conditions justify their use. Cul-de-sacs shall include a
terminal turn-around which shall be provided at the closed end, with an
outside curb radius of at least 40 feet and a right-of-way radius of not less
than 50 feet.



   (C)   Partial development of plat. Where the plat to be submitted
includes only part of the tract owned or intended for development by the
subdivider, a tentative plan of a proposed future street system for the
unsubdivided portion shall be prepared and submitted by the subdivider.



   (D)   Subdivision integration. When a tract is subdivided into
larger than normal building lots or parcels, such lots or parcels shall be so
arranged as to permit the logical location and openings of future streets and
appropriate resubdivision, with provision for adequate utility connections
for such resubdivision.



   (E)   Angle of intersections. Under normal conditions, streets shall
be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, except
where topography of other conditions justify variations. The minimum angle of
intersection of streets shall be 80 degrees.



   (F)   Marginal access. Wherever the proposed subdivision contains or
is adjacent to the right-of-way of a limited access highway or thoroughfare,
provision may be made for a marginal access street approximately parallel and
adjacent to the boundary of such right-of-way, or for a street at a distance
suitable for the appropriate use of land between such street and
right-of-way. Such distance shall be determined with due consideration of the
minimum distance required for approach connections to future grade
separations or for lot depths.



   (G)   Alleys. Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial
districts, except that this requirement may be waived where other definite
and assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading,
unloading and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed
alleys, where provided, shall not be less than 20 feet wide, except where
justified by special conditions. Dead end alleys shall be avoided wherever
possible, but if unavoidable, such dead end alleys may be approved if
adequate turn-around facilities are provided at the closed end.



   (H)   Dedication of half streets. Dedication of half streets will
not be approved, except where it is essential, to the reasonable development
of the subdivision and in conformity with the other requirements of these
regulations, where it is found that it will be practical to require the
dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided, or
where it becomes necessary to acquire the remaining half by condemnation so
it may be improved in the public interest.



   (I)   Minimum right-of-way. For all public ways hereafter dedicated
and accepted, the minimum right-of-way widths for streets and thoroughfares
shall be as shown in the Comprehensive Plan, and where not shown therein, the
minimum right-of-way width for streets, thoroughfares, alleys, or pedestrian
ways included in any subdivision shall not be less than the minimum
dimensions for each classification as follows:



      (1)   Primary thoroughfare:  80 feet;



      (2)   Secondary thoroughfare:  66 feet;



      (3)   Collector street:  66 feet;



      (4)   Minor street:  60 feet;



      (5)   Marginal access street:  50 feet;



      (6)   Alley:  20 feet;



      (7)   Pedestrian way:  10 feet;



      (8)   Where existing or anticipated traffic on primary and
secondary thoroughfares warrants greater widths of right-of-way, these shall
be required.



   (J)   Street grade. The grades in all streets, thoroughfares,
collector streets, minor streets, and alleys in any subdivision shall not be
greater than the maximum grades for each classification as follows:



      (1)   Primary thoroughfare:  5%;



      (2)   Secondary thoroughfare:  5%;



      (3)   Collector street:  5%;



      (4)   Minor street:  8%;



      (5)   Alley:  8%;



      (6)   In addition, there shall be a minimum grade on all
streets and thoroughfares of not less than 1.0%.



   (K)   Horizontal alignment. The horizontal alignment standards on
all streets shall be as follows:



      (1)   Radius center line:



         (a)   Major thoroughfare:  500 feet minimum;



         (b)   Secondary thoroughfare:  500 feet minimum;



         (c)   Collector street:  300 feet minimum;



         (d)   Minor street:  100 feet minimum;



      (2)   There shall be a tangent between all reversed curves of
a minimum length as follows:



         (a)   Major thoroughfare:  100 feet minimum;



         (b)   Secondary thoroughfare:  100 feet minimum;



         (c)   Collector street:  50 feet minimum;



         (d)   Minor street:  30 feet minimum.



   (L)   Vertical alignment. All changes in street grades shall be
connected by vertical parabolic curves of such length as follows:



      (1)   Primary thoroughfare or secondary thoroughfare:  300
feet minimum;



      (2)   Collector street or minor street:  100 feet minimum.



   (M)   Dedication of streets. All proposed streets shall be dedicated
as public streets except where approved by the Planning Commission and City
Council subject to the provisions in division (N) below.



   (N)   Private streets.  The use of private streets are subject to
the following:



      (1)   Be called trails;



      (2)   Have a minimum width of 28 feet;



      (3)   Concrete curb and gutter shall be provided. Curb and
gutter design shall conform to the city's standard for either B style or M
style, as recommended by city staff and/or approved by the City Council based
on project-specific considerations; and



      (4)   Be subject to city design and inspection.



   (O)   Within all new residential subdivisions, the installation of a
sidewalk is required on at least 1 side of any new residential street. The
specifications for sidewalks are as follows:



      (1)   Minimum sidewalk width is 5 feet.



      (2)   Minimum sidewalk depth is 5 inches.



      (3)   Minimum Class 7 aggregate base or other crushed
aggregate base of 5 inches.



   (P)   Sidewalks shall be installed in existing residential
subdivisions as recommended in the Future Sidewalk Development Map.



   (Q)   Curb and gutter. Within all new subdivisions, the installation
of concrete curb and gutter is required on both sides of all streets. Curb
and gutter design shall conform to the city's standard for either B style or
M style, with the following guidelines:



      (1)   M-style curb and gutter shall be used for all new
streets that are functionally classified as local streets in predominantly
single-family or multi-family residential areas.



      (2)   B-style curb and gutter shall be used for all new
streets that are functionally classified as anything higher than local
streets in predominantly single-family or multi-family residential areas.



      (3)   B-style curb shall be used on all new streets in
predominantly commercial or industrial areas.



      (4)   Variations and interpretations to the curb and gutter
design standards specified in divisions (Q)(1), (2) and (3) above may be made
upon approval by the City Council upon recommendations provided by city staff
in consideration of project-specific conditions.



(1975 Code, § 12.06, Subd. 2) (Am. Ord. 4, passed 3-2-1981; Am. Ord. 8, 4th
Series, passed 1-16-2007; Am. Ord. 57, 4th Series, passed 5-5-2014; Am. Ord.
81, 4th Series, passed 9-19-2016)



§ 155.47  LOTS.



   (A)   Zoning chapter. Lot width, depth, area, yards, setbacks and
applicable regulations shall conform in all respects to the Zoning Chapter of
the City Code.



   (B)   Lot depth. Excessive depth in relation to width shall be
avoided unless unusual circumstances warrant it.



   (C)   Lot side lines. Side lines of lots shall be approximately at
right angles to street lines or radial to curved street lines.



   (D)   Double frontage lots. Double frontage lots shall be avoided
except where lots back on a thoroughfare or other arterial street, or where
topographic or other conditions render subdividing otherwise unreasonable.
Such double frontage lots shall have an additional depth of at least 20 feet
in order to allow space for screen planting along the back lot line.



   (E)   Street frontage. Every lot must have at least the minimum
required frontage on a public dedicated street other than an alley.



(1975 Code, § 12.06, Subd. 3)



§ 155.48  EASEMENTS.



   (A)   Easement width. An easement for utilities, at least 10 feet
wide, shall be provided along the front and rear lot lines of each lot and an
easement at least 5 feet wide shall be provided along each side lot line. If
necessary for the extension of main water or sewer lines or similar
utilities, easements of greater width may be required along lot lines or
across lots.



   (B)   Easements, adjoining. Utility easements shall connect with
easements established in adjoining properties. These easements, when
approved, shall not thereafter be changed without the approval of the
Council, by ordinance, upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission.



   (C)   Pole guys. Additional easements for pole guys should be
provided at the outside of turns. Where possible, lot lines shall be arranged
to bisect the exterior angle so that pole guys will fall along side lot lines.



   (D)   Additional easements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a
water course, drainage way, channel or stream, a storm water easement,
drainage right-of-way or park dedication, whichever the Planning Commission
may deem the most adequate, conforming substantially with the lines of such
water courses shall be provided, together with such further width or
construction, or both, as will be adequate for the storm water drainage of
the area. The width of such easements shall be determined by the Planning
Commission.



(1975 Code, § 12.06, Subd. 4)



§ 155.49  STORMWATER DESIGN CRITERIA.



   (A)   Stormwater modeling shall be in accordance with United States
Soil Conversation Service (SCS) Technical Release 55 or 20, i.e. TR-55 or
TR-20.



   (B)   Stormwater detention basins shall be designed to store
sufficient excess runoff from the proposed development. Composite
post-developed site runoff must be equal to or less than the composite
pre-developed site runoff for the 5 and 100 year rainfall events. The SCS
24-hour, 5 year and 100 year rainfall events are 3.7 inches and 6.1 inches,
respectively.



   (C)   Post-developed design site conditions, requiring diversion of
stormwater from an existing inlet point to another inlet point on a different
outfall sewer, shall meet the following: post-developed flow draining to an
existing stormwater inlet point shall be equal to or less than the
undisturbed pre-developed flow draining to that point.



   (D)   The following information shall be submitted to the city for
review by the City Engineer:



      (1)   SCS curve numbers for the pre-developed and
post-developed site conditions;



      (2)   Soil type(s) used in calculations;



      (3)   Size, elevation and location of proposed stormwater
system outfall(s);



      (4)   Size, elevation, location and detail of proposed pond
outlet structure;



      (5)   Map or plan showing the pre-developed and post-developed
design drainage districts;



      (6)   Pond grading plan showing the proposed contour
elevations and location of the pond’s emergency overflow spillway; and



      (7)   All drainage hydrographs, pond routing and peak
elevation/outfall calculations.



§ 155.50  PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES.



   (A)   Open spaces. In subdividing land or resubdividing an existing
plat, due consideration shall be given by the subdivider to the dedication or
reservation of suitable sites for schools, parks, playgrounds, conservation
areas, or other public or semi-public recreational areas for open spaces.
Areas so dedicated or reserved shall conform as nearly as possible to the
Comprehensive Plan and such other park and open space development plans,
regulations and ordinances as may from time to time be adopted by the city.
All areas to be reserved for or dedicated to public use shall be indicated on
the preliminary plat in order that it may be determined when and in what
manner such areas will be dedicated to or acquired by the appropriate agency.



   (B)   Ravine dedication. The subdivider shall dedicate to the city
that portion of all hillsides, ravines and slopes of bluff lands below the
ravine breakline as determined by the building official or record an easement
approved by the city for the conservation and preservation of the terrain and
vegetation.



   (C)   Ravine alterations. The filling, altering, diverting,
stripping of vegetation, topping of trees or otherwise changing the drainage
or other environmental characteristics of any public or private hillsides,
ravines, or slopes of bluff land is prohibited. Alterations of any kind made
to dedicated public lands of the character described above are prohibited
except by the city for purposes of stabilization, erosion control and
stormwater management.



   (D)   Penalties.  The City Council may establish such additional
administrative penalties as it may deem necessary for the enforcement of this
section.



(1975 Code, § 12.06, Subd. 5)  (Am. Ord. 100, 4th series, passed 3-5-2018)



BASIC IMPROVEMENTS



§ 155.65  GENERAL.



   (A)   Agreement. Before a final plat is approved by the Council, the
owner and subdivider of the land covered by the plat may be required to
execute and submit to the Council an agreement, which shall be binding on
his, her or their heirs, personal representatives and assigns, that he or she
will cause no private construction to be made on the plat or file or cause to
be filed any application for building permits for such construction until all
improvements as may be required by the city have been made or arranged for
pursuant to this chapter.



   (B)   Bond. Prior to the making of such required improvements, the
owner or subdivider may be required by the city to deposit with the City
Clerk an amount equal to one and one-half times the city’s estimated cost
of such improvements, either in cash, letter of credit or an indemnity bond,
with banks or sureties satisfactory to the city, conditioned upon the payment
of all construction costs incurred in making of such improvements and all
expense incurred by the city for engineering and legal fees and other expense
in connection with the making of such improvements.  Letters of credit are
to automatically renew annually.  Bonds will be approved as to form by the
City Attorney.



   (C)   Inspections. All of the required improvements to be installed
under the provisions of this chapter shall be inspected during the course of
their construction by the city. All of the inspection costs pursuant thereto
shall  be paid by the owner or subdivider. 



   (D)   Completed improvements. Drawings showing all improvements as
built shall be filed with the City Clerk.



(1975 Code, § 12.07, Subd. 1)  (Am. Ord. 63, 4th Series, passed 1-5-2015)



§ 155.66  DRAINAGE.



   No final plat shall be approved by the Council on land subject to
flooding or containing poor drainage facilities and on land which would make
adequate drainage of the streets and lots impossible. However, if the
subdivider agrees to make improvements which will, in the opinion of the City
Engineer, make the area completely safe for residential occupancy and provide
adequate street and lot drainage, the final plat of the subdivision may be
approved.



(1975 Code, § 12.07, Subd. 2)



§ 155.67  STREET IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Grading. The full width of the right-of-way shall be graded,
including the subgrade of the areas to be paved, in accordance with standards
and specifications for street construction as approved by the Council.



   (B)   Surfacing. All streets shall be improved with a surface in
accordance with the standards and specifications for construction as approved
by the Council.



   (C)   Width. All streets to be surfaced shall be of an overall width
in accordance with the standards and specifications for construction as
approved by the Council. 



   (D)   Drainage. Storm sewers, culverts, storm water inlets, and
other drainage facilities will be required  where they are necessary to
insure adequate storm water drainage for the subdivision. Where required,
such drainage facilities shall be constructed in accordance to the standards
and specifications for street construction as approved by the Council.



   (E)   Street trees. Street trees shall be planted in conformance
with the standards and specifications as approved by the Council.



   (F)   Street signs. Street signs of the standard design approved by
the Council shall be installed at each street intersection.



(1975 Code, § 12.07, Subd. 3)



§ 155.68  SANITARY SEWER IMPROVEMENTS.



   Sanitary sewers shall be installed as required by standards and
specifications as approved by the Council. Where city sanitary sewer is not
available for extension into the proposed subdivision, the Council may by
ordinance grant a franchise for such sewers to serve all properties in the
subdivision where a complete and adequate neighborhood sanitary sewer system
and plant are designed in conjunction with the subdivision, and complete
plans for the system and plant are submitted for the approval of the Council
before construction.



(1975 Code, § 12.07, Subd. 4)



§ 155.69  WATER DISTRIBUTION IMPROVEMENTS.



   City water facilities shall be installed as required by standards and
specifications as approved by the Council. Where city water facilities are
not available for extension into the proposed subdivision, the Council may by
ordinance grant a franchise for such water facilities to serve all properties
within a subdivision where a complete and adequate neighborhood water
distribution system is designed in conjunction with the subdivision and
complete plans for the system are submitted for the approval of the Council.



(1975 Code, § 12.07, Subd. 5)



§ 155.70  PUBLIC UTILITIES.



   (A)   Overhead. All utility lines for telephone and electric service
shall be placed in rear line easements when carried on overhead poles.



   (B)   Underground. Where telephone, electric, gas or cable service
lines are to be placed underground entirely, conduits or cables shall be
placed within easements or dedicated public ways, in such a manner so as not
to conflict with other underground services. All drainage and other
underground utility installations which traverse privately owned property
shall be protected by easements.



   (C)   Other regulations. In all events, public utilities shall be
constructed, placed, and maintained in conformance with all provisions of the
City Code and other laws concerning the same.



(1975 Code, § 12.07, Subd. 6)



§ 155.98  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Sale of lots from unrecorded plats. It is unlawful to sell,
trade, or otherwise convey or offer to sell, trade, or otherwise convey any
lot or parcel of land as a part of, or in conformity with any plan, plat or
replat of any subdivision or portion of the city unless the plan, plat or
replat shall have first been recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds
of the county.



   (B)   Receiving or recording unapproved plats. It is unlawful to
receive or record in any public office any  plans, plats or replats of land
laid out in building lots and streets, alleys or other portions of the same
intended to be dedicated to public or private use or for the use of
purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent thereto and located
within the jurisdiction of this chapter, unless the same shall bear thereon,
by endorsement or otherwise, the approval of the Planning Commission and the
Council.



   (C)   Misrepresentation of improvements. It is unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation owning an addition or subdivision of land within
the city to represent that any improvement upon any of the streets, alleys or
avenues of the addition or subdivision or any sewer in the addition or
subdivision has been constructed according to the plans and specifications
approved by the Council, or has been supervised or inspected by the city,
when such improvements have not been so constructed, supervised or inspected.



(1975 Code, § 12.10)



§ 155.99  PENALTY.



   Every person who violates a section, division, or provision of this
chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor
except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.



(1975 Code, § 12.99)



CHAPTER 156:  ZONING CODE



Section



General Provisions



   156.001   Legislative intent



   156.002   Scope, interpretation



   156.003   Definitions



Zoning Districts and District Map



   156.020   Districts



   156.021   Zoning District Map



   156.022   District boundaries



   156.023   Future annexation



District Regulations



   156.035   Generally



   156.036   R-A, Residential Agricultural District



   156.037   R-1, One Family Dwelling District



   156.038   R1-S, One Family Dwelling, Small Lot District



   156.039   R-2, One and Two Family Dwelling District



   156.040   R-3, Limited Multiple Dwelling District



   156.0401   R-3A, Medium Density Residential District



   156.041   R-4, Multiple Dwelling District



   156.042   B-1, Neighborhood Business District



   156.043   B-2, Community Business District



   156.044   B-3, General Commercial District



   156.045   CBD, Central Business District



   156.046   I-1, Planned Industrial District



   156.047   M-1, Light Industry District



   156.048   M-2, Heavy Industry District



   156.049   TUD, Transitional Unzoned District



   156.050   OR-1, Office-Residential District



   156.051   P-1, Public Use District



   156.052   Non-conforming uses



   156.053   Off-street parking and loading



   156.054   Performance standards



   156.055   Conditional uses



   156.056   Rezoning



   156.057   Temporary family health care dwellings




Administration and Enforcement




   156.085   Appeals and variances



   156.086   Amendments



   156.087   Zoning Administrator



   156.088   Certificate of occupancy




Planned Unit Developments




   156.095   Authority



   156.096   Purpose



   156.097   Public benefit



   156.098   Applicability



   156.099   Flexibility on zoning standards



   156.100   Effect on existing zoning



   156.101   Permitted uses



   156.102   Density



   156.103   Coordination with subdivision regulations



   156.104   Application procedure



   156.105   Final development plan and development agreement



   156.106   Enforcement of development schedule



   156.107   Conveyance and maintenance of common open space



   156.108   Standards for common or open space



   156.109   Review and amendments



   156.110   General requirements



 



   156.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 156.001  LEGISLATIVE INTENT.



   This chapter is enacted to promote the health, safety and general
welfare of the residents of the city.



(1975 Code, § 11.01)



§ 156.002  SCOPE, INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   Scope. From and after the effective date of this chapter, the
use of all land and every building or portion of a building erected, altered
and with respect to height and area, added to, or relocated, and every use
within a building or use accessory thereto in the city shall be in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter. No lot shall be so reduced that the area
of the lot or dimensions of the open spaces shall be smaller than herein
prescribed. Any existing building or structure and any existing use of
properties not in conformity with the regulations herein prescribed shall be
regarded as nonconforming, but may be continued, extended, or changed subject
to the special regulations herein provided with respect to nonconforming
properties or uses.



   (B)   Interpretation. In interpreting and applying the provisions of
this chapter, it shall be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
aforesaid intents. Where the provisions of this chapter impose greater
restrictions than those of any statute, other provision of the City Code, or
regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling. Where the
provisions of any statute, other provision of the City Code, or regulation
impose greater restrictions than this chapter, the provisions of such
statute, other provision of the City Code, or regulation shall be controlling.



(1975 Code, § 11.02)



§ 156.003  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCESSORY USE or ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.  A use or structure or portion
of a structure subordinate to and serving the principal use structure on the
same lot and customarily incidental thereto.



   AGRICULTURAL.  The art or science of cultivating the soil and
activities incident thereto; the growing of soil crops in the customary
manner on open tracts of land; farming. The term shall include incidental
retail selling by the producer of products raised on the premises, provided
that space necessary for parking of vehicles of customers shall be furnished
off the public right-of-way. The term shall include the accessory keeping or
raising of animals pursuant to applicable health and safety requirements and
particularly in conformity with § 156.036.



   ALLEY. A public right-of-way less than 30 feet in width which provides
secondary access to abutting property.



   APARTMENT. A part of a building consisting of a room or suite of rooms
which is used for a semi-permanent residence for one family or an individual
and equipped with cooking facilities, other than a boarding or lodging house,
motel or hotel.



   APARTMENT BUILDING.  Three or more apartments grouped in one building.



   AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATION.  Any building or premises principally used
for the dispensing or sale of automotive fuels (including diesel),
lubricating oil, grease, tires, batteries, or minor automotive accessories.
Services offered may include minor installations, adjustments or repairs.
When sales, service, and repair are offered as the principal use, such
premises shall be classified as a public garage. Automotive service stations
shall not operate truck, car or trailer rental or an automobile wash without
a conditional use permit.



   BASEMENT. A portion of a building having ½ or more of its floor to
ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.



   BED AND BREAKFAST.  An owner-occupied single-family residence which
provides lodging and meals to registered guests.



   BUILDING.  Any structure having a roof which may provide shelter or
enclosure of persons or property of any kind.



   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the finished grade along the building edge to the highest point
of the roof surface.



   BUILDING LINE. A line parallel to the street right-of-way line at any
story level of a building and representing the minimum distance which all or
any part of the building is set back from the right-of-way line, except that
an overhang portion of the roof not exceeding 24 inches may be permitted.



   CAMP GROUND. Public or private land or premises used or occupied for
compensation by campers.



   CAR OR TRUCK WASHOR LAUNDRY.  A building, or portion thereof,
containing facilities for washing automobiles or trucks.



   CONDITIONAL USE.  A use having special circumstances pertaining to its
location or operation which may be permitted in a district subject to
approval by the City Council and is subject to conditions approved by the
City Council.



   CURB LEVEL. The level of the established curb in front of the building
measured at the center of such front. Where no curb level has been
established, the Construction Inspector or his or her designee shall
establish such curb level or its equivalent for the purpose of this chapter.



   DEPTH OF LOT. The horizontal distance between the front street
right-of-way line and the rear lot line. The greater frontage of a corner lot
is its depth and its lesser frontage is its width.



   DISTRICT and ZONING DISTRICT.  A section of the city for which the
regulations governing the use of land and improvements thereon are the same.
The word DISTRICT shall include the word ZONING DISTRICT, and the word ZONING
DISTRICT shall include the word DISTRICT as defined and regulated herein.



   DRIVE-IN. Any use providing the opportunity of selling, serving, or
offering goods or services directly to customers waiting in vehicles or
customers who return to their vehicles to consume or use the goods or
services while on the premises of the principal use.



   DRIVEWAY.  A minor private way used by vehicles and pedestrians on an
individual lot or parcel of land.



   DWELLING. A building designed or used exclusively for residential
occupancy but not including hotels, motels or bed and breakfast.



   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms in a dwelling or other building
designed for occupancy by one family for living purposes and having its own
permanently installed cooking, sanitary facilities and separate identifiable
access and complying with applicable residential building codes.



   DWELLING - ATTACHED. A dwelling joined to other dwellings by a party
wall or walls, including but not limited to such common references as
townhouse, twin home, and row house.



   DWELLING, CONDOMINIUM.  A multiple family dwelling in which the
dwelling units are separated by a party wall and which dwelling units are
designed and intended to be owned separately in fee under the condominium
statutes of the state.



   DWELLING, DETACHED. A single-family dwelling which is entirely
surrounded by open space on the same lot.



   DWELLING, MANUFACTURED, MOBILE HOME.  A structure, transportable in 1
or more sections, which in the traveling mode is 8 body feet or more in width
or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, it is 320 or
more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to
be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected
to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air
conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that the term
includes any structure which meets all the requirements and with respect to
which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the
secretary and complies with the standards established under M.S. Ch. 327.31,
as it may be amended from time to time, and which structure conforms to the
requirements of the Manufactured Home  Building Code. Any structure which is
smaller than the above dimensional requirements shall be known as a
“recreational camping vehicle” pursuant to the definitions of M.S. Ch.
327.14, Subd. 7, as it may be amended from time to time.



   DWELLING, MANUFACTURED, MODULAR. A housing unit that is basically
fabricated at a factory and transported in sections to a building site where
final assembly and installation of such components is completed  to
permanently affix the module to the site and thereby create a non-mobile
housing unit conforming to the Minnesota State Building Code.



   DWELLING, MANUFACTURED, PREFABRICATED. A housing unit with the walls,
floors and ceilings constructed at a factory and which are transported to a
building site where final assembly and installation of such component is
completed to permanently affix the unit to the site and thereby create a
non-mobile housing unit conforming to the Minnesota State Building Code.



   DWELLING, MULTIPLE FAMILY.  A dwelling designed for or intended for
or  containing 3 or more dwelling units, including but not limited to such
common references as apartment buildings and condominiums.



   DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY. A dwelling designed for and used for occupancy
by one family.



   DWELLING, TWIN HOME.  Two single family attached dwellings located on
individual lots in such a manner that the common party wall is located on the
common side lot line.



   DWELLING, TWO FAMILY. A dwelling designed or intended exclusively for
occupancy by 2 families living independently of each other and commonly
referred to as a duplex. Also referring to a single family dwelling plus a
single apartment.



   DWELLING, ZERO LOT LINE.  A single family dwelling attached by party
walls with other single family dwellings in such a manner that the common
party wall(s) is located on the common lot line(s), including but not limited
to such common references as twin homes.



   EARTH SHELTERED.  Constructed so that 50% or more of the exterior
surface is covered or in contact with earth. Exterior surface includes all
walls and roof, but excludes garages and other accessory buildings. Earth
covering on walls is measured from the floor of the structures lowest level.
Earth covering on the roof must be at least 12 inches deep to be included in
calculations of earth covering. An EARTH SHELTERED building must satisfy the
building code standard promulgated pursuant to M.S. § 16B.61, as it may be
amended from time to time. Partially completed buildings shall not be
considered earth sheltered.



   EXTERIOR STORAGE.  The storage of goods, materials, equipment,
manufactured products and similar items not fully enclosed by a building.



   EXTRACTION AREA. Any non-agricultural artificial excavation of earth
exceeding 50 square feet of surface area of 2 feet in depth, excavated or
made by the removal from the natural surface of the earth, or sod, soil,
sand, gravel, stone or other natural matter, or made by turning, or breaking
or undermining the surface of the earth, except that public improvement
projects shall not be considered extraction areas.



   FAMILY.  An individual or 2 or more persons related by blood,
marriage, or adoption, or a group of not more than 5 unrelated persons,
living together as single housekeeping unit within a dwelling unit as
distinguished from individuals or a group occupying a hotel, motel, club,
lodge, sorority, fraternity, or dormitory.



   FAMILY - TRADITIONAL. One or more persons related by blood or marriage
residing in a single dwelling unit.



   FAMILY - FUNCTIONAL. A collective group of unrelated persons residing
in a single dwelling unit, limited to not more than 2 adult persons, together
with their traditional family members of any age.



   FLOOR AREA. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors
of a building measured from the exterior face of walls, including basements
and accessory buildings on the same zoning lot.



   FLOOR AREA (LIVABLE). The same as FLOOR AREA except its application is
limited to dwellings. It is measured from the interior faces of the interior
walls and excludes all unoccupied cellars, garages, porches, attics,
stairways, basements, storage, utility, heating rooms and similar areas.



   GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building or accessory portion of the
principal building which is intended for and used to store the private
passenger vehicles of the family or families resident upon the premises.



   GARAGE, PUBLIC. Any premises used for the storage or care of motor
vehicles or premises where any such vehicles are equipped for operation, are
repaired, or are kept for remuneration, for hire, or for sale. Any sale of
gasoline, oil, and accessories are only incidental to the principal use.



   GARAGE, TRUCK.  A building which is used or intended to be used for
the storage of motor trucks, truck trailers, tractors and commercial vehicles
exceeding 1-1/2 ton capacity.



   GRADE, GROUND. The average of the natural ground elevation within a
200-foot radius within the buildable envelope of a lot or lots.



   GRADE, STREET. The elevation of the established street in front of the
building measured at the center of such front. The Zoning Administrator or
his or her designee shall establish such street grade or its equivalent for
the purposes of this chapter.



   HOME OCCUPATION.  Any occupation which is clearly secondary to the
main use of the premises as a dwelling and does not substantially change the
character thereof or have any substantial exterior evidence of such secondary
use.



   HOTEL. A building or portion thereof occupied as a lodging place for
persons who are lodged with or without meals and in which there are more than
10 sleeping rooms.



   LANDSCAPING.  The enhancement of the appearance of land by altering
its contours, including the planting of trees, shrubs and flowers or
installation of rock, bricks or mulch.



   LICENSE or PERMIT.  A written license or permit issued by the city
under the provisions of this chapter.



   LOT. One unit of a recorded plat or subdivision of land occupied or to
be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings, together with such
open spaces as are required under this chapter and having its principal
frontage upon a public street or officially approved access.



   LOT AREA.  The area of a lot in a horizontal plane bounded by the lot
lines.



   LOT AREA PER FAMILY. The lot area required by this chapter to be
provided for each unit in a dwelling, providing residence for one family.



   LOT, CORNER. Any lot situated at the junction of and fronting on 2 or
more streets.



   LOT COVERAGE. The area of a zoning lot occupied by the principal
buildings and accessory buildings measured as a percentage of the total area
of the zoning lot.



   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE.  A lot having frontage on 2 streets.



   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.



   LOT LINE. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein. When a lot line
abuts a street or alley, such lines shall also be street or alley lines.



   LOT LINE, FRONT. That boundary of a lot which abuts a public street,
and, in the case of a double frontage lot or a corner lot, it shall be the
shortest dimension on a public street. If the dimensions of a double frontage
lot or a corner lot are equal, the front lot line shall be designated by the
owner and filed with the Zoning Administrator.



   LOT LINE, REAR. That boundary of a lot which is opposite the front lot
line. If the rear line is less than 10 feet in length, or if the lot forms a
point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be a line 10 feet in length within
the lot, parallel to, and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.



   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or
a rear lot line.



   LOT WIDTH. The width of a lot is its width measured at the front
setback line.



   LANDSCAPING.  Plantings such as trees, grass, and shrubs.



   MOTEL. A combination or group of 2 or more detached, semi-detached or
connected permanent buildings that are used for overnight transient living
accommodations and are oriented  toward travelers parking their automobiles.



   NONCONFORMING USE. Any pre-existing structure or previously permitted
use of land which is inconsistent with the current provisions of this chapter
or any amendment thereto.



   NUISANCE.



      (1)   PRIVATE NUISANCE.  Any wrongful action, which destroys
or deteriorates the property of an individual or interferes with the
person’s lawful use or enjoyment of the property.



      (2)   PUBLIC NUISANCE.  Maintaining a public nuisance by act,
or by failure to perform a legal duty, intentionally causing or permitting a
condition to exist which injures or endangers the public health, safety or
welfare.  A miscellaneous and diversified group of minor criminal
violations, based on some interference with the interests of the community or
the comfort and convenience of the general public may rise to the level of a
“public nuisance.”  To be considered public, the nuisance must affect an
interest common to the general public.  The activity must be harmful to the
public; create an interference in the use of away of travel; prevent the
public from the peaceful use of their land and the public streets; or must
affect a common interest of the general public.



   NURSING HOME.  A facility for the care of the aged or disabled.



   OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE. A space accessible from a street, alley, or
driveway for the use of trucks or other vehicles while loading or unloading
merchandise or materials. Such space shall be of size as to accommodate 1
vehicle of the type typically used in the particular business.



   OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE. A land area exclusive of driveways of such
shape and dimensions and so prepared as to be usable for the parking of motor
vehicles, trailers, boats, campers and recreational vehicles.



   OPEN SALES LOT. Any land used or occupied for the purpose of buying and
selling any vehicles, goods, materials or merchandise and for the storing of
same under the open sky prior to sale. The words OPEN SALES LOT shall include
the words EXTERIOR STORAGE as defined herein.



   OVERHANG.  Portion of a roof which projects beyond the main structure.



   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT or PLANNED DEVELOPMENT. A large lot or tract
of land developed as a unit rather than as individual development wherein 2
or more buildings may be located in relationship to each other rather than to
lot lines or zoning district boundaries.



   PREFABRICATED DWELLING. See Dwelling, Manufactured, Prefabricated.



   PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE OR USE. The purpose of activity for which the land
or structure thereon is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is
actually occupied or maintained.



   PUBLIC OPEN SPACE. Any publicly owned open area, including but not
limited to the following: parks, playgrounds, school sites, parkways and
streets.



   RETAINING WALL.  A structure made of masonry, stone, brick, concrete
or timber that holds back soil, rock or landscaping material from a building,
structure or area to prevent downslope movement or erosion and provide
support for vertical grade changes.



   ROW HOUSE. A group or row of dwellings which are joined by  party wall
or walls.



   SETBACK. The horizontal distance between the property lines of and the
allowable building lines as defined by the yard regulations of this chapter.



   SOLAR COLLECTOR.  Any device that is employed in the collection of
solar energy for heating and/or cooling of a structure, building or water.



   SOLAR ENERGY.  Radiant energy received from the sun.



   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM.  A set of devices whose primary purpose is to
collect solar energy and convert and store it for useful purposes, including
heating and cooling buildings or other energy-using processes, or to produce
generated power by means of any combination of collecting, transferring, or
converting solar-generated energy.



   STORY. That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the next floor above it or if there is no floor
above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.



   STORY-HALF. That portion of a building under a gable, hip or gambrel
roof, the wall plates of which, on at least 2 opposite exterior-walls, are
not more than 2 feet above the floor of such story.



   STREET. A public right-of-way which affords a principal means of access
to abutting property and which has been accepted by the city as a public way.



   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed, the use of which requires permanent
location on the ground; or attached to something having a permanent location
on the ground.



   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS.  Any change, other than incidental repairs,
which alters bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, foundations or other
structural elements.



   TOWNHOUSE. A single family dwelling attached by party walls with other
single family dwellings in such a way that all exits open to the outside.



   TRAIL.  A private means of access to abutting property.



   UNRELATED INDIVIDUALS. Two or more individuals who are not related by
blood, marriage, or adoption. For the purposes of this chapter, RELATED BY
BLOOD shall mean whole or half relation between a common ancestor or
descendant, husband, wife, son, daughter, father, mother, brother, sister,
uncle, aunt, niece, nephew, stepchildren, legally adopted children,
grandmother, grandfather, state assigned foster children, first cousin, or
any combination of the above persons.



   USE. The purpose for which land, premises or a building is designated,
arranged, intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.



   USED FOR. Shall include the phrases ARRANGED FOR, DESIGNED FOR,
INTENDED FOR, MAINTAINED FOR, and OCCUPIED FOR.



   VARIANCE. A modification or variation of the provisions of this chapter
where it is determined that by reason of special and unusual circumstances
relating to a specific lot, strict application of the ordinance would cause
undue hardship or that strict conformity with the provisions of this chapter
would be  unreasonable, impractical or unfeasible under the circumstances.



   WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS).  Any device that converts wind
power to another form of energy such as electricity or heat (also referred to
by such common names as wind charger, wind turbine, and windmill.)



   YARD. An open space unoccupied by structures and exclusive of accessory
uses except as may be otherwise permitted by this chapter.



   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the full width of a lot and having
a depth equal to the shortest distance between the front line of the lot and
the nearest point on the front building setback line. The front yard depth
shall be measured from an existing or future street right-of-way line on
which the lot fronts.



   YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the full width of a lot and having
a depth equal to the shortest distance between the rear line of the lot and
the rear building setback line.



   YARD, SIDE. A yard between the side line of the lot and the side
building setback line.



   YARD TRANSITIONAL. A front, rear or side yard that may be required
where any lot  line coincides with any residential zoning district lot line,
or where the extension of a front or side lot line coincides with a front lot
line of any residential district lot line. The transitional yards shall be
required where such properties are separated by a public street, alley, or
highway right-of-way of less than 100 feet in width. Such yards required
shall not be less than that which would be required under this chapter for a
residential use on the adjacent residential lot.



(1975 Code, § 11.03) (Am. Ord. 3, passed 3-2-1981; Am. Ord. 5, passed
3-16-1981; Am. Ord. 13, passed 7-6-1981; Am. Ord. 21, passed 4-8-1982; Am.
Ord. 23, passed 8-16-1982; Am. Ord. 24, passed 10-18-1982; Am. Ord. 29-82,
passed 12-6-1982; Am. Ord. 37, passed 8-15-1983; Am. Ord. 214, passed
4-15-2002; Am. Ord. 17, 4th Series, passed 1-17-2008)



ZONING DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT MAP



§ 156.020  DISTRICTS.



   (A)   The city is divided into zoning districts. The zoning
districts established are each separate and distinct and are designed to
assist in carrying out the intents and purposes of this chapter.



   (B)   The districts are established as follows:



      (1)   R-A, Residential Agricultural District;



      (2)   R-1, One-Family Dwelling District;



      (3)   R-1S, One Family Dwelling, small lot;



      (4)   R-2, One and Two-Family Dwelling District;



      (5)   R-3, Limited Multiple Dwelling District;



      (6)   R-4, Multiple Dwelling District;



      (7)   B-1, Neighborhood Business District;



      (8)   B-2, Community Business District;



      (9)   B-3, General Commercial District;



      (10)   CBD, Central Business District;



      (11)   I-1, Planned Industrial District;



      (12)   M-1, Light Industry District;



      (13)   M-2, Heavy Industry District;



      (14)   TUD, Transitional Unzoned District;



      (15)   OR-1, Office-Residential District.



      (16)   P-1, Public Use District.



(1975 Code, § 11.04, Subd. 1)  (Am. Ord. 213, passed 3-18-2002)



§ 156.021  ZONING DISTRICT MAP.



   The location and boundaries of the districts established by this
chapter are set forth on the Zoning Map and the map is made a part of this
chapter. The map shall be known as the "City of North Mankato Zoning Map."
The map and all notations, references, and data shown thereon are
incorporated by reference into this chapter and shall be as much a part of it
as if all were fully described herein. It shall be the responsibility of the
Zoning Administrator to maintain the map and amendments thereto. The Official
Zoning Map shall be publicly displayed in the City Hall. All amendments to
the Zoning Map are generally described in the Table of Special Ordinances,
see Table I.



(1975 Code, § 11.04, Subd. 2)



§ 156.022  DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   The boundaries between districts are, unless otherwise indicated,
either the center lines of streets or alleys or such lines extended or lines
parallel or perpendicular thereto. Where figures are shown on the Zoning Map
between a street and a district boundary line, they indicate that the
district boundary line runs parallel to the street line at a distance
therefrom equivalent to the number of feet so indicated, unless otherwise
indicated. Boundaries indicated as following shore line shall follow the low
water shore lines, and in the event of change in shore line shall move with
the actual shore line; boundaries indicated as following the center lines of
streams, rivers, canals, lakes,  or other bodies of water shall follow such
center lines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the city limits
shall be construed as following such city limits.



(1975 Code, § 11.04, Subd. 3)



§ 156.023  FUTURE ANNEXATION.



   Any land annexed to the city on or after the effective date of this
chapter shall upon annexation and without formal zoning action be placed in a
transitional unzoned district until otherwise zoned in accordance herewith.



(1975 Code, § 11.05)



DISTRICT REGULATIONS



§ 156.035  GENERALLY.



   The regulations of this chapter within each district shall be minimum
regulations and shall apply uniformly within each district, except as may be
permitted or provided by this chapter.



   (A)   District conformance. No building, structure or land shall
hereafter be used or occupied, and no building, structure or part thereof
shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or
structurally altered except in conformity with all of the regulations herein
specified for the district in which it is located.



   (B)   Alterations. No building or other structure shall hereafter be
erected or altered to exceed the height, to accommodate or house a greater
number of families, to occupy a greater percentage of lot area, to have 
narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other open spaces
than herein required, or allowed to be erected or altered in any other manner
contrary to the provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   Requirement computations. No part of a yard or other open
space, or off-street parking required for or in connection with any building
for the purpose of complying with this chapter, shall be included as part of
a yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required
for any other building except as may be permitted by this chapter.
Regulations requiring the use of numerical computations shall utilize the
method provided by this chapter. Where no method has been provided by this
chapter, it shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to determine
appropriate uniform means of computation. In the event fractional sums,
differences, products or quotients are determined in the application of this
chapter, these values shall be “rounded off” to the applicable unit of
measurement.



   (D)   Yard or lot reductions.



      (1)   No yard or lot existing at the time of the passage of
this chapter shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum
requirements set forth herein except detached dwellings located on lots
contained in plats recorded prior to the year 1958 which shall not be less
than the following:



         (a)   Front yards:  20 feet;



         (b)   Side yards:  5 feet;



         (c)   Rear yards:  20 feet;



         (d)   Lot width:  50 feet.



      (2)   Yards or lots created after the effective date of this
chapter shall not be less than the minimum requirements established by this
chapter.



   (E)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses or structures shall not be
located in any required front, side, rear or  transitional yard except as
may be permitted in this section.



      (1)    The following accessory uses or structures shall be
permitted in any required rear or front yard in any residential zoning
district, provided a 15 foot rear yard setback and the required front yard
setback is maintained:



         (a)   Decks or elevated platforms, either attached to a
dwelling or free standing, with no roof or overhead structure of any type;



         (b)   Patios or paved areas that are level, flush or at
grade with the ground, with no roof or overhead structure of any type, and is
not used for parking purposes.



      (2)   The following accessory uses or structures shall be
permitted in any required rear yard in any zoning district, provided a 5 foot
rear yard setback is maintained, and any required side yard in any zoning
district, provided a 5 foot side yard is maintained from the furthest point
of the building to the respective property line: utility buildings;



      (3)   The following accessory use shall be permitted within
any required rear yard in any residential zoning district, provided a 15 foot
rear yard setback and the required side yard setbacks are provided: In-ground
swimming pools, including aprons, and above-ground swimming pools with
attached decks or aprons.



   (F)   Height exceptions. The building height limits established
herein for districts shall not apply to belfries, cupolas, domes, spires,
monuments, radio towers, flag poles, chimneys, water tanks, towers, solar
collectors, wind energy conversion systems and other structures for essential
services, nor to similar structures or necessary mechanical appurtenances
extending above the roof of any building and not occupying more than 10% of
the area of such roof. Building height limit exceptions shall conform to all
structural design standards specified by the Minnesota State Building Code,
as amended. In no event shall this section be construed to allow the
construction or continued maintenance of structures constituting a hazard to
the abutting property or the public at large. Where the average slope of lot
is greater than 1 foot rise or fall in 7 feet of horizontal distance from the
established street elevation at the property line, 1 story in addition to the
number permitted in the district in which the lot is situated shall be
permitted on the downhill side of any building.



   (G)   Accessory buildings.If an accessory building is attached to
the main building, it shall be made a structural part of the main building
and shall comply in all respects with the requirements of this chapter
applicable to the main building. An accessory building, unless attached to
and made a part of the main building, shall not be closer than 5 feet to the
main building or another accessory building. In no event shall an accessory
building be permitted on a vacant lot or when not subordinate to and serving
the principal use structure on the same lot.



      (1)   An accessory building larger than 168 square feet shall
be accessible by a hard- surfaced driveway which meets all applicable setback
regulations.



      (2)   Private garages used as accessory structures for one and
two-family residential dwellings shall not exceed a combined total of 1,200
square feet of floor space per lot for all structures.



      (3)   No pole barn type construction is permitted for any
residential private garage.



      (4)   Detached residential garage roofs must have a hipped or
gable design. No barn-type roofs are permitted on detached garages.



   (H)   Earth sheltered buildings.



      (1)   Where an earth sheltered building substantially alters
the natural watershed of the lot, computations for yard area shall be based
on measurements from the surrounding cover of earth. In cases where the earth
sheltered building has been made part of the natural terrain, computations
for yard area shall be made from the exterior surface of the building.



      (2)   All applications for building permits for earth
sheltered buildings shall be accompanied by a drainage  plan.



   (I)   Wind energy conversion systems (WECS).



      (1)   The location, design, maintenance and removal of WECS
shall be governed as follows.  WECS shall be considered a conditional use in
all zoning districts. All appropriate regulations within each zoning district
must be complied with in addition to regulations outlined below;



      (2)   Applicants requesting a building permit for a WECS shall
furnish such scale drawings and information as the city deems necessary. This
information may include, but is not limited to the following: a plot plan of
the premises involved showing lot lines, the accurate location of all
buildings or structures on the premises and on each adjacent plot and the
location of proposed tower and all guy wires, poles or anchors, and a sketch
elevation of the premises accurately depicting the proposed tower and its
relationship to structures on adjacent lots.



      (3)   The permitted maximum height of a WECS shall be
determined in one of two ways:



         (a)   A ratio of 1 to 1 between the distance from the
closest property line to any part of the WECS to the height of the tower;



         (b)   A maximum of 100 feet in agricultural and
industrial districts and 60 feet in residential and commercial districts. The
shortest height of the two above-mentioned methods shall be used in
determining maximum height. Height shall be measured from the surrounding
grade to the rotor hub or top of the tower, whichever is higher.



      (4)   No part of a WECS shall be located within or above any
required front, side or rear setback area.



      (5)   All WECS shall be designed to meet the following minimum
standards:



         (a)   An automatic braking device capable of halting
operation in high winds (40 m.p.h. or greater)  shall be incorporated;



         (b)   The WECS shall be designed, constructed and
operated so as to not cause radio and television interference;



         (c)   The WECS shall be operated and maintained in a
condition which will not cause unreasonable  noise emissions;



         (d)   The WECS shall be placed on the property in a
position which will not unreasonably obstruct  the view from neighboring
properties;



         (e)   The WECS shall be guarded against unauthorized
climbing. The first 12 feet of the tower shall be unclimbable by design or be
enclosed by a 6 foot high, nonclimbable fence with a secured access;



         (f)   The WECS shall be designed and installed to
withstand natural lightning strikes;



         (g)   The WECS electrical equipment and connections
shall adhere to all state and local government,  as well as power company
rules and regulations and standards.



      (6)   Any WECS which fails to comply with this chapter shall
be brought into compliance within 90 days after notice by the city, or be
dismantled. Any WECS not in operation for 12 months shall be dismantled.



      (7)   WECS existing at the date of adoption of this chapter or
existing at the time of annexation, shall be brought into compliance within
twelve months or be dismantled.



      (8)   The owner of a WECS which is to be dismantled must
accomplish such act within 30 days or the city is empowered to dismantle such
WECS and assess the costs against the property.



      (9)   WECS that are by nature ornamental, rather than
functional, shall be exempt from this chapter if total height is less than 25
feet.



      (10)   The city requires liability insurance to be maintained
on the WECS by its owner.



      (11)   In order to insure adequate wind access, the city does
encourage the use of private easements and restrictive covenants as a means
to protect wind access.



   (J)   Minimum structural requirements.  The following shall be
minimum structural requirements in all residential districts:



      (1)   All structures used for residential occupancy shall have
a minimum width of 24 feet and shall be affixed to a continuous permanent
foundation constructed of concrete block, poured concrete or wood.



      (2)   A private attached or unattached garage having a minimum
floor area of 280 square feet shall be required to be built concurrent with
each dwelling constructed.



      (3)   Roof systems must have a 2-12 minimum pitch. Hip, gable,
mansard, gambrel or shed roof designs are allowable. Flat roofs are not
recommended and will require engineering drawings and snow load certification.



      (4)   The provisions of this subdivision shall apply to all
structures used for residential occupancy except structures controlled by the
provisions of Ch. 152.



      (5)   A residential structure shall have a minimum width of 24
feet at its narrowest point and a minimum depth of 32 feet with a minimum
floor area of 800 square feet on the main floor.



      (6)   Residential structures shall be placed upon and affixed
to a permanent foundation consisting of concrete block, concrete, or treated
wood. The foundation shall be solid for the complete circumference of the 
structure except for necessary doors or windows. The foundation shall align
vertically with the outer walls of such structure for its complete
circumference and shall, as well, provide such other support for the
structure as is required pursuant to the Minnesota State Building Code.



   (K)   Residential driveways.



      (1)   The maximum allowable driveway width measured at the
front property line on residential property having a width of less than 80
feet shall not exceed 24 feet. The maximum allowable driveway width measured
at the front property line on a residential property having a width of 80
feet or more shall not exceed 30 feet. There shall be a minimum of 20 feet of
hard surfaced driveway located perpendicular from the face of any garage
stall to the street. All driveways shall conform to the required side yard
building setbacks for the district it is within.



      (2)   Circular drives.  The maximum allowable driveway width
measured at the property line on residential property shall not exceed 14
feet.



      (3)   For garages with access from the alley there shall be a
minimum of 20 feet of hard-surfaced driveway, located perpendicular from the
face of any garage stall to the alley or side property line, depending on the
position of the garage doors. In no event shall a driveway encroach into a
side yard building setback.



   (L)   Ravine setbacks. For all uses permitted there shall be a
setback of no less than 25 feet, measured from the breakline of an adjacent
ravine to any permanent structure, including but not limited to: dwellings,
garages, decks, above-ground patios, in-ground swimming pools. Gazebos
exceeding 144 square feet in size are subject to a 25-foot ravine breakline
setback. The breakline shall be established by the Building or Construction
Inspector prior to construction. Permitted uses in the 25-foot setback area
are fences, lawn sheds, inground patios, dog kennels, playground equipment or
sandboxes that are located a minimum of five feet from the ravine breakline.



      (M)   Cul de sac lot provisions.



      (1)   Lot width. The minimum lot width measured at the front
property line on platted cul de sac lots shall be a minimum of 50 feet.



      (2)   Driveways. The maximum allowable driveway width measured
at the property line on cul de sac lots shall not exceed 24 feet. Beginning
at the front property line, the driveway width may be enlarged at an angle
not greater than 45 degrees to a point not closer than 10 feet to any side
property line.



   (N)   Carports.  Permitted within any zoning district subject to
applicable setback regulations within each zoning regulation.



   (O)   Amateur radio towers.  Permitted within any zoning district
subject to applicable setback and building height requirements.



   (P)   Storage or utility sheds.  Permitted in any residential
zoning district subject to the following:



      (1)   Maximum floor area shall not exceed 168 square feet.



      (2)   Minimum setback is 5 feet from any rear or side property
line.



      (3)   Located a minimum of 5 feet from any main or accessory
building.



      (4)   Shall not be located within any front yard.



      (5)   Maximum height shall not exceed 14 feet.



      (6)   Overhangs shall not exceed 2 feet.



      (7)   Access door shall not exceed 6 feet in width.



      (8)   No more than 1 storage shed or utility shed is permitted
on any lot.



      (9)   Minimum setback is 5 feet from any ravine breakline.



         (a)   For every new attached or detached residential
dwelling unit constructed, the following is required:



            1.   An individual water service and shut-off
shall be installed for each dwelling unit.



            2.   An individual sanitary sewer service shall be
installed for each dwelling unit.



         (b)   Multi-unit rental apartment buildings are not
subject to this provision.



   (Q)   Setbacks for accessory buildings.  The building setbacks for
garages on lots platted prior to 1958 are as follows:



      (1)   Garage when the vehicle entrance doors face an adjacent
alley; 20 foot rear, 5 foot side.



      (2)   Garage when the vehicle entrance doors face a side
property line; 5 foot rear, 5 foot side.



      (3)   Garage when the vehicle entrance doors face an adjacent
street; 5 foot rear, 5 foot side.



      (4)   Corner lots are subject to 2 front yard setbacks.



   (R)   Foundation drainage.  All residential and commercial
foundation drains shall be connected to a sump pump or directed into an
adjacent ravine with the discharge line located at the bottom of the ravine.
Beginning at a distance of 3 feet from the foundation wall, a drainage pipe
shall be non-perforated.



   (S)   Land preparation.  The initial stripping of land for any
development requires the removal of all organic material and soil to a depth
of at least 12 inches. Professional soil engineer or building inspector
findings may require the removal of more than 12 inches of soil.



   (T)   Minimum distance between buildings.  The minimum distance
between privately owned primary  or accessory buildings shall be 5 feet.



   (U)   Foundation elevations.  The following standards apply for all
new residential construction:



      (1)   Finished grade elevations shall have a minimum of 5%
slope up to a maximum of 8% slope, from the back top of curb to the finished
grade elevation adjacent to the foundation wall. This applies to the minimum
front yard setback requirements for valley and hilltop locations. Any
variations are subject to be reviewed for approval by the City Building
Official. Criteria for determining setback elevations beyond minimum setbacks
are subject to the following:



         (a)   Required setbacks.



         (b)   Surface contours.



         (c)   Elevations of adjacent properties.



         (d)   Distance from top back of curb.



         (e)   Drainage.



      (2)   The City Building Official shall establish the final
floor elevation for all new residential, commercial or industrial buildings.



      (3)   Window well casings shall be constructed a minimum of 6
inches above finished grade.



      (4)   Residential property drainage.  Drainage resulting from
new home construction must conform to the topography of the land and be
directed so as to not to adversely affect neighboring property.  Drainage
plans are subject to Building Inspector approval.



   (V)   Driveway paving.  Driveway paving shall occur within 1 year
after a building permit is issued for a garage and/or driveway having access
to a public street or alley. The driveway shall be hard surfaced.



   (W) Stormwater drainage plan.  On-site stormwater detention is
required for any new parking lot. Prior to issuance of a building permit, a
stormwater drainage plan shall be submitted and approved by the City's
Construction Inspector (refer to standards).



   (X)   Stormwater detention pond.  For any residential, commercial
or industrial development utilizing more than 1 acre of land, an on-site
stormwater detention pond is required. Prior to issuance of a building
permit, a Stormwater Drainage Plan shall be submitted and approved by the
Building Inspector. Setbacks for storm water ponds, rain gardens or other
storm water retention areas shall be a minimum of 10 feet from any property
line.



   (Y)   Address identification numbers.  Any residential dwelling
unit or Commercial/Industrial building shall display address identification
numbers on the dwelling or building that shall be visible from the nearest
public street and be of a contrasting color from the dwelling or building.
The height of the numbers shall be no less than 4 inches.



   (Z)   Property corners.  Prior to construction of any new
residential dwelling, dwelling addition, garage, garage addition or
commercial/industrial building, it is the responsibility of the property
owner to establish or display all property corners. For any other type of
project that requires a building permit, it may be necessary for the property
owner to display property corners at the request of the Building Official or
Assistant Building Inspector. Property corners shall be located by the
property owner or a registered land surveyor.



   (AA)   Underground systems.  Underground invisible pet fencing
shall be located a minimum of 3 feet from any sidewalk or street. Any
underground sprinkler system installed within any public right-of-way is at
risk from damage as a result of street or utility maintenance or any other
public improvement project. The city accepts no responsibility for
underground sprinkler system or invisible pet fencing damage in any public
right-of-way.



   (BB)   Home occupations.  Home occupations are permitted uses in
residential districts and shall conform to the following standards:



      (1)   Such use shall be operated entirely within the primary
living dwelling. The use of an attached or detached accessory building or
garage for such use is prohibited.



      (2)   Such use shall not employ any person not residing on the
premises.



      (3)   Such use shall not exceed 1/3 of the main floor space of
a dwelling.



      (4)   Only 1 home occupation shall be operated within a
dwelling.



      (5)   There shall be no outside storage of materials, goods,
supplies, or equipment of any kind related to the home occupation.



      (6)   No traffic or parking demand shall be generated by such
use in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential
neighborhood.



      (7)   Any occupation shall be clearly secondary to the main
use of the premises as a residential dwelling.



      (8)   The owner of the building shall be the operator of the
home occupation.



   (CC)   Outside storage of materials in Business or Commercial
districts.  Where outside storage of materials, equipment and product is
permitted in a Business or Commercial district, such outside storage shall
conform to the following provisions.



      (1)   Outside storage shall be fenced and screened from any
abutting property and public street by privacy fencing or planting of
vegetation. Such fencing or vegetation shall be not less than 6 feet in
height.



      (2)   Outside storage areas shall be hard surfaced using
concrete or asphalt material.



      (3)   Outside storage areas shall not be located within
setback areas.



      (4)   All materials stored outside shall be directly
associated with the business.



   (DD)   Outside storage in Industrial districts.  Where outside
storage of materials, equipment and product is permitted in an Industrial
district, such outside storage shall conform to the following provisions.



      (1)   Outside storage areas shall be fenced and screened from
any abutting property and public street by privacy fencing or planting of
vegetation. Such fencing or vegetation shall be not less than 8 feet in
height.



      (2)   Outside storage areas shall be hard surfaced using
concrete or asphalt material.



      (3)   Outside storage areas shall not be located within
setback areas.



      (4)   All materials stored outside shall be directly
associated with the industry.



   (EE)   Outside storage of materials in Residential districts.  In
any Residential zoning district, it is unlawful for any person to discard,
place, accumulate, maintain or store out of doors, the following:



      (1)   (a)   Unlicensed, unregistered or inoperable motor
vehicles, recreational vehicle, boats, campers, snowmobiles, trailers or
similar equipment.



         (b)   In the event a licensed motor vehicle parked or
stored out of doors on private property has not been moved within a
consecutive 30-day time period, the Zoning Administrator may, by written
letter to the property owner, request that the vehicle owner demonstrate the
vehicle is operable by starting and driving the vehicle a distance of not
less than 500 feet. The operation to be observed by the Zoning Administrator
or his or her designee.



      (2)   Motor vehicle bodies, frames, parts, tires, rims or
other machinery or equipment.



      (3)   Household furnishings or appliances.



      (4)   Lumber or construction materials.



      (5)   Non-residential vehicles including but not limited to: 
tractors, buses, skid loaders and commercial trucks.



      (6)   Lawnmowers, snowblowers and other lawn and garden
equipment.



      (7)   Garbage, litter and other debris which is considered to
be a public nuisance by the Zoning Administrator.



      (8)   The outside storage of materials shall not be located
within any building setback area.



   (FF)   Outside storage of vehicles in Residential districts.  In
any Residential district, the off-street parking of vehicles shall conform to
the following provisions.



      (1)   The off-street parking on any automobile, trailer,
camper, boat, or recreational vehicle shall be on a lawfully permitted
hard-surfaced area constructed of concrete or asphalt.



      (2)   The off-street parking of any automobile, trailer,
camper, boat, or recreational vehicle shall not be within any building
setback area unless on a lawfully constructed parking area adjacent to an
alley.



      (3)   Any automobile, trailer, camper, boat or recreational
vehicle stored on private property shall be licensed and registered to the
property owner or tenant.



      (4)   Any automobile, trailer, camper, boat, recreational
vehicle stored on private property shall not be used to store materials or
equipment.



   (GG)   Driveways and curb openings.  The following standards shall
apply for each use.



 

 
Maximum Curb Cut (Measured at Property Line)
 
Maximum # of Curb Cuts
 
Minimum Distance Between Curb Cuts
 
Minimum Side Yard Driveway Setback




Single Family Interior Lot
 
24 feet
 
1
 
20 feet
 
10 feet


Single Family Corner Lot
 
24 feet
 
1
 
20 feet
 
10 feet


Single Family Corner Lot  utilizing circular drive
 
14 feet
 
2
 
20 feet
 
10 feet


Single Family Cul-de-Sac Lot
 
24 feet
 
1
 
20 feet
 
10 feet


Multi-Family (2-8Units)
 
24 feet
 
1
 
20 feet
 
10 feet


Multi-Family (Over 8 Units)
 
24 feet
 
2
 
20 feet
 
10 feet


Commercial/Business
 
36 feet
 
2
 
20 feet
 
10 feet


Industrial
 
50 feet
 
4
 
20 feet
 
10 feet




 



   (HH)   Residential occupancies. Residential occupancies of single
and two family dwellings in the R-1, R-1S and R-2 Districts shall be limited
to family-functional and family-traditional as defined by § 156.003. A
family-traditional or family-functional may have 1 additional person residing
with them for non-rental purposes or for the purposes of providing a
housekeeping or personal service for the resident(s) therein.



   (II)   For every new attached or detached residential dwelling unit
constructed, an individual water service and shut-off shall be installed for
each dwelling unit. Multi-unit rental apartment buildings are not subject to
this provision.



   (JJ)   Landscaping.  In conjunction with any new residential
dwelling, commercial or industrial building, landscaping, including seeded or
sodding, shall occur within 1 year after a building permit is issued.



   (KK)   Pergolas and dog kennels.



      (1)    Building setbacks for pergolas and dog kennels are as
follows:



 


Valley

 

Hilltop



Side yard - 5 feet
 
Side yard - 10 feet


Rear yard - 5 feet
 
Rear yard - 10 feet



 



      (2)   Pergolas and dog kennels shall not be located within any
front yard building setback.



   (LL)   Playhouses. Permitted in any residential zoning district,
subject to the following:



      (1)   Maximum floor area shall not exceed 60 square feet.



      (2)   Maximum height shall not exceed 5 feet.



      (3)   Minimum setback is 5 feet from any rear or side property
line.



      (4)   Shall not be located within any front yard.



      (5)   No more than 1 playhouse permitted on any lot.



      (6)   Minimum setback is 5 feet from any ravine breakline.



      (7)   Shall be located a minimum of 5 feet from any main,
accessory or utility building.



   (MM)   Garage and yard sales.  Permitted in all residential
districts and the Central Business District subject to the following:



      (1)   Events shall not exceed 3 days in length with no more
the 4 events allowed in any 12-month period.



      (2)   No items related to the event shall be stored
out-of-doors overnight.



      (3)   No items or materials shall be located in any boulevard
or public right-of-way area.



(1975 Code, § 11.06)  (Am. Ord. 3, passed 3-2-1981;  Am. Ord. 5, passed
3-16-1981; Am. Ord. 21, passed 4-9-1982; Am. Ord. 23, passed 8-16-1982; Am.
Ord. 24, passed 10-18-1982; Am. Ord. 36, passed 8-15-1983; Am. Ord. 114,
passed 5-7-1990; Am. Ord. 146, passed 3-6-1995;  Am. Ord. 193, passed
7-24-2000; Am. Ord. 194, passed 7-24-2000; Am. Ord. 206, passed 4-16-2001;
Am. Ord. 233, passed 12-1-2003; Am. Ord. 235, passed 1-20-2004; Am. Ord. 8,
4th Series, passed 1-16-2007; Am. Ord. 17, 4th Series, passed 1-17-2008; Am.
Ord. 21, 4th Series, passed 1-20-2009; Am. Ord. 34, 4th Series, passed
1-18-2011; Am. Ord. 48, 4th Series, passed 1-22-2013; Am. Ord. 63, 4th
Series, passed 1-5-2015; Am. Ord. 86, 4th Series, passed 4-3-2017; Am. Ord.
102, 4th Series, passed 4-2-2018; Am. Ord. 112, 4th Series, passed 1-22-2019)



§ 156.036  R-A, RESIDENTIAL AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended to establish an area which
is best suited for the transition from agricultural use to urban use and to
prevent unplanned, non-farm development and permit orderly and economic
development of public services, utilities and schools.



   (B)   Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses:



      (1)   Single family detached dwellings;



      (2)   Agriculture, farming, and truck gardening; except
kennels, animal, or poultry farms;



      (3)   Fences;



      (4)   Landscaping;



      (5)   Driveways.



   (C)   Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted.



      (1)   Cemetery, memorial garden.



      (2)   Churches.



      (3)   Public uses.



      (4)   Schools, public and private.



      (5)   Home occupations when such use does not exceed one-third
of the main floor space of a dwelling, is conducted only in the principal
dwelling, and does not employ any persons not residing on the premises.



      (6)   Water supply buildings, reservoirs, wells, elevated
tanks, and similar essential public utility and service structures.



   (D)   Accessory uses. The following are permitted uses.



      (1)   Private garage.



      (2)    In-ground private swimming pool serving a single-family
residence when completely enclosed within a fence at least 6 feet in height
or an automatic pool cover installed over the entire pool surface which meets
ASTM F 1346 standards.



      (3)   Aboveground swimming pool.



      (4)   Driveways.



      (5)   Off-street parking.



      (6)   Utility buildings.



      (7)   Solar energy systems.



      (8)   Satellite reception equipment.



   (E)   Yard regulations.



      (1)   Front yard. For all uses allowed there shall be a front
yard of not less than 30 feet. Where a lot is located at the intersection of
two or more streets there shall be a front yard on each street side.



      (2)   Side yard. For all uses allowed there shall be a side
yard, on each side of a building, having a width of not less than 10 feet.



      (3)   Rear yard. For all uses allowed there shall be a rear
yard of not less than 25 feet.



      (4)   Transitional yards. There are no requirements.



   (F)   Ground coverage. The sum total of the ground area covered by
all structures shall not exceed 20% of the lot on which the structures are
located, for all permitted or conditional uses.



   (G)   Height regulations. No structure hereafter erected or altered
shall exceed two and one-half stories or 30 feet in height.



(1975 Code, § 11.07)  (Am. Ord. 3, passed 3-2-1981; Am. Ord. 22, passed
7-19-1982; Am. Ord. 105, 4th Series, passed 8-20-2018)



§ 156.037  R-1, ONE FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended to establish an area of low
density residential uses.



   (B)   Special requirements. Conversion of any use to other than a
permitted or an approved conditional use  is prohibited.



   (C)   Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses:



      (1)   Single family detached dwellings.



      (2)   Fences.



      (3)   Non-commercial gardening.



      (4)   Landscaping.



      (5)   Driveways.



      (6)   Churches, provided that no building shall be located
within 50 feet of any abutting lot line in any of  the classes of
residential districts.



      (7)   Public buildings and uses of the following kind:
elementary and secondary schools, parks, playgrounds, libraries, museums,
community centers and recreation centers, or private schools having a
curriculum equivalent to a public elementary school or public high school.



      (8)   Home occupations.  See § 156.035(BB).



   (D)   Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted:



      (1)   Bed and breakfast..



      (2)   Cemetery.



      (3)   Government, public utility and public services uses.



   (E)   Accessory uses.



      (1)   The following are permitted uses:



         (a)   Private garage.



         (b)    In-ground private swimming pool serving a
single-family residence when completely enclosed within a fence at least 6
feet in height or an automatic pool cover installed over the entire pool
surface which meets ASTM F 1346 standards.



         (c)   Aboveground pool.



         (d)   Driveways.



         (e)   Off-street parking.



         (f)   Utility buildings.



         (g)   Solar energy systems,



         (h)   Satellite reception equipment.



      (2)   The raising and keeping of farm animals is not permitted.



   (F)   Lot area.  Every single family dwelling erected shall require
a lot area of not less than 9,000 square feet. 



   (G)   Lot width and depth.



      (1)   Lot width. Every lot or plot upon which there is erected
a single family dwelling shall require a minimum width of 90 feet at the
building setback line.



      (2)   Lot depth. Every lot or plot upon which there is erected
a single family dwelling shall require a minimum depth of not less than 100
feet.



   (H)   Yard regulations.



      (1)   Front yard. For all uses allowed there shall be a front
yard of not less than 30 feet. Where a lot  is located at the intersection
of two or more streets, there shall be a front yard on each street side.



      (2)   Side yard. For all uses allowed, there shall be a side
yard, on each side of the building, each not  less than 10 feet in width.



      (3)   Rear yard. For all uses allowed there shall be a rear
yard of not less than 25 feet.



      (4)   Transitional yards. There are no requirements.



   (I)   Ground coverage. Not more than 40% of a lot or plot shall be
covered by all main and accessory buildings.



   (J)   Height regulations. No structure hereafter erected or altered
shall exceed two and one-half stories or 30 feet in height. Accessory
buildings shall not exceed 1-1/2 stories in height or 22 feet in height.



   (K)   State licensed residential facility. State licensed
residential facilities are allowed in all residential districts pursuant to
Minnesota State Statutes, as amended from time to time. The regulation of
residential occupancies contained in this section shall not apply to a state
licensed residential facility.



(1975 Code, § 11.08)  (Am. Ord. 214, passed 4-15-2002; Am. Ord. 8, 4th
Series, passed 1-16-2007; Am. Ord. 21, 4th Series, passed 1-20-2009 ; Am.
Ord. 105, 4th Series, passed 8-20-2018)



§ 156.038  R1-S, ONE-FAMILY DWELLING, SMALL LOT DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended to establish an area of
single-family residential development on smaller lots.



   (B)   Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses:



      (1)   Single family detached dwellings.



      (2)   Fences.



      (3)   Non-commercial gardening.



      (4)   Landscaping.



      (5)   Driveways.



      (6)   Churches, provided that no building shall be located
within 50 feet of any abutting lot line in any of the classes of residential
districts.



      (7)   Public buildings and uses of the following kind:
elementary and secondary schools, parks, playgrounds, libraries, museums,
community centers and recreation centers, or private schools having a
curriculum equivalent to a public elementary school or public high school.



      (8)   Home occupations. See § 156.035(BB).



   (C)   Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted:



      (1)   Cemetery.



      (2)   Government, public utility and public service uses.



   (D)   Accessory uses. The following are permitted uses:



      (1)   Private garage.



      (2)    In-ground private swimming pool serving a single-family
residence when completely enclosed with a fence at least 6 feet in height or
an automatic pool cover installed over the entire pool surface which meets
ASTM F 1346 standards.



      (3)   Above-ground swimming pool.



      (4)   Driveways.



      (5)   Off-street parking.



      (6)   Utility buildings.



      (7)   Solar energy systems.



      (8)   Satellite reception equipment.



   (E)   Lot area (detached). Every single family detached dwelling
erected shall require a lot area of not less than 6,000 square feet.



   (F)   Lot width and depth.



      (1)   Lot width (detached). Every lot or plot upon which there
is erected a single- family detached dwelling shall require a minimum width
of 60 feet at the building setback line.



      (2)   Lot depth. Every lot or plot upon which there is erected
a single family dwelling shall require a minimum depth of not less than 100
feet.



   (G)   Yard regulations.



      (1)   Front yard. For all uses allowed there shall be a front
yard of not less than 30 feet. Where a lot is located at the intersection of
2 or more streets there shall be 1 front yard of not less than 30 feet and 1
front yard of not less than 15 feet.



      (2)   Side yard. For all uses allowed there shall be a side
yard of not less than 6 feet.



      (3)   Rear yard. For all uses allowed there shall be a rear
yard of not less than 25 feet.



      (4)   Transitional yards. There are no requirements.



   (H)   Ground coverage. Not more than 40% of a lot or plot shall be
covered by all main and accessory buildings.



   (I)   Height regulations. No structure hereafter erected or altered
shall exceed 2-1/2 stories or 30 feet in height. Accessory uses shall not
exceed 1-1/2 stories or 22 feet in height.



   (J)   Variances. No variances to reduce minimum building setbacks or
minimum lot sizes shall be granted in the R-1S, One-Family Dwelling-Small Lot
District.



(Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 8, 4th Series , passed 1-16-2007; Am. Ord. 83,
4th Series, passed 12-5-2016 ; Am. Ord. 105, 4th Series, passed 8-20-2018)



§ 156.039  R-2, ONE AND TWO FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended to establish an area low
density residential development allowing one- and two-family dwellings.



   (B)   Special requirements.



      (1)   Conversion of any use to other than a permitted or
approved conditional use is prohibited.



      (2)   All two-family dwellings which share a common vertical
wall and whose lot size and front footage render them capable of being
converted to a twin home shall conform to the twin home building code
requirements.



   (C)   Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses:



      (1)   Single family detached dwellings.



      (2)   Two family dwellings.



      (3)   Fences.



      (4)   Non-commercial gardening.



      (5)   Landscaping.



      (6)   Driveways.



      (7)   Churches, provided that no building shall be located
within 50 feet of any abutting lot line in any of the classes of residential
districts.



      (8)   Public buildings and uses of the following kind:
elementary and secondary schools, parks, playgrounds, libraries, museums,
community centers and recreation centers, or private schools having a
curriculum equivalent to a public elementary school or public high school.



      (9)    Home occupations.  See § 156.035(BB).



   (D)   Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted:



      (1)   Cemetery



      (2)   Government, public utility and public service uses.



   (E)   Accessory uses. The following are permitted uses:



      (1)   Private garage.



      (2)    In-ground private swimming pool serving a single-family
residence when completely enclosed with a fence at least 6 feet in height or
an automatic pool cover installed over the entire pool surface which meets
ASTM F 1346 standards.



      (3)   Aboveground swimming pool.



      (4)   Driveways.



      (5)   Off-street parking.



      (6)   Utility buildings.



      (7)   Solar energy systems.



      (8)   Satellite reception equipment.



      (9)   Accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the same
lot as the principal use as regulated by this chapter.



   (F)   Lot area.



      (1)   Lot area (detached). Every single family detached
dwelling erected shall require a lot area of not less than 7,500 square feet.



      (2)   Lot area (attached).  Every single family attached
dwelling erected shall require a lot area of not less than 10,500 square feet.



      (3)   Lot area (two-family/duplex). Every two family dwelling
erected shall require a lot area of not less than 8,750 square feet.



      (4)   Planned unit developments shall require at least 10
acres.



   (G)   Lot width and depth.



      (1)   Lot width (detached). Every lot upon which there is
erected a single family detached dwelling shall require a minimum width of 75
feet at the building setback line.



      (2)   Lot width (attached). Every lot upon which there is
erected a single family attached dwelling consisting of two dwelling units
shall require a minimum width of 80 feet at the building setback line; each
additional dwelling unit attached thereafter shall require a minimum
additional width of 18 feet per unit at the building setback line.



      (3)   Lot width (two family). Every lot upon which there is
erected a two family dwelling shall require a minimum width of 80 feet at the
building setback line.



      (4)   Lot depth. Every lot or plot upon which there is erected
a single family dwelling, whether attached or detached, a two family
dwelling, or a multiple family dwelling shall require a minimum depth of not
less than 100 feet.



   (H)   Yard regulations.



      (1)   Front yard. For all uses allowed there shall be a front
yard of not less than 30 feet. Where a lot is located at the intersection of
two or more streets there shall be a front yard on each street side.



      (2)   Side yard. For all uses allowed there shall be a side
yard of not less than 10 feet.



      (3)   Rear yard. For all uses allowed there shall be a rear
yard of not less than 25 feet.



      (4)   Transitional yards. There are no requirements.



   (I)   Ground coverage. Not more than 40% of a lot or plot shall be
covered by all main and accessory buildings.



   (J)   Height regulations. No structure hereafter erected or altered
shall exceed two and one-half stories or  30 feet in height. Accessory uses
shall not exceed 1-1/2 stories in height or 22 feet.



   (K)   Zero lot line dwellings.



      (1)   Twin homes shall be subject to the following regulations:



         (a)   The required lot area for each dwelling in a twin
home shall be at a minimum one-half of the  minimum lot area for 2 single
family attached dwellings in the relevant zoning district;



         (b)   Every lot or plot upon which there is erected a
dwelling as part of a twin home shall have a minimum width of 40 feet at the
building setback line and a minimum depth of 100 feet;



         (c)   Each dwelling in a twin home shall have a front
yard of not less than 30 feet, a rear yard of not less than 25 feet, and a
side yard of not less than 10 feet. Where a dwelling is located on a lot
which is on the intersection of 2 or more streets, there shall be a yard of
not less than 30 feet on each street side and a yard of not less than 25 feet
on the remaining side;



         (d)   Dwellings in a twin home shall be governed by the
height and ground coverage regulations for single family attached dwellings
in the relevant zoning district.



      (2)   All other zero lot line dwellings shall be subject to
the following regulations:



         (a)   Zero lot line dwellings may be erected in such a
manner that 2 single family dwellings share a common wall located on the
common rear lot line;



         (b)   The zero lot line dwellings described in
subsection (1) shall be permitted uses within R-2, R-3 and R-4 zoning
districts. The zoning standards shall be proportionate to the minimum
standards for single family attached dwellings in the relevant zoning
district.



      (3)   Deed restrictions shall be recorded with the property
requiring that the structure and yard areas shall  have a uniform exterior
appearance in terms of color, design and maintenance. These restrictions
shall be in the form of a homeowners association or a homeowners agreement.



(1975 Code, § 11.09)  (Am. Ord. 29-82, passed 12-6-1982; Am. Ord. 54,
passed 12-17-1984; Am. Ord. 239, passed 5-17-2004; Am. Ord. 8, 4th Series ,
passed 1-16-2007 ; Am. Ord. 105, 4th Series, passed 8-20-2018)



§ 156.040  R-3, LIMITED MULTIPLE DWELLING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended to establish an area of
limited high density residential uses.



   (B)   Special requirements.



      (1)   Conversion of any use to other than a permitted or
approved conditional use is prohibited. Single family attached dwellings
permitted shall not exceed 8 dwelling units per structure. Apartments,
apartment buildings, and multiple family dwellings permitted shall not exceed
12 dwelling units per structure.



      (2)   All two-family dwellings which share a common vertical
wall and whose lot size and front footage render them capable of being
converted to a twin home shall conform to the twin home building code
requirements.



   (C)   Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses:



      (1)   Single family detached dwellings.



      (2)   Two family dwellings.



      (3)   Fences.



      (4)   Non-commercial gardening.



      (5)   Landscaping.



      (6)   Driveways.



      (7)   Churches, provided that no building shall be located
within 50 feet of any abutting lot line in any of the classes of residential
districts.



      (8)   Public buildings and uses of the following kind:
elementary and secondary schools, parks, playgrounds, libraries, museums,
community centers and recreation centers, or private schools having a
curriculum equivalent to a public elementary school or public high school.



      (9)   Home occupations. See § 156.035(BB).



      (10)   Apartments or apartment buildings.



      (11)   Multiple family dwellings.



   (D)   Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted:



      (1)   Cemetery.



      (2)   Government, public utility and public service uses.



      (3)   Mobile home or trailer park pursuant to the provisions
of the City Code.



   (E)   Accessory uses. The following are permitted uses:



      (1)   Private garage.



      (2)    In-ground private swimming pool serving a single-family
residence when completely enclosed with a fence at least 6 feet in height or
an automatic pool cover installed over the entire pool surface which meets
ASTM F 1346 standards.



      (3)   Aboveground swimming pool.



      (4)   Driveways.



      (5)   Off-street parking.



      (6)   Utility buildings.



      (7)   Solar energy systems.



      (8)   Satellite reception equipment.



      (9)   Accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the same
lot as the principal use as regulated by this chapter.



       (10)   In-ground swimming pool serving a multi-family
dwelling(s) when completely enclosed with a fence of at least 6 feet in
height.



   (F)   Lot area.



      (1)   Lot area (detached). Every single family detached
dwelling erected shall require a lot area of not less than 6,500 square feet.



      (2)   Lot area (attached). Every single family attached
dwelling erected shall require a lot area of not less than 9,000 square feet
for the first two dwelling units erected, plus 3,000 square feet for each
additional unit attached.



      (3)   Lot area (two family). Every two family dwelling erected
shall require a lot area of not less than 8,800 square feet.



      (4)   Lot area (multiple). Every multiple family dwelling
erected shall require a lot area of not less than 11,000 square feet for the
first 3 dwelling units erected plus 1,500 square feet for each additional
unit attached.



   (G)   Lot width and depth.



      (1)   Lot width (detached). Every lot upon which there is
erected a single family detached dwelling shall require a minimum width of 65
feet at the building setback line.



      (2)   Lot width (attached). Every lot upon which there is
erected a single family attached dwelling consisting of two dwelling units
shall require a minimum width of 80 feet at the building setback line; each
additional dwelling unit attached thereafter shall require a minimum
additional width of 16 feet per unit at the building setback line.



      (3)   Lot width (two family/duplex). Every lot upon which
there is erected a two family dwelling shall require a minimum width of 80
feet at the building setback line.



      (4)   Lot width (multiple). Every lot upon which there is
erected a multiple family dwelling shall require a minimum width of 100 feet
at the building setback line.



      (5)   Lot depth. Every lot upon which there is erected a
single family dwelling, whether attached or detached, a two family dwelling;
or a multiple family dwelling shall require a minimum depth of not less than
100 feet.



   (H)   Yard regulations.



      (1)   Front yard. For all uses allowed there shall be a front
yard of not less than 30 feet. Where a lot is located at the intersection of
two or more streets there shall be a front yard on each street side.



      (2)   Side yard. For all uses allowed there shall be a side
yard, on each side of the building, each not less than 10 feet in width, plus
1 additional foot for each side yard required for each 1 foot or fraction
thereof of building height in excess of 30 feet.



      (3)   Rear yard. For all uses allowed there shall be a rear
yard of not less than 25 feet.



      (4)   Transitional yards. There are no requirements.



   (I)   Ground coverage. Not more than 50% of a lot or plot shall be
covered by all main and accessory buildings.



   (J)   Height regulations. No structure hereafter erected or altered
shall exceed 3 stories or 45 feet in height. Accessory buildings shall not
exceed 1-1/2 stories in height or 22 feet in height.



(1975 Code, § 11.10)  (Am. Ord. 23, passed 8-16-1982; Am. Ord. 24, passed
10-18-1982; Am. Ord. 54, passed 12-17-1984; Am. Ord. 8, 4th Series, passed
1-16-2007; Am. Ord. 53, 4th Series, passed 1-21-2014 ; Am. Ord. 105, 4th
Series, passed 8-20-2018)



§ 156.0401  R-3A, MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended to establish an area for
medium density residential uses. Such areas are intended for the development
of single-family attached and detached dwellings and medium density
residential dwellings such as duplexes, townhomes and smaller apartment
buildings.



   (B)   Special requirements.



      (1)   The density of residential development upon any lot in
an R-3A zone shall not exceed 6 dwelling units per acre.



      (2)   Conversion of any use to other than a permitted or
approved conditional use is prohibited. Single family attached dwellings
permitted shall not exceed 4 dwelling units per structure. Apartments,
apartment buildings, and multiple dwellings shall not exceed 4 dwelling units
per structure.



      (3)   All two-family dwellings which share a common vertical
wall and whose lot size and front footage render them capable of being
converted to a twin home shall conform to the Twin Home Building Code
requirements.



   (C)   Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses:



      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings.



      (2)   Two-family dwellings.



      (3)   Fences.



      (4)   Non-commercial gardening.



      (5)   Landscaping.



      (6)   Driveways.



      (7)   Churches, provided that no building shall be located
within 50 feet of any abutting lot line in any of the classes of residential
districts.



      (8)   Public buildings and uses of the following kind:
elementary and secondary schools, parks, playgrounds, libraries, museums,
community centers and recreation centers, or private schools having a
curriculum equivalent to a public elementary school or public high school.



      (9)   Home occupations. See § 156.035(BB).



      (10)   Apartments or apartment buildings not to exceed 4
dwelling units per structure.



      (11)   Multiple family dwellings not to exceed 4 dwelling
units per structure.



   (D)   Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted:



      (1)   Cemetery.



      (2)   Government, public utility and public service uses.



   (E)   Accessory uses. The following are permitted uses:



      (1)   Private garage.



      (2)    In-ground private swimming pool serving a single-family
residence when completely enclosed with a fence at least 6 feet in height or
an automatic pool cover installed over the entire pool surface which meets
ASTM F 1346 standards.



      (3)   Above-ground swimming pool.



      (4)   Driveways.



      (5)   Off-street parking.



      (6)   Utility buildings.



      (7)   Solar energy systems.



      (8)   Satellite reception equipment.



       (9)   Accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the
same lot as the principal use as regulated by this chapter.



      (10)   In-ground swimming pool serving a multi-family
dwelling(s) when completely enclosed with a fence of at least 6 feet in
height.



   (F)   Lot area.



      (1)   Lot area (detached). Every single family detached
dwelling erected shall require a lot area of not less than 6,500 square feet.



      (2)   Lot area (attached). Every single-family attached
dwelling erected shall require a lot area of not less than 9,000 square feet
for the first 2 dwelling units erected, plus 3,000 square feet for each
additional unit attached.



      (3)   Lot area (two-family). Every two-family dwelling erected
shall require a lot area of not less than 8,800 square feet.



      (4)   Lot area (multiple). Every multiple family dwelling
erected shall require a lot area of not less than 11,000 square feet for the
first 3 dwelling units erected plus 1,500 square feet for each additional
unit attached.



   (G)   Lot width and depth.



      (1)   Lot width (detached). Every lot upon which there is
erected a single-family detached dwelling shall require a minimum width of 65
feet at the building setback line.



      (2)   Lot width (attached). Every lot upon which there is
erected a single-family attached dwelling consisting of 2 dwelling units
shall require a minimum width of 80 feet at the building setback line; each
additional dwelling unit attached thereafter shall require a minimum
additional width of 16 feet per unit at the building setback line.



      (3)   Lot width (two family/duplex). Every lot upon which
there is erected a two family dwelling shall require a minimum width of 80
feet at the building setback line.



      (4)   Lot width (multiple). Every lot upon which there is
erected a multiple family dwelling shall require a minimum width of 100 feet
at the building setback line.



      (5)   Lot depth. Every lot upon which there is erected a
single-family dwelling, whether attached or detached, a two-family dwelling;
or a multiple family dwelling shall require a minimum depth of not less than
100 feet.



   (H)   Yard regulations.



      (1)   Front yard. For all uses allowed there shall be a front
yard of not less than 30 feet. Where a lot is located at the intersection of
2 or more streets there shall be a front yard on each street side.



      (2)   Side yard. For all uses allowed there shall be a side
yard, on each side of the building, each not less than 10 feet in width, plus
1 additional foot for each side yard required for each 1 foot or fraction
thereof of building height in excess of 30 feet.



      (3)   Rear yard. For all uses allowed there shall be a rear
yard of not less than 25 feet.



      (4)   Transitional yards. There are no requirements.



   (I)   Ground coverage. Not more than 50% of a lot or plot shall be
covered by all main and accessory buildings.



   (J)   Height regulations. No structure hereafter erected or altered
shall exceed 3 stories or 30 feet in height. Accessory buildings shall not
exceed 1-1/2 stories in height or 22 feet in height.



(Ord. 64, 4th Series, passed 2-17-2015 ; Am. Ord. 105, 4th Series, passed
8-20-2018)



§ 156.041  R-4, MULTIPLE DWELLING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended to establish a residential
area of high density.



   (B)   Special requirements.



      (1)   Conversion of any use to other than a permitted or
approved conditional use is prohibited.



      (2)   All two family dwellings which share a common vertical
wall and whose lot size and front footage render them capable of being
converted to a twin home shall conform to the twin home building code
requirements.



   (C)   Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses:



      (1)   Single family detached dwellings.



      (2)   Two family dwellings.



      (3)   Apartment buildings in excess of 12 units per building.



      (4)   Multi-family dwellings in excess of 8 units per building.



      (5)   Fences.



      (6)   Non-commercial gardening.



      (7)   Landscaping.



      (8)   Driveways.



      (9)   Churches, provided that no building shall be located
within 50 feet of any abutting lot line in any of the classes of residential
districts.



      (10)   Public buildings and uses of the following kind:
elementary and secondary schools, parks, playgrounds, libraries, museums,
community centers and recreation centers, or private schools having a
curriculum equivalent to a public elementary school or public high school.



      (11)   Home occupations. See § 156.035(BB).



       (12)   In-ground swimming pool serving a multi-family
dwelling(s) when completely enclosed with a fence of at least 6 feet in
height.



   (D)   Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted:



      (1)   Bed and breakfast.



      (2)   Cemetery.



      (3)   Government, public utility and public service uses.



      (4)   Hotels, motels and apartment hotels in which no business
shall be conducted except as a service for guests thereof accessible to
customers from inside the building.



   (E)   Accessory uses. The following are permitted uses:



      (1)   Private garage.



      (2)    In-ground private swimming pool serving a single-family
residence when completely enclosed with a fence at least 6 feet in height or
an automatic pool cover installed over the entire pool surface which meets
ASTM F 1346 standards.



      (3)   Aboveground swimming pool.



      (4)   Driveways.



      (5)   Off-street parking.



      (6)   Utility buildings.



      (7)   Solar energy systems.



      (8)   Satellite reception equipment.



   (F)   Lot area.



      (1)   Lot area (detached). Every single family detached
dwelling erected shall require a lot area of not less than 6,000 square feet.



      (2)   Lot area (attached). Every single family attached
dwelling erected shall require a lot area of not less than 9,000 square feet
for the first two dwelling units erected plus 3,000 square feet for each
additional unit attached.



      (3)   Lot area (two family). Every two family dwelling erected
shall require a lot area of not less than 8,800 square feet.



      (4)   Lot area (multiple). Every multiple family dwelling
erected shall require a lot area of not less than 11,000 square feet for the
first 3 dwelling units erected plus 500 square feet for each additional unit
attached.



   (G)   Lot width and depth.



      (1)   Lot width (detached). Every lot upon which there is
erected a single family detached dwelling shall require a minimum width of 60
feet at the building setback line.



      (2)   Lot width (attached). Every lot upon which there is
erected a single family attached dwelling consisting of 2 dwelling units
shall require a minimum width of 80 feet at the building setback line; each
additional dwelling unit attached thereafter shall require a minimum
additional width of 16 feet per unit at the building setback line.



      (3)   Lot width (two family). Every lot or plot upon which
there is erected a two family dwelling shall require a minimum width of 80
feet at the building setback line.



      (4)   Lot width (multiple). Every lot or plot upon which there
is erected a multiple family dwelling shall require a minimum width of 110
feet at the building setback line.



      (5)   Lot depth. Every lot or plot upon which there is erected
a single family dwelling, whether attached or detached, a two family
dwelling, or a multiple family dwelling shall require a minimum depth of not
less than 100 feet.



   (H)   Yard regulations.



      (1)   Front yard. For all uses allowed there shall be a front
yard of not less than 30 feet. Where a lot is located at the intersection of
two or more streets there shall be a front yard on each street side of each
corner lot.



      (2)   Side yard. For all uses allowed there shall be a side
yard, on each side of the building, each not less than 10 feet in width, plus
1 additional foot for each side yard required for each 1 foot or fraction
thereof of building height in excess of 45 feet.



      (3)   Rear yard. For all uses allowed there shall be a rear
yard of not less than 25 feet.



      (4)   Transitional yards. There are no requirements.



   (I)   Ground coverage. Not more than 60% of a lot shall be covered
by all main and accessory buildings.



   (J)   Height regulations. No structure hereafter erected or altered
shall exceed 3 stories or 45 feet in height, except as may be permitted in
division (D)(4) of this section, as regulated by this chapter. Accessory uses
shall not exceed 1-1/2 stories or 22 feet in height.



(1975 Code, § 11.11)  (Am. Ord. 54, passed 12-17-1984; Am. Ord. 8, 4th
Series, passed 1-16-2007; Am. Ord.53, 4th Series, passed 1-21-2014; Am. Ord.
105, 4th Series, passed 8-20-2018)



§ 156.042  B-1, NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The Neighborhood Business District is intended to
establish an area for the convenience of  persons residing in adjacent
residential areas and to permit such uses as are necessary to satisfy basic
needs by encouraging an optimum mix of office, institutional, and retail in
proximity to places of residence.



   (B)   Special requirements.



      (1)   Business establishments are restricted to a maximum
floor area of 5,000 square feet each so as to limit the volume of vehicular
and pedestrian traffic in and around their function and location. Business
establishments are restricted to a minimum floor area of 800 square feet. All
business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing
directly with consumers.



      (2)   Every use, unless expressly exempted by this subdivision
shall be operated in its entirety within a completely enclosed structure, the
exemption of a use from the requirement of enclosure will be indicated by the
phrase "need not be enclosed" appearing after any use exempted.



      (3)   Every use shall be connected to municipal utilities and
be constructed on a permanent foundation.



      (4)   Only one business permitted per lot except when located
within the same structure.



   (C)   Permitted uses.



      (1)    The following are permitted uses:



         (a)   Antique store.



         (b)   Apparel store.



         (c)   Appliance store.



         (d)   Art gallery, studio, school or supply store.



         (e)   Bakeries, retail.



         (f)   Banks, savings and loans or finance companies.



         (g)   Barber and beauty shops.



         (h)   Book store.



         (i)   Business machine store.



         (j)   Camera and photographic studio and supply.



         (k)   Candy, ice cream, confectionary store.



         (l)   Caterer.



         (m)   Cemetery, memorial garden, need not be enclosed.



         (n)   Churches.



         (o)   Clinic, dental or medical, but not animal clinic.



         (p)   Club or lodge.



         (q)   Community centers, parks or public buildings.



         (r)   Convent, monastery or similar institution for
religious training.



         (s)   Dairy store.



         (t)   Day cares.



         (u)   Delicatessen.



         (v)   Driveways.



         (w)   Drug store.



         (x)   Dry cleaning.



         (y)   Essential public utility and service structures.



         (z)   Fences.



         (aa)   Floral and garden supply including nursery, need
not be enclosed.



         (bb)   Gift, novelty or souvenir store.



         (cc)   Grocery store.



         (dd)   Hardware store.



         (ee)   Hobby store.



         (ff)   Institution of religious, charitable or
philanthropic nature.



         (gg)   Interior decorating store and supply.



         (hh)   Laboratory, medical or dental.



         (ii)   Laundromat.



         (jj)   Leather goods store - retail only.



         (kk)   Libraries, auditoriums, museums, or other
cultural institutions.



         (ll)   Locksmith or key stand, need not be enclosed.



         (mm)   Medical intern or resident doctor's quarters.



         (nn)   Office of any type.



         (oo)   Optical services and supply.



         (pp)   Parking of vehicles, need not be enclosed.



         (qq)   Private recreation facilities; tennis court, golf
club, swimming pool.



         (rr)   Rehabilitation center for handicapped persons.



         (ss)   Restaurants or other eating places including
drive-ins.



         (tt)   School, public or private.



         (uu)   Shoe repair shops.



         (vv)   Sporting goods store.



         (ww)   Stationery store.



         (xx)   Tailor shops.



         (yy)   Toy store.



         (zz)   Travel bureau or ticket agency.



         (aaa)   Variety stores.



      (2)   Every permitted use allowed shall be constructed on a
permanent foundation and be connected to municipal utilities.



      (3)   Only 1 business permitted per lot except when located in
the same structure.



   (D)   Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted:



      (1)   Hotels and motels.



      (2)   Dwelling units located in business establishments above
the ground floor as regulated by this chapter.



      (3)   Home occupations.



      (4)   Public development.



   (E)   Accessory uses. The following is a permitted use:  Storage
structure not to exceed 600 square feet.



   (F)   Lot area.



      (1)   For each permitted or conditional use there shall be
provided not less than 9,000 square feet of lot area except as may be
required with respect to dwelling units located in business establishments
above the ground floor.



      (2)   For each dwelling unit located in business
establishments above the ground floor there shall be provided 1,000 square
feet of lot area in addition to that amount required for the business
establishment.



   (G)   Lot width and depth.



      (1)   Lot width. Every lot upon which there is a permitted or
conditional use shall require a minimum width of 75 feet at the building
setback line.



      (2)   Lot depth. Every lot upon which there is a permitted or
conditional use shall require a minimum depth of 120 feet.



   (H)   Yard regulations. The minimum yard regulations are as follows:



 



Front Yard:
 
 


Main and Accessory Buildings
 
15 feet


Parking Areas
 
10 feet


Side Yards:
 
 


Main and Accessory Buildings
 
10 feet


Parking Areas
 
10 feet


Rear Yard:
 
 


Main and Accessory Buildings
 
15 feet


Parking Areas
 
10 feet




 



      (1)   Where a lot is located at the intersection of 2 or more
streets there shall be a front yard on each street side.



      (2)   Transitional yards. There are no requirements.



   (I)   Ground coverage. Not more than 60% of a lot shall be covered
by all main and accessory buildings.



   (J)   Height regulations. No structure hereafter erected or altered
shall exceed three stories or 45 feet in height, except as may be permitted
in subsection (D)(1) of this section, as regulated by this chapter. Accessory
buildings shall not exceed one story in height.



(1975 Code, § 11.12)  (Am. Ord. 8, 4th Series, passed 1-16-2007; Am. Ord.
17, 4th Series, passed 1-17-2008; Am. Ord. 30, 4th Series, passed 1-4-2010;
Am. Ord. 79, 4th Series, passed 8-1-2016)



§ 156.043  B-2, COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The Community Business District is intended to
establish a shopping district for the convenience of persons residing in
nearby residential areas and, thereby, provides a broad range of services and
goods for both daily and occasional shopping and service needs in a
contiguous location.



   (B)   Special requirements.  Every use, unless expressly exempted
by this subdivision, shall be operated in its entirety within a completely
enclosed complex of structures; the exemption of a use from the requirement
of enclosure will be indicated by the phrase "need not be enclosed" appearing
after any use exempted.



   (C)   Permitted uses.



      (1)    The following are permitted uses:



         (a)   Antique store.



         (b)   Apparel store.



         (c)   Appliance store.



         (d)   Art gallery, studio, school or supply store.



         (e)   Bakeries, retail.



         (f)   Banks, savings and loans or finance companies.



         (g)   Barber and beauty shops.



         (h)   Book store.



         (i)   Bowling alley.



         (j)   Business machine store.



         (k)   Business, trade or commercial school.



         (l)   Camera and photographic studio and supply.



         (m)   Candy, ice cream, confectionary store.



         (n)   Caterer.



         (o)   Cemetery, memorial garden, need not be enclosed.



         (p)   Churches.



         (q)   Clinic, dental or medical, but not animal clinic.



         (r)   Club or lodge.



         (s)   Community centers, parks or public buildings.



         (t)   Convent, monastery or similar institution for
religious training.



         (u)   Dairy store.



         (v)   Day cares.



         (w)   Delicatessen.



         (x)   Driveways.



         (y)   Drug store.



         (z)   Dry cleaning.



         (aa)   Essential public utility and service structures.



         (bb)   Fences.



         (cc)   Floral and garden supply including nursery, need
not be enclosed.



         (dd)   Gift, novelty or souvenir store.



         (ee)   Grocery store.



         (ff)   Hardware store.



         (gg)   Hobby store.



         (hh)   Hotels and motels.



         (ii)   Institution of religious, charitable or
philanthropic nature.



         (jj)   Interior decorating store and supply.



         (kk)   Laundromat.



         (ll)   Laboratory, medical or dental.



         (mm)   Libraries, auditoriums, museums, or other
cultural institutions.



         (nn)   Leather goods store – retail only.



         (oo)   Locksmith or key stand, need not be enclosed.



         (pp)   Medical intern or resident doctor's quarters.



         (qq)   Mortuary, funeral home.



         (rr)   Office condominium.



         (ss)   Office of any type.



         (tt)   Optical services and supply.



         (uu)   Parking of vehicles, need not be enclosed.



         (vv)   Private recreation facilities; tennis court, golf
club, swimming pool.



         (ww)   Rehabilitation center for handicapped persons.



         (xx)   Restaurants and other eating places, excluding
drive-ins.



         (yy)   Restaurants or other eating places including
drive-ins.



         (zz)   School, public or private.



         (aaa)   Shoe repair shops.



         (bbb)   Sporting goods store.



         (ccc)   Stationery store.



         (ddd)   Tailor shops.



         (eee)   Theaters, excluding drive-in type service.



         (fff)   Toy store.



         (ggg)   Travel bureau or ticket agency.



         (hhh)   Variety stores.



      (2)   Every permitted use allowed shall be constructed on a
permanent foundation and be connected to municipal utilities.



      (3)   Only 1 business permitted per lot except when located in
the same structure.



   (D)   Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted pursuant
to division (B) of this section.



      (1)   Auto service.



      (2)   Automobile wash.



      (3)   Bar and cocktail lounges or similar uses offering
alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises.



      (4)   Public uses.



   (E)   Accessory uses. The following is a permitted use:  Storage
structure not to exceed 600 square feet.



   (F)   Lot area. All permitted or conditional uses shall require a
lot area of at least 15,000 square feet.



   (G)   Lot width and depth. Minimum lot width of 100 feet and a
minimum lot depth of 150 feet.



   (H)   Yard regulations.



      (1)   The minimum yard regulations are as follows:



 



Front Yard:
 
 


Main and Accessory Buildings
 
15 feet


Parking Areas
 
10 feet


Side Yards:
 
 


Main and Accessory Buildings
 
10 feet


Parking Areas
 
10 feet


Rear yard:
 
 


Main and Accessory Buildings
 
15 feet


Parking Areas
 
10 feet




 



      (2)   Where a lot is located at the intersection of 2 or more
streets there shall be a front yard on each side street.



   (I)   Ground coverage. Maximum ground coverage allowed shall be 65%
of a lot.



   (J)   Height regulations. No structure hereafter erected or altered
shall exceed 3 stories or 45 feet in height.  Accessory buildings shall not
exceed 1 story in height.



(1975 Code, § 11.13) (Am. Ord. 8, 4th Series, passed 1-16-2007; Am. Ord. 17,
4th Series, passed 1-17-2008; Am. Ord. 30, 4th Series, passed 1-4-2010; Am.
Ord. 79, 4th Series, passed 8-1-2016)



§ 156.044  B-3, GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  The General Commercial District is intended to
establish a district of providing the broadest range of retail, wholesale,
service, and commercial activities.



   (B)   Special requirements. Every use, unless expressly exempted by
this division, shall be operated in its entirety within a completely enclosed
structure; the exemption of a use from the requirement of enclosure will be
indicated by the phrase "need not be enclosed" appearing after any use
exempted.



   (C)   Permitted uses.



      (1)    The following are permitted uses:



         (a)   Antique store.



         (b)   Apparel store.



         (c)   Appliance store.



         (d)   Art gallery, studio, school or supply store.



         (e)   Bakeries, retail.



         (f)   Banks, savings and loans or finance companies.



         (g)   Barber and beauty shops.



         (h)   Bars, taverns and cocktail lounges licensed to
sell soft drinks, beer malt, or alcoholic beverages on sale, off sale or both.



         (i)   Book store.



         (j)   Bowling alley.



         (k)   Business machine store.



         (l)   Business, trade or commercial school.



         (m)   Camera and photographic studio and supply.



         (n)   Candy, ice cream, confectionary store.



         (o)   Car sales lots, need not be enclosed.



         (p)   Catalog service and mail order house.



         (q)   Caterer.



         (r)   Cemetery, memorial garden, need not be enclosed.



         (s)   Churches.



         (t)   Clinic, dental or medical, but not animal clinic.



         (u)   Club or lodge.



         (v)   Community centers, parks or public buildings.



         (w)   Convent, monastery or similar institution for
religious training.



         (x)   Conventions, or meeting facility.



         (y)   Dairy store.



         (z)   Dance studio.



         (aa)   Day cares.



         (bb)   Delicatessen.



         (cc)   Driveways.



         (dd)   Drug store.



         (ee)   Essential public utility and service structures.



         (ff)   Fences.



         (gg)   Floral and garden supply including nursery, need
not be enclosed.



         (hh)   Gift, novelty or souvenir store.



         (ii)   Grocery store.



         (jj)   Hardware store.



         (kk)   Hobby store.



         (ll)   Hotels and motels.



         (mm)   Institution of religious, charitable or
philanthropic nature.



         (nn)   Interior decorating store and supply.



         (oo)   Janitorial services.



         (pp)   Laboratory, medical or dental.



         (qq)   Laundry or dry-cleaning.



         (rr)   Leather goods store - retail only.



         (ss)   Libraries, auditoriums, museums, or other
cultural institutions.



         (tt)   Locksmith or key stand, need not be enclosed.



         (uu)   Medical appliance sales and fittings.



         (vv)   Medical intern or resident doctor's quarters.



         (ww)   Mortuary, funeral home.



         (xx)   Motorcycle shop.



         (yy)   Office condominium.



         (zz)   Office of any type.



         (aaa)   Optical services and supply.



         (bbb)   Parking of vehicles, need not be enclosed.



         (ccc)   Pet store, including animal clinic.



         (ddd)   Private recreation facilities; tennis court,
golf club, swimming pool.



         (eee)   Public and private utilities.



         (fff)   Rehabilitation center for handicapped persons.



         (ggg)   Restaurants or other eating places including
drive-ins.



         (hhh)   School, public or private.



         (iii)   Shoe repair shops.



         (jjj)   Sporting goods store.



         (kkk)   Stationery store.



         (lll)   Tailor shops.



         (mmm)   Theater.



         (nnn)   Toy store.



         (ooo)   Travel bureau or ticket agency.



         (ppp)   Variety stores.



      (2)   Every permitted use allowed shall be constructed on a
permanent foundation and be connected to municipal utilities.



      (3)   Only 1 business permitted per lot except when located in
the same structure.



   (D)   Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted:



      (1)   Automobile wash, service or repair;



      (2)   Convenience store;



      (3)   Taxidermist;



      (4)   Home and building supply store;



      (5)   Pawnshop;



      (6)   Dwelling units located in business establishments above
the ground floor as regulated by this section;



      (7)   Landing or take-off area for rotorcraft, not including
maintenance, repair, fueling, or hangar facilities;



   (E)   Accessory uses. The following is a  permitted use:  Storage
building associated with the permitted use.



   (F)   Lot area.



      (1)   For each permitted or conditional use there shall be
provided not less than 15,000 square feet of lot area.



      (2)   For each dwelling unit located in business
establishments above the ground floor there shall be provided 1,000 square
feet of lot area in addition to that amount required for the business
establishment.



   (G)   Lot width and depth.



      (1)   Lot width. Every lot upon which there is a permitted or
conditional use shall require a minimum width of 100 feet at the building
setback line.



      (2)   Lot depth. Every lot or plot upon which there is a
permitted or conditional use shall require a minimum depth of 150 feet.



   (H)   Yard regulations.



      (1)   The minimum yard regulations are as follows:



 



Front Yard:
 
 


Main and Accessory Buildings
 
15 feet


Parking Areas
 
10 feet


Side Yards:
 
 


Main and Accessory Buildings
 
10 feet


Parking Areas
 
10 feet


Rear Yard:
 
 


Main and Accessory Buildings
 
15 feet


Parking Areas
 
10 feet




 



      (2)   Where a lot is located at the intersection of 2 or more
streets there shall be a front yard on each side street.



   (I)   Ground coverage. Not more than 70% of a lot shall be covered
by all main and accessory buildings.



   (J)   Height regulations. No structure hereafter erected or altered
shall exceed 3 stories or 45 feet in height. Accessory buildings shall not
exceed 1 story in height.



(1975 Code, § 11.14) (Am. Ord. 30, passed 2-22-1983; Am. Ord. 8, 4th Series,
passed 1-16-2007; Am. Ord. 17, 4th Series, passed 1-17-2008; Am. Ord. 30, 4th
Series, passed 1-4-2010; Am. Ord. 79, 4th Series, passed 8-1-2016; Am. Ord.
112, 4th Series, passed 1-22-2019)



§ 156.045  CBD, CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The Central Business District is intended to provide
for low- to high-intensity pedestrian-oriented residential, office, retail,
commercial, institutional and mixed-use (commercial/residential) development
that supports the integrity of a downtown neighborhood, and serves the entire
population. While pedestrian orientation is emphasized, the automobile is
also accommodated. The CBD District accommodates the traditional "main
street" character of the historical North Mankato downtown area (200 block of
Belgrade), but also extends west to accommodate a combination of residential,
commercial, and office uses. It includes a traditional residential corridor,
with some houses that are maintained as residences and others that have
converted to non-residential use.



   (B)   Special requirements.  Every use, unless expressly exempted
by this division, shall be operated in its entirety within a completely
enclosed structure; the exception of a use from the requirement of the
enclosure will be indicated by the phrase "need not be enclosed" appearing
after any use exempted.



   (C)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   The following are permitted uses:



         (a)   Antique store.



         (b)   Apparel store.



         (c)   Appliance store.



         (d)   Art gallery, studio, school or supply store.



         (e)   Bakeries, retail.



         (f)   Banks, savings and loans or finance companies.



         (g)   Barber and beauty shops.



         (h)   Bars, taverns, and cocktail lounges licensed to
sell soft drinks, beer malt, or alcoholic beverages on sale, off sale or both.



         (i)   Book store.



         (j)   Bowling alley.



         (k)   Business machine store.



         (l)   Business, trade or commercial school.



         (m)   Camera and photographic studio and supply.



         (n)   Candy, ice cream, confectionary store.



         (o)   (Reserved).



         (p)   Catalog service and mail order house.



         (q)   Caterer.



         (r)   (Reserved).



         (s)   Churches.



         (t)   Clinic, dental or medical, but not animal clinic.



         (u)   Club or lodge.



         (v)   Community centers, parks or public buildings.



         (w)   Convent, monastery or similar institution for
religious training.



         (x)   Conventions, or meeting facility.



         (y)   Dairy store.



         (z)   Dance studio.



         (aa)   Day cares.



         (bb)   Delicatessen.



         (cc)   Drug store.



         (dd)   Dwellings:



            1.   Single-family detached.



            2.   Two-family.



            3.   Apartments or apartment buildings.



            4.   Multiple family dwellings.



         (ee)   Essential public utility and service structures.



         (ff)   Fences.



         (gg)   Floral and garden supply including nursery, need
not be enclosed.



         (hh)   Gift, novelty or souvenir store.



         (ii)   Grocery store.



         (jj)   Hardware store.



         (kk)   Hobby store.



         (ll)   Hotels and motels.



         (mm)   Institution of religious, charitable or
philanthropic nature.



         (nn)   Interior decorating store and supply.



         (oo)   Janitorial services.



         (pp)   Laboratory, medical or dental.



         (qq)   Laundry or dry-cleaning.



         (rr)   Leather goods store - retail only.



         (ss)   Libraries, auditoriums, museums, or other
cultural institutions.



         (tt)   Locksmith or key stand, need not be enclosed.



         (uu)   Medical appliance sales and fittings.



         (vv)   Medical intern or resident doctor's quarters.



         (ww)   Mixed-use buildings and developments.



         (xx)   Mortuary, funeral home.



         (yy)   Office of any type.



         (zz)   Optical services and supply.



         (aaa)   Parking of vehicles, need not be enclosed.



         (bbb)   Pet store, including animal clinic.



         (ccc)   Private recreation facilities; tennis court,
golf club, swimming pool.



         (ddd)   Rehabilitation center for handicapped persons.



         (eee)   Restaurants or other eating places including
drive-ins.



         (fff)   School, public or private.



         (ggg)   Shoe repair shops.



         (hhh)   Sporting goods store.



         (iii)   Stationery store.



         (jjj)   Tailor shops.



         (kkk)   Theater.



         (lll)   Toy store.



      (mmm)   Travel bureau or ticket agency.



         (nnn)   Variety stores.



      (2)   Every permitted use allowed shall be constructed on a
permanent foundation and be connected to municipal utilities.



   (D)   Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted if
granted a conditional use permit under the provisions of § 156.055:



      (1)   Automobile wash, service or repair.



      (2)   Convenience store.



      (3)   Home and building supply store.



      (4)   Taxidermist.



      (5)   Structures exceeding 4 stories or 45 feet in height.



      (6)   Car sales lots, need not be enclosed.



      (7)   Motorcycle sales and service.



   (E)   Accessory uses. The following is a permitted use: Storage
building not to exceed 600 square feet.



   (F)   Lot area. For each permitted or conditional non-residential
use there shall be provided not less than 3,500 square feet of lot area.
Required lot area for permitted residential uses are as follows:



      (1)   Lot area (detached). Every single family detached
dwelling erected shall require a lot area of not less than 6,500 square feet.



      (2)   Lot area (attached). Every attached dwelling erected
shall require a lot area of 3,000 square feet for each unit attached.



      (3)   Lot area (two family). Every two family dwelling erected
shall require a lot area of not less than 8,800 square feet.



      (4)   Lot area (multiple). Every multiple family dwelling
(non-attached) erected shall require a lot area of not less than 850 square
feet for each unit.



   (G)   Lot width and depth. Minimum lot width of 25 feet and minimum
depth of 140 feet.



   (H)   Yard regulations. For all permitted uses in the CBD District,
principal buildings must be located within 10 feet of the front lot line,
unless a front yard is required under the provisions of this section. There
are no other yard requirements except as may be required for conditionally
permitted uses and for all uses as follows:



      (1)   Residential uses:



         (a)   Front yard. For all single family detached, two
family, and attached (townhome) dwellings there shall be a front yard of not
less than 20 feet. For all multiple family dwellings (non-attached) there are
no front, side or rear yard requirements. When a multiple family dwelling is
located adjacent to a single-family residential use, a front yard of not less
than 20 feet shall be provided.



         (b)   Side yard. When any new residential use is located
adjacent to an existing residential use, there shall be a side yard, on that
side of the building adjacent to the existing residential use, of not less
than 5 feet in width, plus 1 additional foot of side yard required for each 1
foot or fraction thereof of building height in excess of 30 feet.



         (c)   Rear yard. When any new residential use is located
adjacent to an existing residential use, there shall be a rear yard of not
less than 20 feet.



      (2)   Non-residential uses:



         (a)   Front yard. For all permitted non-residential or
mixed uses, there shall be a front yard of not less than 20 feet when such a
structure is located across the street from an area zoned to a residential
district classification. When a permitted non-residential or mixed use is
located adjacent to a single-family residential use, a front yard of not less
than 20 feet shall be provided. Off-street parking shall not be located in
that front yard area. Where the lot is located at the intersection of 2 or
more streets there shall be a front yard on each street side.



         (b)   Side yard. When a permitted non-residential or
mixed use is located adjacent to an existing residential use, there shall be
a side yard, on that side of the lot adjacent to the residential use, of not
less than 10 feet in width, plus 1 additional foot of side yard required for
each 1 foot or fraction thereof of building height in excess of 30 feet.



         (c)   Rear yard. None required.



   (I)   Ground coverage. There are no maximum ground coverage
requirements.



   (J)   Height regulations. No structure hereafter erected or altered
shall exceed 4 stories or 45 feet in height, except as may be permitted in
division (D)(5) of this section, as regulated by this chapter.



   (K)   Off-street parking. Uses within the CBD district shall meet
the off-street parking and loading requirements of § 156.053. However,
commercial properties having frontage on the 200 block of Belgrade Avenue are
exempt from off-street parking and loading requirements. For mixed use
buildings within the 200 Block of Belgrade Avenue, 1 off-street parking space
is required per residential dwelling unit provided that mixed use buildings
have a minimum of 100% of the ground floor dedicated to commercial use.



(1975 Code, § 11.15) (Am. Ord. 33, passed 3-21-1983; Am. Ord. 46, passed
6-18-1984; Am. Ord. 8, 4th Series , passed 1-16-2007; Am. Ord. 17, 4th Series
, passed 1-17-2008; Am. Ord. 53, 4th Series , passed 1-21-2014)



§ 156.046  I-1, PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The Planned Industrial District is intended to
establish a district for the purpose of industrial development which
contributes beneficially to the integration of the surrounding residential
business, and industrial uses.



   (B)   Special requirements.



      (1)   Residential uses conditionally permitted shall be
regulated by the standards set forth in § 156.041.



      (2)   Commercial uses conditionally permitted shall be
regulated by the standards set forth in § 156.044.



      (3)   Every use, unless expressly exempted by this division,
shall be operated in its entirety within a completely enclosed structure; the
exemption of a use from the requirement of enclosure will be indicated by the
phrase "need not be enclosed" appearing after any use exempted.



   (C)   Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses:



      (1)   Automobile accessories manufacturer;



      (2)   Cabinet and woodworking establishments;



      (3)   Camera and photographic manufacturing;



      (4)   Cold storage plants;



      (5)   Confectionery and related products, manufacturing and
packaging;



      (6)   Electrical products and appliances, manufacture and
assembly;



      (7)   Footwear manufacture;



      (8)   Jewelry manufacture;



      (9)   Luggage, handbags, and similar items - manufacture and
assembly;



      (10)   Medical and surgical instruments and supplies -
manufacture and assembly;



      (11)   Musical instruments manufacture;



      (12)   Newspaper plants and offices;



      (13)   Office furniture and suppliers - manufacturing;



      (14)   Optical instruments and lenses - manufacture and
assembly;



      (15)   Parking of vehicles - need not be enclosed;



      (16)   Pottery shops - manufacture;



      (17)   Printing, publishing, and allied industries -
manufacturing;



      (18)   Precision instruments - manufacturing;



      (19)   Plumbing fixture and equipment - wholesale;



      (20)    Radio and television - assembly and parts fabrication;



      (21)   Sport equipment - manufacture and assembly;



      (22)   Scientific and research instruments and equipment -
manufacture and assembly;



      (23)   Storage garages and driveways;



      (24)   Telephone apparatus manufacture and assembly;



      (25)   Temperature controls - fabrication and assembly;



      (26)   Tool- manufacture and assembly;



      (27)   Trade schools;



      (28)   Upholstery manufacturing;



      (29)   Warehousing and distribution operations;



   (D)   Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted:



      (1)   Apartment buildings in excess of 12 units per building.
Such residential use must be directly associated with the primary industrial
use.



      (2)   Multi-family dwellings in excess of 8 units per
building. Such residential use must be directly associated with the primary
industrial use.



      (3)   Public buildings and uses of the following kind:



         (a)   Elementary and secondary schools;



         (b)   Parks;



         (c)   Playgrounds;



         (d)   Libraries;



         (e)   Museums;



         (f)   Community centers and recreational centers; or



         (g)   Private schools having a curriculum equivalent to
a public elementary school or public high school.



      (4)   Catalog service and mail order house.



      (5)   Conventions, or meeting facility.



      (6)   Janitorial services.



      (7)   Medical appliance sales and fittings.



      (8)   Public and private utilities.



      (9)   Cellular towers.



      (10)   Public uses.



      (11)   Structures exceeding 3 stories or 45 feet in height.



   (E)   Lot area.  For each permitted or conditional use there shall
be provided not less than 20,000 square feet of zoning lot area.



   (F)   Lot width and depth.



      (1)   Lot width. Every lot on which there is a permitted or
conditional use shall require a minimum width of 100 feet at the building
setback line.



      (2)   Lot depth. Every lot on which there is a permitted or
conditional use shall require a minimum depth of 200 feet.



   (G)   Yard regulations.  The minimum yard regulations are as
follows:



 



Front Yard
 
 


Main and Accessory Buildings
 
40 feet


Parking Areas
 
10 feet


Side Yards
 
 


Main and Accessory Buildings
 
10 feet plus 1 additional foot for each 1 foot or fraction thereof of
building in excess of 45 feet


Parking Areas
 
10 feet


Rear Yard
 
 


Main and Accessory Buildings
 
25 feet


Parking Areas
 
10 feet




 



   (H)   Ground coverage. Not more than 70% of a lot shall be covered
by all main and accessory buildings.



   (I)   Height regulations. No structure hereafter erected or altered
shall exceed three stories or 45 feet in height, except as may be permitted
in subsection (D)(5) of this section, as regulated by this chapter.



(1975 Code, § 11.16) (Am. Ord. 8, 4th Series , passed 1-16-2007)



§ 156.047  M-1, LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The Light Industry District is intended to establish
a district for the purpose of providing an area of limited industrial
development in close proximity to intense residential and commercial
activities.



   (B)   Special requirements.



      (1)   Commercial uses conditionally permitted shall be
regulated by the minimum standards set forth in § 156.044.



      (2)   Every use, unless expressly exempted by this division,
shall be operated in its entirety within a completely enclosed structure; the
exemption of a use from the requirement of enclosure will be indicated by the
phrase "need not be enclosed" appearing after any use exempted.



   (C)   Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses:



      (1)   Adult uses;



      (2)   Automobile accessories manufacturer;



      (3)   Bottling establishments;



      (4)   Building materials yards, contractors yards, lumber
yards - need not be enclosed;



      (5)   Cabinet and woodworking;



      (6)   Camera and photographic manufacturing;



      (7)   Cold storage plants;



      (8)   Confectionery and related products - manufacturing and
packaging;



      (9)   Electrical products and appliances - manufacture and
assembly;



      (10)   Footwear manufacture;



      (11)   Jewelry manufacture;



      (12)   Luggage, handbags and similar items - manufacture and
assembly;



      (13)   Medical and surgical instruments and supplies -
manufacture and assembly;



      (14)   Musical instruments manufacture;



      (15)   Newspaper plants and offices;



      (16)   Office furniture and suppliers - manufacturing;



      (17)   Optical instruments and lenses - manufacture and
assembly;



      (18)   Parking of vehicles - need not be enclosed;



      (19)   Pottery shops - manufacture;



      (20)   Printing, publishing, and allied industries -
manufacturing;



      (21)   Precision instruments - manufacturing;



      (22)   Plumbing fixture and equipment - wholesale;



      (23)   Public garage;



      (24)   Radio and television - assembly and parts fabrication;



      (25)   Sport equipment - manufacture and assembly;



      (26)   Scientific and research instruments and equipment -
manufacture and assembly;



      (27)   Storage garages and driveways;



      (28)   Telephone  apparatus manufacture and assembly;



      (29)   Temperature controls - fabrication and assembly;



      (30)   Tool - manufacture and assembly;



      (31)   Trade schools;



      (32)   Truck garage;



      (33)   Upholstery manufacturing;



      (34)   Warehousing and distribution operations.



   (D)   Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted:



      (1)   Catalog service and mail order house.



      (2)   Conventions, or meeting facility.



      (3)   Janitorial services.



      (4)   Medical appliance sales and fittings.



      (5)   Public and private utilities.



      (6)   Public uses.



      (7)   Structures exceeding 3 stories or 45 feet in height.



      (8)   Cellular towers.



   (E)   Lot area.  For each permitted or conditional use there shall
be provided not less than 22,500 square feet of lot area.



   (F)   Lot width and depth.



      (1)   Lot width. Every lot or plot upon which there is a
permitted or conditional use shall require a minimum width of 125 feet at the
building setback line.



      (2)   Lot depth. Every lot or plot upon which there is a
permitted or conditional use shall require a minimum depth of 180 feet.



   (G)   Yard regulations.  The minimum yard regulations are as
follows:



 



Front Yard
 
 


Main and Accessory Buildings
 
40 feet


Parking Areas
 
10 feet


Side Yards
 
 


Main and Accessory Buildings
 
10 feet plus 1 additional foot for each 1 foot or fraction thereof of
building in excess of 45 feet


Parking Areas
 
10 feet


Rear Yard
 
 


Main and Accessory Buildings
 
25 feet


Parking Areas
 
10 feet




 



   (H)   Ground coverage. There are no requirements.



   (I)   Height regulations. No structure hereafter erected or altered
shall exceed three stories or 45 feet in  height, except as may be permitted
in subsection (D)(3) and (4) of this section.



(1975 Code, § 11.17) (Am. Ord. 8, 4th Series , passed 1-16-2007)



§ 156.048  M-2, HEAVY INDUSTRY DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The Heavy Industry District is intended to establish
a district for the purpose of providing an area for industries where
operations will not conflict with adjacent land uses.



   (B)   Special requirements.



      (1)   Residential dwellings of any kind are prohibited.



      (2)   Where any lot line coincides with any residential,
business or commercial lot line, or where the extension of a front, side or
rear lot line coincides with a lot line of any residential, business, or
commercial lot line, a yard of at least 30 feet shall be provided along such
lot line.



   (C)   Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses:



      (1)   Automobile accessories manufacturer;



      (2)   Bottling establishments;



      (3)   Building materials yards, contractors yards, lumber
yards - need not be enclosed;



      (4)   Cabinet and woodworking;



      (5)   Camera and photographic manufacturing;



      (6)   Cold storage plants;



      (7)   Confectionery and related products - manufacturing and
packaging;



      (8)   Electrical products and appliances - manufacture and
assembly;



      (9)   Footwear manufacture;



      (10)   Jewelry manufacture;



      (11)   Luggage, handbags and similar items - manufacture and
assembly;



      (12)   Medical and surgical instruments and supplies -
manufacture and assembly;



      (13)   Musical instruments manufacture;



      (14)   Newspaper plants and offices;



      (15)   Office furniture and suppliers - manufacturing;



      (16)   Optical instruments and lenses - manufacture and
assembly;



      (17)   Parking of vehicles - need not be enclosed;



      (18)   Pottery shops - manufacture;



      (19)   Printing, publishing, and allied industries -
manufacturing;



      (20)   Precision instruments - manufacturing;



      (21)   Plumbing fixture and equipment - wholesale;



      (22)   Public garage;



      (23)    Radio and television - assembly and parts fabrication;



      (24)   Sport equipment - manufacture and assembly;



      (25)   Scientific and research instruments and equipment -
manufacture and assembly;



      (26)   Storage garages and driveways;



      (27)   Telephone  apparatus manufacture and assembly;



      (28)   Temperature controls - fabrication and assembly;



      (29)   Tool - manufacture and assembly;



      (30)   Trade schools;



      (31)   Truck garage;



      (32)   Upholstery manufacturing;



      (33)   Warehousing and distribution operations;



      (34)   Airports, including hangars;



      (35)   Automobiles, airplane, manufacturing or assembling;



      (36)   Freight terminal;



      (37)   Highway maintenance shops and yards;



      (38)   Manufacturing of food stuffs;



      (39)   Monument works;



      (40)   Plastic extrusion, moulding, and fixture;



   (D)   Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted:



      (1)   Catalog service and mail order house;



      (2)   Conventions, or meeting facility;



      (3)   Janitorial services;



      (4)   Medical appliance sales and fittings;



      (5)   Public and private utilities;



      (6)   Public uses;



      (7)   Cellular towers.



   (E)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses customarily incidental to and
on the same lot as the principal use as regulated by this section are
permitted.



   (F)   Lot area. There are no minimum requirements.



   (G)   Lot width and depth. There are no minimum requirements.



   (H)   Yard regulations.



 



Front Yard
 
 


Main and Accessory Buildings
 
40 feet plus 2 feet setback for every 1 foot of building height exceeding 45
feet (40 foot minimum)


Parking Areas
 
10 feet


Side Yards
 
 


Main and Accessory Buildings
 
10 feet plus 2 feet setback for every 1 foot of building height exceeding 45
feet (10 foot minimum)


Parking Areas
 
10 feet


Rear Yard
 
 


Main and Accessory Buildings
 
25 feet plus 2 feet setback for every 1 foot of building height exceeding 45
feet (25 foot minimum)


Parking Areas
 
10 feet




 



   (I)   Ground coverage. There are no maximum limitations.



   (J)   Height regulations. No structure hereafter erected or altered
shall exceed 10 stories or 100 feet.



(1975 Code, § 11.18) (Am. Ord. 8, 4th Series , passed 1-16-2007)



§ 156.049  TUD, TRANSITIONAL UNZONED DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The Transitional Unzoned District is intended to
establish a district for the purpose of determining the appropriate future
zoning classifications of the parcel in light of the comprehensive
development plan of the city.



   (B)   Applications. The placement of land in a Transitional Unzoned
District may be made by the Council upon recommendation of the Planning
Commission. A property owner may petition for the placement of such land he
owns or controls in a TUD.



   (C)   Removal. The removal of land from a Transitional Unzoned
District may be made by the Council upon recommendation of the Planning
Commission. A property owner may petition the Planning Commission for the
removal of his land from a Transitional Unzoned District.



   (D)   Procedure. Lands placed in a Transitional Unzoned District
shall remain in said district for a minimum of 60 days. Upon expiration of
the 60 days the Council upon recommendation of the Planning Commission
shall  zone such lands if petitioned by the property owner to do so. The
Council may hold land in a Transitional Unzoned District indefinitely if the
property owner does not petition for its removal. The Planning Commission and
Council may hold whatever public hearings they may deem advisable in the
determination of the zoning.



   (E)   Restricted development. At such time that parcels of land are
in a Transitional Unzoned District, development shall be restricted. Said
land shall not be subdivided or improved with respect to utilities. No
building permits shall be issued for improvements upon said parcels during
such time as it remains in the Transitional Unzoned District. The
continuation of existing uses or normal maintenance of structures, then in
use, shall be permitted.



(1975 Code, § 11.19)



§ 156.050  OR-1, OFFICE-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  The OR-1, Office-Residential District, is designed
and intended to provide for medium-high density development at strategic
locations and encourage an optimum mix of office, institutional, and
residential uses.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Except as specifically limited herein, the
following uses are permitted in the OR-1, Office-Residential District. Every
use, unless expressly exempted below, shall be operated in its entirety,
within a completely enclosed structure, including the storage of materials,
products, and equipment:



      (1)   Child daycare facilities. Playgrounds may be unenclosed.



      (2)   Churches or places of religious worship, parish houses,
rectories, and convents.



      (3)   Clubs and lodges, not including the accessory sale of
food or alcoholic beverages unless permitted by a conditional use permit.



      (4)   Community centers.



      (5)   Dental and medical clinics and laboratories.



      (6)   Dwellings, one-, two-, and multiple-family.



      (7)   Libraries, museums, auditoriums, art galleries, or other
cultural institutions.



      (8)   Music studios.



      (9)   Nursing homes and assisted living facilities.



      (10)   Office condominiums.



      (11)   Parking lots (need not be enclosed).



      (12)   Professional service offices.



      (13)   Rehabilitation centers for handicapped persons.



      (14)   Schools, public and private elementary, middle, and
secondary.



      (15)   Public utilities and essential service utility
facilities and structures.



   (C)   Conditional uses. Except as specifically limited herein, the
following uses may be allowed in the OR-1, Office-Residential District. In
addition, every use, unless expressly exempted below, shall be operated in
its entirety, within a completely enclosed structure, including the storage
of all materials, products, and equipment:



      (1)   Bed and breakfast establishments;



      (2)   Emergency shelter;



      (3)   Government institutions;



      (4)   Mixed use development.



   (D)   Minimum lot size. The minimum lot area in the OR-1,
Office-Residential District, is 10,000 square feet.



   (E)   Minimum lot frontage. The minimum lot frontage in the OR-1,
Office-Residential District, shall be not less than 100 feet.



   (F)   Yards and setbacks. The minimum yard and setback requirements
for the OR-1, Office-Residential District, are as follows.



      (1)   Front yard setback.  All buildings and parking:  A
minimum of 30 feet.



      (2)   Side yard setback.  All buildings and parking:  A
minimum of 10 feet.



      (3)   Rear yard setback.  All buildings and parking:  A
minimum of 25 feet.



      (4)   Transitional yard. A transitional yard shall be provided
anywhere a lot line in the OR-1, Office-Residential District, abuts a
Residential District. The depth or width of the required transitional yard
shall be equal to the depth or width of the required yard on the property
located in the abutting Residential District. A transitional yard shall not
be required to be more than 20 feet in depth or width.



      (5)   Utility sheds. Utility sheds shall not be allowed in the
required front or side yards. Utility sheds may be located in the rear yard,
provided the building is located at least 5 feet from any rear or side
property line.  Utility sheds shall not exceed 120 square feet of floor
space and shall be located a minimum distance of 10 feet from any existing
structure.



      (6)   Garages. The total amount of garage floor square footage
for single- family dwellings shall not exceed 1,200 square feet.



      (7)   Curb openings. The maximum allowable curb opening
measured at the property line shall not exceed 24 feet for all residential
uses and 32 feet for all other permitted uses.



      (8)   Screening/berming. All parking areas shall be either
screened by use of trees or shrubs or by the use of berms.



   (G)   Maximum ground coverage. The sum total of ground area that may
be covered by all structures located on a zoning lot in the OR-1,
Office-Residential District, shall not exceed 60% of the lot area.



   (H)   Maximum building height. The maximum building height in the
OR-1, Office-Residential District, is 45 feet. Accessory structures shall not
exceed 1-1/2 stories in height or 22 feet.



   (I)   Minimum structural requirements. The following shall be
minimum requirements in the OR-1, Office-Residential District:



      (1)   All structures used for residential occupancy shall have
a minimum width of 20 feet at the structure’s narrowest dimension and the
structure shall be affixed to a continuous permanent perimeter foundation 
constructed of concrete block, poured concrete, or wood. All structures,
either principal or accessory, shall be constructed in conformance with the
Uniform Building Code;



      (2)   A private garage, attached or unattached, with a minimum
floor area of 440 square feet shall be required to be built concurrent with
each single- or two-family dwelling constructed after the effective date of
the ordinance set forth in this chapter.



   (J)   Signs.  The following shall be minimum requirements for
signage in the OR-1, Office-Residential District.



      (1)   The use of signs to identify non-residential buildings
shall be limited to either ground signs or signs attached to buildings. Pylon
signs are not permitted. The placement of any ground sign is permitted only
at the entrance side of the building.



      (2)   The total amount of signage allowed for any single
occupant building is 80 square feet. For each additional use within a
multi-occupant building, an additional 20 square feet of signage is allowed.
The maximum size of any ground sign is limited to 50 square feet.



      (3)   The minimum front yard setback for a ground sign shall
be 5 feet from any front property line or 16.5 feet from the curb line,
whichever is greater. The minimum side yard setback for any ground sign shall
be 10 feet measured from the property line.



      (4)   The maximum height of any ground sign measured from the
nearest top back of curb shall be 8 feet.



      (5)   In addition to this division, all signage shall conform
to the North Mankato Sign Ordinance.



(Ord. 213, passed 3-18-2002; Am. Ord. 248, passed 12-20-2004)



§ 156.051  P-1, PUBLIC USE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  The Public Use District is intended to establish a
district designed to serve public uses.



   (B)   Permitted uses.  The following are permitted uses.



      (1)   Municipal government administrative buildings, utility
stations, fire stations and police stations;



      (2)   Parks and playgrounds;



      (3)   Public libraries and community centers;



      (4)   Other public uses determined by the Council to be of the
same general character and consistent with the intent of division (A) of this
section.



   (C)   Conditional uses.



      (1)   Indoor sport and recreational facilities.



   (D)   Lot area. For each permitted use there shall be provided not
less than 6,000 square feet of lot area.



   (E)   Lot width and depth.



      (1)   Every lot upon which there is a permitted use shall
require a minimum width of 55 feet at the building setback lines.



      (2)   Every lot upon which there is a permitted use shall
require a minimum depth of 100 feet.



   (F)   Yard regulations.



      (1)   Front yard setback.



         (a)   Platted lots recorded prior to 1958 - 20 feet.



         (b)   Platted lots recorded 1958 and after - 30 feet.



         (c)   Corner lots have 2 front yard setbacks.



      (2)   Side yard setbacks.



         (a)   Platted lots recorded prior to 1958 - 5 feet.



         (b)   Platted lots recorded 1958 and after - 10 feet.



         (c)   Rear yard setback - 25 feet.



   (G)   Maximum ground coverage.  50%.



   (H)   Maximum building height.



      (1)   Main buildings - 3 stories or 45 feet, whichever is less.



      (2)   Accessory buildings - 1-1/2 stories or 22 feet,
whichever is less.



      (3)   Conditional uses - maximum of 100 feet.



(Am. Ord. 112, 4th Series, passed 1-22-2019)



§ 156.052  NONCONFORMING USES.



   (A)   Nonconforming land. A lawful use of land existing on the date
of enactment of this chapter may be continued, but if discontinued for a
period of 12 consecutive calendar months, it shall not hereafter be resumed
and any future use of such land shall be in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter. The use of land if changed from a nonconforming use, shall be
in conformity with the provisions of the specific district in which it is
located.



   (B)   Nonconforming structure uses. A lawful use of a structure
existing on the date of enactment of this chapter may be continued, and such
use may be extended throughout the building or changed to another
nonconforming use permitted in the same district provided no structural
alterations except those required by law, and no additions or enlargements,
are made to such building. If a non-conforming structure is discontinued for
a period of 12 consecutive calendar months, it shall not hereafter be resumed
and any future use of the structure shall be in conformity with the
provisions of the specific district in which it is located.



   (C)   Restoration of structures. When a structure being used for a
non-conforming use is destroyed or damaged by fire, flood, wind, earthquake,
explosion or other casualty, or by a public enemy to an extent exceeding 50%
of its original value or, where a structure is destroyed or damaged to such
an extent that its total demolition is required by existing or hereinafter
adopted law or ordinance, or demolition is required to protect the public
health or safety, any future structure or use shall conform to the provision
of the specific district in which it is located.



   (D)   Residential alteration. Alterations may be made to a
residential building containing nonconforming residential units when they
will improve the livability of such units; provided, however, that they do
not increase the number of dwelling units in the structure.



   (E)   District changes. The provisions of this section shall apply
to any use that may become nonconforming due to a change in the
classification of the district in which it is located.



   (F)   Conditional uses. Any use which is permitted in a district as
a conditional use shall, upon its establishment, be considered a conforming
use in that district, but subject to any requirements of a conditional use
permit.



   (G)   Nuisance - general. No structure or use constituting a public
nuisance pursuant to any section of the City Code or state law shall be
allowed to continue as a nonconforming use under this section.



   (H)   Obstructions. Any structure, any portion of which is on the
effective date of this chapter situated unlawfully within a public street or
alley or other public way or thoroughfare, is declared to be a nonconforming
use, whether or not its use is otherwise in conformity with the regulations
of the district in which said structure is located. Such portions of
structures may be removed by the city through appropriate legal action.



   (I)   Normal maintenance. Maintenance of a building or other
structure containing or used for a nonconforming use will be permitted when
it includes necessary nonstructural repairs and incidental alterations which
do not extend or intensify the non-conforming building or use. Nothing in
this section shall prevent the placing of a structure in safe condition when
said structure is declared unsafe by the city or other governmental authority.



(1975 Code, § 11.20)  (Am. Ord. 70, passed 1-21-1986; Am. Ord. 102, 4th
series, passed 4-2-2018)



§ 156.053  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.



   (A)   Scope. All off-street parking and loading shall conform with
the provisions of this section and any other provisions of the City Code and
regulations of the city and shall apply to all buildings and uses of land
established after the effective date of this chapter.



   (B)   Computation. In determining the number of off-street parking
and loading spaces a fraction of a space  shall be deemed a requirement for
an additional whole space. Multiple use facilities shall be required to
provide off-street parking for each of its separate and distinct uses. In
such cases the number of spaces required shall be the sum total of the
individual requirements pursuant to division (G) of this section. The parking
requirements for a use not specifically mentioned herein shall be the same as
a use of similar nature as determined by the Zoning Administrator.



   (C)   Site plan. All plans submitted for a building permit which
require parking spaces or loading facilities shall include a site plan
approved by the Zoning Administrator. Such site plan shall be a part of the
building permit and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all
items shown on the site plan for parking and loading facilities have been
completed. The site plan should include at least the following:



      (1)   Zoning, setbacks, and statement of use;



      (2)   North point and scale;



      (3)   All adjacent streets and alleys;



      (4)   Sidewalks, curbs, gutters, and street trees;



      (5)   Entire ownership of lot or parcel being developed;



      (6)   Completely dimensioned parking layouts;



      (7)   All parking spaces clearly marked;



      (8)   Owner’s name and current address;



      (9)   The type and thickness of the paving;



      (10)   Screening and landscaping;



      (11)   Stormwater drainage plan.



   (D)   Parking and storage of certain vehicles.  Inoperable or
unlicensed automotive vehicles or trailers of any kind or type shall not be
parked or stored on any residentially zoned property except in completely
enclosed buildings.



   (E)   Reduction and use of parking and loading areas. Off-street
parking facilities existing at the effective date of this chapter shall not
subsequently be reduced to less than the requirements of this chapter.
Off-street parking facilities provided to comply with the provisions of this
chapter shall not subsequently be reduced below the requirements of this
chapter. Required parking or loading spaces shall not be used for storage of
goods or for storage of vehicles that are inoperable or for sale or rent. In
such case where reconstruction enlarges bulk or floor area or other such
measurable unit prescribed in this chapter, parking and loading facilities
shall be provided by this chapter, for that measurable unit beyond the
original use of structure.



   (F)   Design standards. The following design standards shall apply
to all off-street parking and loading required by this chapter.



      (1)   Lighting. Commercial, industrial and multiple family
dwelling off-street parking and loading areas shall be sufficiently
illuminated during hours of operation so as to protect the safety of
properties, vehicle operators, and pedestrian passersby. Any lighting used to
illuminate off-street parking areas shall be directed away from residential
properties and public streets in such a way as not to create a nuisance.



      (2)   Screening and landscaping. All open automobile parking
areas containing more than 4 parking spaces shall be effectively screened on
each side adjoining or fronting on any property situated in a residence
district. However, the Council upon recommendation of the Planning Commission
may waive this requirement if the closest point of such parking area is at
least 75 feet from the nearest residential property line. The screening and
landscaping plan shall show plant materials, bed location, and other
necessary information. Plans of such screen or fence shall be submitted for
approval as a part of the required site or plot plan and such fence or
landscaping shall be installed as a part of the initial construction.



      (3)   Construction and maintenance.



         (a)   All residential, commercial and industrial parking
areas, driveways and access drives shall be surfaced with either a concrete
or a bituminous surface. All parking lots in any zoning district designed to
accommodate more than 6 vehicles, shall include B style curb and gutter. A
drainage plan may be required for review by the Building Official. The owner
of the property shall maintain all parking areas, driveways and access drives
in a well-kept condition.



         (b)   After the date of adoption of this revised City
Code, property owners who have existing unpaved parking areas or do not meet
the minimum parking requirements shall have 3 years to comply with this
section.  Should a residential, commercial or industrial property not have
sufficient size to accommodate additional parking, the property will be
exempt from this section.



      (4)   Minimum size. Each off-street parking space shall
contain a minimum area of not less than 250 square feet, including access
drive, a width of not less-than 9 feet, and a depth of not less than 20 feet.
Each space shall be adequately served by access drives. Each off-street
loading space shall contain a minimum area of not less than 500 square feet.



      (5)   Yard and setback regulations. Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be subject to the front, side, rear, and
transitional yard requirements for the district in which said uses are
located. Access to said uses may be located in required yard areas except the
same shall in no event be used as a parking or loading area.



      (6)   Access. Parking and loading space shall have proper
access from a public right-of-way. The number and width of access drives
shall be located to minimize traffic congestion and abnormal traffic hazard.
In business districts, direct access shall be provided to a city street or to
a related service road. Vehicular access to business or industrial uses
across property in residential districts shall be prohibited. No dwelling
shall hereafter be erected or altered unless there is direct access to it
from a street or highway through an open space at least 20 feet wide. No
building shall hereafter be erected or altered so as to close the present
means of access or to diminish this means of access to a width less than 20
feet.



      (7)   Location. Required off-street parking and loading space
shall be provided on the same zoning lot as the principal building or use
generating said required space, except that the Council may upon
recommendation of the Planning Commission, allow said space to be provided
within 500 feet thereof.



   (G)   Table of off-street parking requirements.



 


Use

 

Spaces Required





Single family
 
2 per dwelling unit


Two family
 
2 per dwelling unit


Elderly housing
 
0.5 per dwelling unit


Multiple family
 
2 per dwelling unit


Mobile homes
 
2 per dwelling unit


Motel, hotel
 
1.25 per dwelling unit


Nursing home
 
1 for each 4 beds plus 1 for each 3 employees on major shift


Hospital
 
1 for each 2 beds plus 1 for each employee on major shift


Lodging house
 
2 per each 3 occupants




 



 


Use

 

Spaces Required





Churches
 
1 for each 4 seats in the largest place of assembly


Post secondary schools
 
1 for each 4 seats in the largest place of assembly plus 1 for each

250 square feet of gross office area


Other schools
 
1 for each classroom plus 1 for each 250 square feet of gross

office area


Theater, hall
 
1 for each 6 seats of the design capacity


Public service buildings
 
1 for each 200 square feet of service area (minimum 10)


Professional offices
 
1 for each 300 square feet of gross floor area (minimum 6)


Private recreation
 
1 for each 500 square feet of gross floor area (minimum 20)


Bowling alley
 
5 for each bowling lane


Skating rink, dance hall
 
1 for each 200 square feet of floor area


Golf driving range
 
1 for each 200 square feet of floor area


Restaurant, tavern
 
1 for each 75 square feet of floor area


Drive-in restaurant
 
1 for each 20 square feet of floor area (minimum 20)


Convenience store
 
1 for each 200 square feet (minimum 15)


Automobile service station
 
4 plus 2 for each service stall (minimum 8)


Shopping center
 
1 for each 200 square feet of floor area


Automobile car wash
 
5 for each wash lane (minimum 10)


Auto, marine, furniture sales
 
1 for each 500 square feet of floor area (minimum 6)


Retail, service stores
 
1 for each 200 square feet of floor area plus 1 for each employee

on the major shift


Research, testing station
 
1 for each employee on the major shift


Wholesale, manufacturing
 
1 for each employee on the major shift plus 1 for each vehicle

stored on the premises


Storage, warehouse
 
1 for each 2,000 square feet of floor area plus 1 for each vehicle

stored on premises




 



   (H)   Required loading areas. Loading and unloading areas for goods,
supplies, and services shall be sufficient to meet the requirements of each
use. All commercial and industrial uses proposed shall submit the necessary
information with respect to the loading and unloading needs generated by the
use.



   (I)   Joint parking. Provision of joint parking areas for several
uses in the same block or in the same vicinity is permissible, in which case
the number of stalls required shall be the sum total of the individual
requirements, provided that where it is found by the Planning Commission and
Council, upon application thereto, that the parking demand generated by the
different uses included in any joint arrangement to provide parking stalls
required herein occurs at distinctly different times. The Council upon
recommendation of the Planning Commission may reduce the total number of
parking stalls to be jointly provided.



(1975 Code, § 11.21) (Am. Ord. 8, 4th Series, passed 1-16-2007; Am. Ord. 86,
4th Series, passed 4-3-2017)



§ 156.054  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   (A)   Intent. The performance standards established by this section
are intended to promote and preserve the health, safety, comfort,
convenience, prosperity, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city.
These standards are designed to encourage a high standard of development by
assuring the compatible integration of surrounding land uses.



   (B)   Scope. From and after the effective date of this chapter the
use of all land, and structures upon such land shall be in conformance with
the provisions of this section. The administration and enforcement of this
section shall apply uniformly to all zoning districts. Uses of structures
that become nonconforming upon the effective date of this section shall be
allowed as long as they remain in compliance with § 156.052.



   (C)   Standards. The minimum performance standards are as follows.



      (1)   Aesthetics. It is hereby affirmed as essential public
policy that the appearance of this community is a proper matter for public
concern and that all open spaces, buildings, plantings, surfaces, and
structures which may be seen from the public ways and water bodies are
subject to the provisions of this chapter. On any building visible from a
public street, materials shall not be permitted on exterior wall surfaces not
in a proper arrangement, or combination of a permanent nature with good
architectural design and appeal.



      (2)   Building Code. The Minnesota State Building Code as
amended has been adopted by the city. The Building Code shall be complied
with in all respects for the construction, maintenance or alteration of any
structure or variance.



      (3)   Bulk materials. All bulk materials shall be contained in
such a fashion that they are not allowed to become airborne. Solid or liquid
particles shall not be emitted at any point in concentrations exceeding .03
grains per cubic foot of the conveying gas or air.



      (4)   Density. Development density is a legitimate public
concern. The density of development permitted shall in all instances be
consistent with the terms and intents of this chapter. To the extent
reasonable, development shall be integrated with surrounding land uses.



      (5)   Dwelling units (prohibited). No basement, garage, tent,
trailer, recreational vehicle or detached accessory building shall at any
time be used as a dwelling unit. The basement portion of a finished home or
apartment may be used for a dwelling unit provided it is located in a zone
permitting such use and otherwise conforms with the Minnesota State Building
Code, as amended.



      (6)   Employee dwelling units. Except as otherwise provided,
living quarters within a residence of persons employed on the premises are
permitted. Except as otherwise provided, living quarters on business or
industrial premises of persons employed on the same premises may be
permitted. Said living quarters on business or industrial premises shall
require a conditional use permit and may be attached or detached. In any
event, adequate off-street parking shall be provided in addition to that
amount that would be required if said use were not present.



      (7)   Exterior lighting. Any lights used for exterior
illumination shall be directed away from adjacent properties.



      (8)   Exterior storage. Exterior storage shall be permitted
when such storage is not contrary to the terms of this chapter, or in
violation of other applicable provisions of the City Code. Exterior storage
shall be required to be fully screened or fully enclosed by a structure.



      (9)   Fences. Fences are a permitted use in any zoning
district, subject to the following.



         (a)   Fences shall not be located on any property line.



         (b)   In all residential zones, fences located in front
yard setbacks may not exceed 3 feet in height, except as regulated in
division (c) of this section. In all other yards, fences shall not exceed 6
feet in height and shall follow the unaltered natural terrain of the land.



         (c)   Where a lot is located at the intersection of 2
streets, fences shall be no higher than 3 feet for a distance equal to or
greater than the front yard setback measured both directions from the corner
property pin.



         (d)   Fences in commercial zoning districts shall not
exceed 6 feet in height and shall follow the unaltered terrain of the land.



         (e)   Fences in industrial zoning districts shall not
exceed 8 feet in height. No barbed wire shall be located less than 6 feet
from the ground.



         (f)   All fences shall be constructed and maintained so
as not to endanger life or property.



         (g)   Fences shall not interfere with traffic or
pedestrian visibility.



         (h)   Above ground electrical fences shall only be
permitted in industrial zoning districts and shall be installed to all
applicable safety standards which apply.



      (10)   Fire hazards. No use of land or use of structure upon
the land shall be allowed to constitute a fire hazard.



      (11)   Fumes or gases. Fumes or gases shall not be emitted at
any point in concentrations or amount that are noxious, toxic, or corrosive.



      (12)   Health. All land uses and uses of structures upon the
land shall be constructed and maintained in such a fashion as to not endanger
the public health. Sufficient ingress, egress, rodent control, and similar
health safety measures shall be required.



      (13)   Hours of operation.



         (a)   In no event shall the hours of operation of any
business or industrial establishment constitute a nuisance to abutting
residential properties.



         (b)   Permitted outdoor construction working hours. 
Any residential or commercial outdoor construction, alteration, repair,
enlargement or demolition project or construction activities involving the
use of any kind of electric, diesel or gas-powered machine or other power
equipment shall not be permitted except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on
any weekend or holiday.



      (14)   Landscaping.



         (a)   All required yards shall be landscaped
attractively with lawn, trees, shrubs, or similar uses.



         (b)   Non-residential yards adjoining any of the classes
of residence districts shall be effectively screened. Plans of such screens
shall be submitted for approval as a part of the site plan and installed
prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy for any tract in the
district.



         (c)   With the exception of boulevard trees as approved
by the city, no other type of landscaping, retaining wall, flower garden,
berm or other similar uses shall be permitted within a public right-of-way.



         (d)   With the exception of grass, trees and flowers,
any landscaping project valued greater than $300 consisting of the alteration
of land, including but not limited to: landscaping rock, boulders, berms,
retaining walls, walkways, fountains, ponds, fences, patios and paver bricks
requiring a building permit. As part of the building permit process for
landscaping projects, a detailed site plan shall be submitted showing the
locations of proposed landscaping materials for review.



         (e)   With the exception of driveway approaches, at a
minimum, the first 5 feet of any residential boulevard or a street
right-of-way located closest to the street shall be planted and maintained
using traditional turf grass.  Thereafter, mulch or landscaping rock may be
used for landscaping purposes.  Flowering plants not to exceed 36 inches in
height are permitted in the boulevard or street right-of-way when used for
screening or aesthetics.



      (15)   Materials, construction.



         (a)   Construction materials are permitted in any
district. The materials may be located in any required yard area for only
such time as may be required to expeditiously complete the project. The
materials during the respective time limitations are permitted as exterior
storage.



         (b)   All building materials for any residential or
commercial construction, alteration, repair or enlargement project shall not
have been previously used.



      (16)   National Electric Code. The National Electric Code,
1968, a U.S.A. Standard as amended has been adopted by the city. National
Electric Code shall be conformed with in all respects.



      (17)   Noise.



         (a)   Noise shall be muffled so as not to be
objectionable due to intermittence, beat frequency, shrillness or intensity
as discerned at the property line of the tract on which the operation is
located.



         (b)   No person shall use or operate or permit the use
or operation of a radio or similar device in a manner where it can be heard
from a distance of 75 feet from the source between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
7:00 p.m.



      (18)   Odor. Strong, unpleasant or objectionable odors from
any use shall not be discernible at the property line.



      (19)   Plumbing Code. The Minnesota Plumbing Code as amended
has been adopted by the city. The use of land and the use of structures upon
the land shall conform to said Code in all respects.



      (20)   Preparation of plans and specifications.  All
applicable city rules, regulations and ordinances and all state laws, rules
and regulations as amended shall apply.



      (21)   Screening. Screening required shall consist of a fence,
wall, or closely grown hedge not less than 5 feet nor more than 6 feet in
height except that buffer planting screens required may consist of spaced
plantings exceeding 6 feet in height. Screening required shall not extend
within 15 feet of any parallel street or driveway. Except as otherwise
provided screening shall be placed A fence shall block direct vision.
Planting of a type approved by the Zoning Administrator may also be required
in addition to or in lieu of fencing.



      (22)   Smoke. Any emission of smoke shall be limited to the
level permitted by the applicable state or federal regulations.



      (23)   Snow removal. Snow removal operations shall not reduce
the availability, number, or gross area of off-street parking and loading
areas required by this chapter. The provision of snow storage space may be
required in addition to required off-street parking and loading areas.
Adequate area shall be designated for snow storage such that clear visibility
shall be maintained from the property to any public street.



      (24)   Solar energy systems. The use of solar energy systems
for the purpose of heating and/or cooling is a permitted use within all
zones. Use of solar energy systems is subject to the restraints imposed by
the topography within the corporate limits of the city and the zoning
regulations contained in this chapter. Reasonable care should be taken to
protect the opportunity for the utilization of solar energy systems at all
locations available.



      (25)   Traffic. The traffic generated by any use shall be
channelized and controlled in a manner that will avoid congestion on the
public streets, traffic hazards, and excessive traffic through residential
areas, particularly truck traffic. Internal traffic shall be so regulated as
to ensure its safe and orderly flow. Traffic into and out of business and
industrial areas shall in all cases be forward moving with no backing into
streets. On corner lots nothing shall be placed or allowed to grow in such a
manner as to impede vision of the intersecting streets. The maximum height of
any hedge or similar vegetation on corner lots is limited to 3 feet in height
in any building setback area.



      (26)   Watersheds. No land use or use of structures upon the
land shall be allowed to divert the natural drainage of the land except as
may be permitted pursuant to approved site or building plans.



      (27)   Waste.  All sewage and wastes shall be treated and
disposed of in such manner as to comply with city and Minnesota State
Department of Health standards and requirements.



      (28)   Yards. Except as otherwise provided, required yard
areas shall be open and unobstructed. Measurements shall be taken from the
nearest point of the structure to the lot line in question except that
cornices, canopies, eaves, or fire escapes may extend into the required
front, side or rear yard to a distance not exceeding 2 feet.



(1975 Code, § 11.22)  (Am. Ord. 3, passed 3-2-1981; Am. Ord. 23, passed
8-16-1982; Am. Ord. 24, passed 10-18-1982; Am. Ord. 8, 4th Series, passed
1-16-2007; Am. Ord. 17, 4th Series, passed 1-17-2008; Am. Ord. 48, 4th
Series, passed 1-22-2013; Am. Ord. 63, 4th Series, passed 1-5-2015; Am. Ord.
86, 4th Series, passed 4-3-2017; Am. Ord. 102, 4th series, passed 4-2-2018)



§ 156.055  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Purpose. The conditional use permit is required for the
purpose of determining the acceptability of uses, which by their nature,
require particular consideration in light of the purpose and terms of the
zoning district in which they are located. A conditional use may be approved
upon a showing by the applicant that the standards and criteria stated in
this chapter concerning such use will be satisfied.



   (B)   Scope. Conditional use permits may be issued for any of the
following:



      (1)   Any of the uses or purposes for which such permits are
required by the provisions of this chapter;



      (2)   To permit as a conditional use any nonconforming use
existing in any district at the time of the establishment of such district.



   (C)   Procedure. Conditional use permits shall require application
of the following procedure.



      (1)   Initiation. Initiation of an application may be made by
any person having an ownership interest in the parcel described in the
application.



      (2)   Application. Application shall be made upon forms
approved by the Zoning Administrator together with such applicable plans and
information required by this chapter and the Zoning Administrator.
Applications shall be received by the Zoning Administrator and subsequently
shall be submitted to the Planning Commission.



      (3)   Notice. Upon receipt of an application, the Zoning
Administrator shall cause to have published once in the official newspaper a
notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing. A similar notice shall
be sent by first class mail to each owner of the affected property and to the
owners of property situated within 350 feet of the affected property.
Publication and mailing notices shall be made not less than 10 days nor more
than 30 days prior to the date of the hearing. For the purpose of giving
mailed notice, the Zoning Administrator may use any appropriate records to
determine the names and addresses of owners. A copy of the notice and a list
of the owners and addresses to which the notice was sent shall be attested to
by the Zoning Administrator and shall be made a part of the records of the
proceedings. For purposes of computing the 10 days of notice, the day after
publication or mailing shall be counted as the first day. Saturdays, Sundays
or any day made a legal holiday by the city, state or federal governments
shall be included in the computation unless the tenth day of the period falls
on such a day, when it shall not be so counted. The failure to give mailed
notice to individual property owners or defects in the notice shall not
invalidate the proceedings.



      (4)   Hearing. Upon evidence that adequate notice has been
served the Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing on each
application. The applicant or a duly authorized representative shall be
present at said public hearings. Absence of the applicant or a duly
authorized representative shall be sufficient cause to deny the application.



      (5)   Report. The Planning Commission shall report its
proceedings together with its recommendations to the Council subject to
limitations in § 155.25.



      (6)   Action. Upon receipt of the Planning Commission’s
report the Council may hold whatever public hearings it deems advisable. The
Council shall take action on the application within the limitations of §
155.25.



      (7)   Review. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator
to report annually on all applications granted in the last year so as to
advise the Planning Commission and Council of their conformance status.



      (8)   Denial. No application denied shall be resubmitted for a
period of 6 months from the date of the denial, except the Planning
Commission may permit a new application, if in the opinion of the Zoning
Administrator, new evidence or a change of circumstances warrant it.



   (D)   Standards. Conditional uses shall in all events be required to
conform to the minimum standards of the district in which it is located. In
acting upon a request it may be determined that, in order to protect the
public health, safety, convenience and welfare, or to avoid traffic
congestion or hazard or other dangers, or for promoting conformity of a
proposed use with the character of adjoining property and uses and the
district as a whole, or for protecting such character, the issuance of a
permit should be subject to conditions, including, but not limited to, the
following.



      (1)   Access. Provisions controlling the location, or number
of vehicle access points.



      (2)   Adjacent property. Requiring diking, fencing, screening,
landscaping or other facilities to protect adjacent or nearby property.



      (3)   Agreements. A written agreement, deposit of certified
check for funds, a bond or other assurance of faithful observance of
conditions the violation of which shall invalidate the permit.



      (4)   Building limitations. Limiting the height, size, or
location of buildings.



      (5)   Enclosed uses. Every use requesting exemption from the
requirement of being within a completely enclosed structure must comply with
any or all other standards determined to affect such use.



      (6)   Maintenance. Limitation of use or specification of
manner of maintaining and conducting same.



      (7)   Open space. Designating sites for open space or
dedication to the public of areas required for public purposes.



      (8)   Parking. Increasing the number of required off-street
parking or loading space.



      (9)   Streets. Increasing the street design, width, or
right-of-way.



      (10)   Time. Limiting the time a use may exist or operate.



      (11)   Yards. Adherence to modified yard, area, open space,
width or depth, requirements in lieu of the regulations herein.



   (E)   Amended application. Any change involving enlargement,
intensification of use, or similar change not specifically permitted by the
conditional use permit issued shall require an amended conditional use permit
and all procedures shall apply as if a new permit were being issued.



   (F)   Fee. To defray administrative costs of processing requests for
conditional use permits a fee, determined by the Council, shall be paid by
the applicant. The fee payment shall accompany the initial application.



   (G)   Duration. A conditional use permit shall remain in effect as
long as the conditions agreed upon are observed, but nothing in this section
shall prevent the city from enacting or amending official controls to change
the status of conditional uses.



   (H)   Filing a permit. A certified copy of any conditional use
permit shall be filed with the County Recorder or Registrar of Titles of
Nicollet County. The conditional use permit shall include the legal
description of the property included. Any cost incurred in such filing shall
be charged to the applicant.



(1975 Code, § 11.23)  (Am. Ord. 31, passed 2-22-1983)



§ 156.056  REZONING.



   (A)   Planning Commission.  The Planning Commission shall have the
power and duty of hearing and recommending to the Council all requests for
the zoning or rezoning of property.



   (B)   Application procedure.  Zoning or rezoning applications are
subject to the following procedures:



      (1)   Initiation.  Initiation of the application may be made
by any person having ownership interest in the property described in the
application.



      (2)   Application.  Application shall be made upon forms
approved by the Zoning Administrator together with such applicable plans and
information required by this chapter and the Zoning Administrator.
Applications shall be received by the Zoning Administrator and subsequently
shall be submitted to the Planning Commission.



      (3)   Notice. Upon receipt of an application the Zoning
Administrator shall cause to have published in the official newspaper a
notice of hearing. Adjacent property owners within 350 feet of the affected
property shall be notified by registered mail. The notices shall describe the
purpose of the hearing and a brief description thereof. Publications and
mailing notices shall not be less than 10 days nor more than 30 days prior to
the date of the hearing. Failure of any adjacent property owner to receive
notice, once reasonable attempt has been made, shall not invalidate the
proceedings.



      (4)   Hearing.  Upon evidence that adequate notice has been
served the Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing on each
application. The applicant or a duly authorized representative shall be
present at the public hearings. Absence of the applicant or a duly authorized
representative shall be sufficient cause to deny the application.



      (5)   Report.  The Planning Commission shall report its
proceedings together with its recommendations to the Council subject to the
60-day review process standard set in § 155.25.



      (6)   Action.  Upon receipt of the Planning Commissions 
report the Council may hold whatever public hearings it deems advisable. The
Council shall take action on the application.



      (7)   Review.  It shall be the duty of the Zoning
Administrator to report annually on all applications granted in the last year
so as to advise the Planning Commission and Council of their conformance
status.



      (8)   Denial. No application denied shall be resubmitted for a
period of 6 months from the date of the denial, except the Planning
Commission may permit a new application, if in the opinion of the Planning
Commission, new evidence or a change of circumstances warrant it.



(Ord. 8, 4th Series, passed 1-16-2007; Am. Ord. 63, 4th Series, passed
1-5-2015)



§ 156.057  TEMPORARY FAMILY HEALTH CARE DWELLINGS.



   Pursuant to authority granted by M.S. § 462.3593, Subd. 9, the city
opts-out of the requirements of M.S. § 462.3593, which defines and regulates
temporary family health care dwellings.



(Ord. 78, 4th Series, passed 8-1-2016)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 156.085  APPEALS AND VARIANCES.



   (A)   Planning Commission.  The Planning Commission shall have the
power and duty of hearing and recommending to the Council as herein provided,
appeal or requests in the following cases.



   (B)   Variances.  No variance shall be granted unless adequate
evidence is produced showing:



      (1)   Extraordinary circumstances.  That there are
exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to the
land, building, or use referred to in the application, which circumstances or
conditions do not apply generally to land, buildings, or uses in the same
classification.



      (2)   Necessity.  That the granting of the application is
necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights
of the petitioner.



      (3)   Not detrimental.  That the granting of such application
will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, materially
adversely affect the health or safety of persons residing or working in the
neighborhood of the property of the applicant, and will not, under the
circumstances of the particular case be materially detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to property or improvements in said neighborhood. In
granting a variance, the Board and the Council may impose conditions to
insure compliance and to protect adjacent properties.



   (C)   Application procedure.  Variance applications are subject to
the following procedures:



      (1)   Initiation.  Initiation of the application may be made
by any person having ownership interest in the parcel described in the
application.



      (2)   Application.  Application shall be made upon forms
approved by the Zoning Administrator together with such applicable plans and
information required by this chapter and the Zoning Administrator.
Applications shall be received by the Zoning Administrator and subsequently
shall be submitted to the Planning Commission.



      (3)   Professional survey.  A professional survey drawing
prepared by a licensed land surveyor is required which identifies the
location of all property lines in relationship to the proposed variance
request.



      (4)   Notice.  Upon receipt of an application the Zoning
Administrator shall cause to have published in the official newspaper a
notice of hearing. Adjacent property owners within 350 feet of the affected
property shall be notified by registered mail. The notices shall describe the
purpose of the hearing and a brief description thereof. Publications and
mailing notices shall not be less than 10 days nor more than 30 days prior to
the date of hearing. Failure of any adjacent property owner to receive
notice, once reasonable attempt has been made, shall not invalidate the
proceedings.



      (5)   Hearing.  Upon evidence that adequate notice has been
served the Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing on each
application. The applicant or a duly authorized representative shall be
present at the public hearings. Absence of the applicant or a duly authorized
representative shall be sufficient cause to deny the application.



      (6)   Report.  The Planning Commission shall report its
proceedings together with its recommendations to the Council subject to the
standard set in § 155.25, 60-Day Review Process.



      (7)   Action.  Upon receipt of the Planning Commission's
report the Council may hold whatever public hearings it deems advisable. The
Council shall take action on the application.



      (8)   Review.  It shall be the duty of the Zoning
Administrator to report annually on all applications granted in the last year
so as to advise the Planning Commission and Council of their conformance
status.



      (9)   Denial.  No application denied shall be resubmitted for
a period of 6 months from the date of the denial, except the Planning
Commission may permit a new application, if in the opinion of the Planning
Commission, new evidence or a change of circumstances warrant it.



(Ord. 220, passed 6-3-2002)



§ 156.086  AMENDMENTS.



   This chapter may be amended whenever the public necessity and
convenience and the general welfare require.



(1975 Code, § 11.26)  (Am. Ord. 31, passed 2-22-1983; Am. Ord. 8, 4th
Series , passed 1-16-2007)



§ 156.087  ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   The office of the Zoning Administrator is established for
which the Council may appoint such employee or employees of the city as it
may deem proper.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator or his or her
duly authorized agent to:



      (1)   Enforce chapter. Enforce this chapter through proper
legal channels;



      (2)   Applications. Examine all applications pertaining to use
of land, buildings or structures, and approve same when the application
conforms with the provisions of this chapter;



      (3)   Records. Maintain permanent and current records of the
zoning chapter of the City Code, including all maps, amendments, special
uses, and variations. Maintain a current file of all permits, all
certificates, and all copies of notices of violation, discontinuance, or
removal for such time as necessary to insure a continuous compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and, upon request, provide information to any
person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in any specific property.
Keep a record of all nonconforming uses;



      (4)   Inspection. Periodically inspect buildings and uses of
land to determine compliance with the terms of this chapter;



      (5)   Technical assistance. Provide technical assistance to
the Planning Commission and Council as directed;



      (6)   Violations. Notify, in writing, any person responsible
for violating a provision of this chapter, indicating the nature of the
violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. Order
discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures; order removal
of illegal buildings, structures, additions, alterations; order
discontinuance of illegal work being done; or take any other action
authorized by this chapter to insure compliance with or to prevent violation
of its provisions.



(1975 Code, § 11.27, Subd. 1)



§ 156.088  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   A certificate of occupancy shall be issued upon final inspection before
any building hereafter erected is occupied or used.



   (A)   Application. Application for a certificate of occupancy shall
be made to the Zoning Administrator or his duly authorized agent upon forms
furnished by the city. Each application for a permit to construct or alter a
building shall be accompanied by a plan drawn to scale showing the dimensions
of the lot to be built upon and the size and location of the building and use
and accessory buildings and uses to be erected or constructed. The Zoning
Administrator or his duly authorized agent may require such other information
as deemed necessary for the proper enforcement of this chapter.



   (B)   Issuance. The certificate shall be issued within 10 days after
a final inspection by the Building Official has been completed.



   (C)   Records. Every certificate of occupancy shall state that the
building or proposed use of a building complies with all provisions of law
and of this chapter. A record of all certificates of occupancy



shall be kept on file in the office of the Building Official and copies shall
be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy
interest in the building or land affected. A fee may be charged for a
certificate of occupancy. 



(1975 Code, § 11.27, Subd. 2)



PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS



§ 156.095  AUTHORITY.



   The City Council may, in accordance with the procedures and standards
set forth in this section, and other standards and regulations applicable to
the district in which the subject property is located, approve by ordinance,
planned unit developments for uses as listed within each zoning district.



(Ord. 65, 4th Series, passed 3-2-2015)



§ 156.096  PURPOSE.



   The purposes of this subchapter are:



   (A)   Comprehensive Plan goals. To meet the goals of the
Comprehensive Plan and preserve the health, safety and welfare of North
Mankato's citizens by encouraging creative and efficient development of land
and infrastructure and preservation of natural features and amenities that
would not be permitted under the more restrictive application of zoning
requirements.



   (B)   Mix of uses. To allow for a complementary mixture of uses in
an integrated and well planned area within a single zoning district.



   (C)   Integrate natural resources. To ensure contiguous and
well-planned open space and preservation of the site's natural resources.



   (D)   Public utilities. To facilitate economic and sustainable
investment in streets and public utilities.



   (E)   Community assets. To facilitate sustainable building design
and site layout, recreational uses and institutional uses.



(Ord. 65, 4th Series, passed 3-2-2015)



§ 156.097  PUBLIC BENEFIT.



   The public benefits to the surrounding neighborhood and the city as a
whole that are intended to be derived from the approval of a planned unit
development include, but are not limited to:



   (A)   Consistency with the goals of the Comprehensive Plan.



   (B)   Preservation and enhancement of desirable site characteristics
and open space.



   (C)   A pattern of development which preserves natural vegetation,
topographic and geologic features.



   (D)   Preservation and enhancement of historic and natural resources
that significantly contribute to the character of the city.



   (E)   Integration of proposed development with existing or proposed
development in the areas surrounding the project site in a harmonizing way.



   (F)   Use of design, landscape, or architectural features to create
a pleasing environment or other special development features.



   (G)   Elimination of blighted structures or incompatible uses
through redevelopment or rehabilitation.



   (H)   Business and commercial development to enhance the local
economy and strengthen the tax base.



   (I)   The efficient use of land resulting in more economic networks
of utilities, streets, schools, public grounds, buildings, and other
facilities.



(Ord. 65, 4th Series, passed 3-2-2015)



§ 156.098  APPLICABILITY.



   The PUD regulations are applicable in all zoning districts where PUDs
are a conditional use. The PUD regulations can be used for developments
meeting the following criteria:



   (A)   Minimum Area. A planned unit development proposed for any
parcel or tract of land under single or multiple ownership or control shall
have a minimum net site area for each zoning district as set forth below.



      (1)   Residential
Districts                   Minimum Area



         R-A, Residential Agricultural District         Two
(2) acres



         R-1, One-Family Dwelling
District            Two (2) acres



         R-1S, One Family Dwelling, small lot         Two
(2) acres



         R-2, One- and Two-Family Dwelling District      Two
(2) acres



         R-3, Limited Multiple Dwelling
District         Two (2) acres



         R-3A, Medium Density Residential            Two
(2) acres



         R-4, Multiple Dwelling District            Two
(2) acres



         OR-1, Office-Residential
District            Two (2) acres



 



      (2)   Downtown Districts                  
Minimum Area



         CBD, Central Business
District            One-half (.5) acre



 



      (3)   Business Districts                  
Minimum Area



         B-1, Neighborhood Business
District            Two (2) acres



         B-2, Community Business District            Two
(2) acres



         B-3, General Commercial District            Two
(2) acres



 



      (4)   Industrial Districts                  
Minimum Area



         1-1, Planned Industrial
District            Five (5) acres



         M-1, Light Industry
District               Five (5) acres



         M-2, Heavy Industry
District               Five (5) acres



   (B)   Minimum number and configuration of buildings, uses. A
development that includes 2 or more principal buildings or uses but which may
consist of 1 building containing a combination of principal and supportive
uses.



   (C)   Consistency with Zoning District. Uses not otherwise allowed
in the zoning district are prohibited within a PUD except as provided in §
156.101 and listed in the required materials of the development agreement
outlined in § 156.105.



(Ord. 65, 4th Series, passed 3-2-2015)



§ 156.099  FLEXIBILITY ON ZONING STANDARDS.



   PUDs may allow subdivision and development design elements not
otherwise permitted in some zoning districts if specific conditions are met,
provided the design meets the general standards for development in this
section.



   (A)   Elements for flexibility. The subdivision and development
design elements that are granted flexibility include:



      (1)   Non-standard lot sizes;



      (2)   Higher density of housing units;



      (3)   Reduced rights-of-way;



      (4)   Broader range of housing types;



      (5)   Land use mix; and



      (6)   Zero lot lines and other modifications to minimum
building setbacks.



   (B)   Conditions for flexibility. The conditions required for
flexibility on zoning regulation shall advance the North Mankato
Comprehensive Plan goals as identified in that document.



(Ord. 65, 4th Series, passed 3-2-2015)



§ 156.100  EFFECT ON EXISTING ZONING.



   The granting of a PUD conditional use permit does not alter in any
manner the existing zoning district classification except that building
permits shall not be issued which are not in conformity pursuant to an
approved PUD conditional use permit and development agreement. Whenever a
question arises concerning the interpretation of this section, it shall be
the duty of the Planning Staff and Planning Commission to ascertain all facts
concerning the question and forward all data and a recommendation to the City
Council for a determination.



(Ord. 65, 4th Series, passed 3-2-2015)



§ 156.101  PERMITTED USES.



   Uses not otherwise allowed in the zoning district are prohibited within
a PUD unless specific provisions are made and listed in the PUD conditional
use permit or conditions of approval. A PUD may include varied and compatible
land uses within 1 defined development. Uses may include:



   (A)   Dwelling units in attached, detached, clustered, and
multifamily structures or combinations thereof.



   (B)   Commercial, office and industrial uses.



   (C)   Supporting community facilities, parking facilities and
institutional uses.



   (D)   Parks, recreational facilities and open space.



(Ord. 65, 4th Series, passed 3-2-2015)



§ 156.102  DENSITY.



   In any planned unit development the maximum number of dwelling units
allowed shall not exceed the density identified for that site in the
Comprehensive Plan, except as noted below.



   (A)   Consistency with Comprehensive Plan goals. Density increases
inconsistent with the zoning code may be allowed if the proposed development
can be demonstrated to better meet Comprehensive Plan goals, objectives and
policies.



   (B)   Optional waiver of lot size, setback requirements. Zoning and
subdivision standards relating to lot size and setbacks may be modified when
a PUD is submitted for approval. Increased residential densities and open
space areas may be subject to additional design conditions that are
necessary, in the judgment of the City of North Mankato, to meet
Comprehensive Plan goals.



   (C)   Minimum lot size for single-family homes. Up to 40% of
single-family detached home lots in a single development may use reduced lot
areas. Lot areas must have a minimum of 4,000 contiguous square feet of
buildable area. Buildable area must be unencumbered by setbacks, public
easements and other physical constraints (such as topography or similar
features).



(Ord. 65, 4th Series, passed 3-2-2015)



§ 156.103  COORDINATION WITH SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Simultaneous subdivision review. Subdivision review must be
carried out simultaneously with the review of a planned unit development.



   (B)   Preliminary and final plats. The plans required under this
subchapter must be submitted in a form that will satisfy North Mankato's
subdivision requirements for the preliminary and final plats as seen in Ch.
155 of North Mankato's city code.



   (C)   Flexibility of subdivision standards. Flexibility of design
standards and criteria of North Mankato's subdivision ordinance may be
allowed as part of a planned unit development.



(Ord. 65, 4th Series, passed 3-2-2015)



§ 156.104  APPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Pre-application meeting. Prior to the submission of any plan
to the planning and zoning commission, the applicant shall meet with the
Community Development Director to discuss the contemplated project relative
to community development objectives for the area in question and to learn the
procedural steps and exhibits required. This includes the procedural steps
for a conditional use permit, preliminary plat, and a general development
plan. The applicant may submit a simple sketch plan at this stage for
informal review and discussion. The applicant is urged to follow the advice
and assistance of the city staff to facilitate the review of the general
development plan and preliminary plat.



   (B)   Neighborhood meeting. Prior to submission of any preliminary
plat to the Planning Commission, the Developer shall hold a neighborhood
meeting to include those residing within 350 feet from the proposed
development. The Developer shall provide a detailed, scaled layout of the
proposed development and incur all costs associated with the provision of the
meeting.



   (C)   Preliminary Development Plan. The following information and
documents shall be filed as part of the General Development Plan.



      (1)   Application. An applicant shall make an application for
a conditional use permit following the procedural steps as set forth in the
conditional use regulations seen in § 156.055.



      (2)   Additional requirements for PUD. In addition to the
criteria and standards set forth under § 156.055, the following additional
findings shall be made by the Developer and reviewed by staff before the
approval of the development plan:



         (a)   Comprehensive Plan. The proposed PUD is in
conformance with the Comprehensive Plan.



         (b)   Neighboring impacts. The uses proposed will not
have an undue and adverse impact on the reasonable enjoyment of neighboring
property and will not be detrimental to potential surrounding uses.



         (c)   Phasing. Each phase of the proposed development,
as it is proposed to be completed, is of sufficient size, composition, and
arrangement that its construction, marketing, and operation are feasible as a
complete unit, and that provision and construction of dwelling units and
common open space are balanced and coordinated.



         (d)   Public facility capacity. The PUD will not create
an excessive burden on parks, schools, streets, and other public facilities
and utilities, which serve or are proposed, to serve the area.



         (e)   Unified development. The proposed total
development is designed in such a manner as to form a desirable and unified
environment within its own boundaries.



      (3)   Required exhibits and narratives. The following exhibits
and written narratives shall be submitted to the Community Development
Director by the proposed Developer as a part of the application for a
conditional use permit:



         (a)   Character. An explanation of the character of the
planned unit development and the manner in which it has been planned to take
advantage of the planned development regulations.



         (b)   Ownership. A list of the present ownership of all
the land included within the planned development and a list of property
owners within 350 feet of the outer boundaries of the property as obtained
through county records.



         (c)   Schedule. A general indication of the expected
schedule of development including progressive phasing and time schedule.



         (d)   Mapped information. A map giving the legal
description of the property including approximate total acreage and also
indicating existing property lines and dimensions, ownership of all parcels,
platting, easements, street right-of-ways, utilities, and buildings on the
property.



         (e)   Natural features. Natural features, maps of the
property showing contour lines at no more than 2-foot intervals, drainage
patterns, wetlands, vegetation.



         (f)   Proposed land uses. A scaled map indicating
proposed land uses including housing units and types, vehicular and
pedestrian circulation, and open space uses.



         (g)   Government services. Full description as to how
all necessary governmental services will be provided to the development
including sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water systems, streets and other
public utilities.



         (h)   City code compliance. Calculations showing
conformance with all lot size, density, setbacks, and ground coverage
requirements.



         (i)   Additional information. Any additional information
requested by the city staff, the planning and zoning commission and City
Council that may be required for clarification of the proposed project.



         (j)   Copies. Twenty copies of all required information
shall be submitted.



         (k)   Subdivision process. The applicant shall submit a
preliminary plat for all or that portion of the project to be platted
including all the necessary documentation required under North Mankato's
subdivision ordinance, Ch. 155 of North Mankato's city code. For purposes of
administrative simplification, the public hearings required for the
conditional use permit and preliminary plat may be combined into 1 hearing or
may be held concurrently.



(Ord. 65, 4th Series, passed 3-2-2015)



§ 156.105  FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT.



   (A)   Final plan to include all required modifications. The final
development plan with recommended modifications, if any, and if necessary,
the modified preliminary plat, shall be filed with the Community Development
Director containing the information required in the general development plan
plus any changes recommended by the Planning Commission and the City Council
as a result of the public hearing.



   (B)   Final plat. The applicant shall also submit a final plat for
all or that portion to be platted. The final general development plan shall
be submitted with the first final plat which shall conform to the approved
general development plan and approved preliminary plat. Such plats may be
submitted in smaller increments as may be economical to finance or construct
at one time. This plan shall include any recommended changes by the Planning
Commission or City Council to the original general development plan and
original preliminary plat.



   (C)   Development agreement required. A development agreement,
signed by the applicant and noting all conditions of the final development
plan, shall be submitted with the final plat. The development agreement shall
include an expiration date consistent with the phasing of the project.



   (D)   Review of final documents. The Council shall review the final
development plan and final plat. If the final development plan is approved by
the Council, the Community Development Director shall issue a conditional use
permit to the applicant.



(Ord. 65, 4th Series, passed 3-2-2015)



§ 156.106  ENFORCEMENT OF DEVELOPMENT SCHEDULE.



   The construction, restoration, and other provisions of all of the
common open spaces, public and recreational facilities, renewable energy or
low-impact development infrastructure, or other required amenities identified
in the final development plan and development agreement must proceed at the
same phase of the construction of dwelling units and commercial buildings.
From time to time the Community Development Director may review all of the
building permits issued for the planned development and examine the
construction which has taken place on the site. If the Community Development
Director finds that the rate of construction of dwelling units is greater
than the rate at which open space, public and recreational facilities,
renewable energy, or other amenities have been constructed and provided, the
administrator shall forward this information to the Council, which may modify
or revoke the conditional use permit.



(Ord. 65, 4th Series, passed 3-2-2015)



§ 156.107  CONVEYANCE AND MAINTENANCE OF COMMON OPEN SPACE.



   (A)   Homeowners' Association required. A homeowners' association or
similar organization must be created if the PUD includes common open space.



      (1)   The common open space must be permanently restricted to
the uses specified on the final development plan, either by:



         (a)   Assigning covenants, to be approved by the North
Mankato City attorney, restricting the common open space to its designated
purpose and providing for long-term maintenance in a manner that assures its
intended purpose.



         (b)   Placing conservation easements on the open space
that restrict the open space to its designated purpose and provide for
long-term maintenance that assures its intended purpose. The easements shall
be held and managed consistent with Minnesota Statute.



      (2)   The applicant shall submit all required homeowners'
association documents to the North Mankato City Attorney and planning staff 2
months prior to final plat approval and must include the following:



         (a)   Ownership and membership requirements.



         (b)   Articles of incorporation and bylaws.



         (c)   Time at which the developer turns the association
over to the homeowners.



         (d)   Approximate monthly or yearly association fees for
homeowners.



         (e)   Specific listing of items owned in common,
including such items as roads, recreation facilities, parking, common open
space grounds, and utilities.



         (f)   Management plans for items owned in common.



(Ord. 65, 4th Series, passed 3-2-2015)



§ 156.108  STANDARDS FOR COMMON OR OPEN SPACE.



   No open area may be approved as common open space under the provisions
of this subchapter unless it meets the following standards:



   (A)   Suitable for development. The location, shape, size, and
character of the common open space must be suitable for the planned
development.



   (B)   Uses of open space. Common open space must be used as a
natural amenity or for recreational purposes. The uses authorized for the
common open space must be appropriate to the scale and character of the
planned development, considering its size, density, expected population,
topography, and the number and type of dwellings to be provided.



   (C)   Required improvements. Common open space must be suitably
improved for its intended use but common space containing natural features
worthy of preservation may be left unimproved. The buildings, structures and
improvements which are permitted in the common open space must be appropriate
to the uses which are authorized for the common open space and must conserve
and enhance the amenities of the common open space having regard to its
topography and unimproved condition.



   (D)   Other outlots. Outlots to be dedicated for public park,
ponding or other purposes shall be deeded to North Mankato before the final
plat is released for recording.



(Ord. 65, 4th Series, passed 3-2-2015)



§ 156.109  REVIEW AND AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   Commencement of development. From time to time the Community
Development Director may review PUDs within North Mankato and may make a
report to the Council on the status of non-compliance for a particular PUD.
If the Community Development Director finds that the development has not
commenced within 1 year after the original approval of the conditional use
for the PUD, the Community Development Director may recommend that the
Council extend the time or revoke the conditional use permit as set forth in
North Mankato's conditional use process. Prior to cancellation or revocation
of this permit, the Council shall hold a public hearing at which time all
interested parties will be given an opportunity to be heard.



   (B)   Additional phases. For additional phases of the PUD, if within
5 years the project has not progressed, the Community Development Director
may recommend that the Council determine what action will be taken with the
remainder of the project. Prior to determining the outcome of the PUD, the
Council shall hold a public hearing at which time all interested parties will
be given an opportunity to be heard.



   (C)   Minor changes. Minor changes in the location, placement, and
heights of the buildings or structures may be authorized by the Community
Development Director if required by engineering or other circumstances not
foreseen at the time the final plan was approved.



   (D)   Major changes require new Development Agreement. Major
changes, such as rearrangement of lots, blocks and building tracts require a
public hearing and renegotiated development agreement. All changes shall be
consistent with the purpose and intent of the original approved final
development plan and the Comprehensive Plan. All amendments to the
development agreement shall require the same procedures as for the
application for a conditional use permit as set forth in North Mankato's
ordinances.



(Ord. 65, 4th Series, passed 3-2-2015)



§ 156.110  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Records. The Community Development Director shall maintain a
record of all PUD districts approved by the city, including information on a
project's allowed uses, all pertinent project plans, any conditions imposed
on a project by the City Council, and such other information as the Community
Development Director may deem appropriate.



   (B)   Withdrawal of an application. Any application under this
chapter may be withdrawn by an applicant without prejudice at any time prior
to final City Council action thereon.



   (C)   Platting of a PUD. In the event that a PUD is to be subdivided
into lots or parcels for the purpose of separate ownership, such PUD shall be
platted under the platting procedures of Ch. 155 of North Mankato's city
code. The preliminary plat shall be processed in conjunction with the
development stage plan. A separate action on the final plat shall be
processed before the City Council prior to or in conjunction with the final
stage of the PUD.



   (D)   Conveyance of property within a PUD. In the event that any
real property within an approved PUD is conveyed in total or in part, the
buyer(s) thereof shall be bound by all provisions of the PUD and the general
plan for that project. However, nothing in this chapter shall be construed as
to make such conveyed property nonconforming with regard to normal zoning
standards as long as the conveyed property conforms with the approved PUD and
the development plan for a project.



   (E)   Agreement/financial guarantee. Following the approval of the
development plan but prior to final plan approval, the applicant shall enter
into an agreement with the city relating to the terms of the PUD, and shall
also provide such financial guarantees as the city requires or deems
necessary. Such agreement may take the form of:



      (1)   A development contract; and/or



      (2)   Site improvement performance agreement; and/or



      (3)   Another form of legally binding instrument as may be
required by the city.



(Ord. 65, 4th Series, passed 3-2-2015)



§ 156.999  PENALTY.



   In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained; or any building,
structure or land is used in violation of this chapter, the violation is
declared and shall be a public nuisance, and in addition to other remedies,
the Council may:



   (A)   Institute action. Authorize and direct the Zoning
Administrator to institute, on behalf of the city, any proper action or
proceeding to abate said nuisance; or



   (B)   Set hearing. Set a time and place for public hearing before
the Council at which time the Council shall determine whether or not a public
nuisance exists as hereinabove provided and if said nuisance is found to
exist, shall proceed to order the same abated. In the event the owners or
occupiers of such property neglect or refuse to abate the same within 30 days
following such determination, the Council may authorize said abatement to be
accomplished at the expense of the owners or occupiers and shall have the
right to assess the same against the property and to make, enforce and
collect such assessment in the same manner as provided for local improvements
for benefits made. At least 10 days prior to the date of said hearing a
notice thereof shall be published once in the official newspaper and mailed
notice sent to the owners or occupiers of the land as determined by the tax
records then existing. The Zoning Administrator shall have the powers of a
police officer to prevent the occupancy of any such building, structure or
land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about the
premises.



(1975 Code, § 11.27, Subd. 3)



CHAPTER 157:  SHORT TERM RENTALS



Section



   157.01   Purpose



   157.02   Definition



   157.03   License required



   157.04   Generally



   157.05   Licensing



   157.06   Sale or transfer of ownership of licensed short term rental



   157.07   Applications



   157.08   Conduct on licensed property



   157.09   Off-street parking



   157.10   Occupancy



   157.11   Agent required



 



   157.99   Penalty



§ 157.01  PURPOSE.



   The city finds that short-term rentals located in residential zoning
districts constitute commercial use of residential property which is
inconsistent with the residential nature of the zoning districts. Therefore,
in order to protect the residential character of the city's residential
districts, the city determines that it is appropriate to license short-term
rentals.



(Ord. 111, 4th Series, passed 1-7-2019)



§ 157.02  DEFINITION.



   For purposes this chapter the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   SHORT-TERM RENTAL. A dwelling unit or a portion of a dwelling unit
rented for a period of less than 30 days.



(Ord. 111, 4th Series, passed 1-7-2019)



§ 157.03  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No owner of a short-term rental located within a residential zoning
district shall rent, offer for rent, or advertise for rent to another
person(s) without first obtaining a short-term license. As part of the
licensing process, all short-term rental dwellings will be subject to
inspection by the Building Official or Building Inspector.



(Ord. 111, 4th Series, passed 1-7-2019)



§ 157.04  GENERALLY.



   The following are applicable to all short-term rental dwellings:



   (A)   The dwelling shall not be used for commercial events or
receptions such as weddings, reunions or parties.



   (B)   The dwelling shall be rented for a period of less than 30
consecutive days.



   (C)   Short-term rental are not subject to the rental density
provisions of the North Mankato City Code.



   (D)   Recreational vehicles (RV's), campers, tents or travel
trailers shall not be used for short -term rental purposes.



   (E)   No sign identifying a short-term rental is permitted on the
premises.



   (F)   No short-term rental dwelling shall be occupied until a
certificate of license has been issued.



(Ord. 111, 4th Series, passed 1-7-2019)



§ 157.05  LICENSING.



   (A)   License fee. The annual rental license fee shall be
established by resolution of the Council. A $50 non-refundable application
fee is required for each new short-term rental license application.



   (B)   License expiration. Each license issued pursuant to this
section shall have a term of 1 year and shall expire on December 31. Payment
of license fees is due and payable on or before the date of expiration of the
license. All short-term rental licenses, for which payment of license fees is
over 30 days past due shall be automatically canceled. Reissuance of a
license for any property with a canceled license shall be handled as if the
property were a new license. Such issuance will require the property to
comply with all codes in effect at the time of the new license application.



(Ord. 111, 4th Series, passed 1-7-2019)



§ 157.06  SALE OR TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OF LICENSED SHORT TERM RENTAL.



   Upon the sale of any licensed short-term rental, should the subsequent
owner wish to continue to use the dwelling for short-term rental purposes, it
is necessary to apply for transfer of a short-term rental license including a
physical inspection of the dwelling and property by the Building Official or
Building Inspector.



(Ord. 111, 4th Series, passed 1-7-2019)



§ 157.07  APPLICATIONS.



   All applications shall be made as follows:



   (A)   All applications shall be made at the office of the City Clerk.



   (B)   All such applications must be subscribed, sworn to, and
include, but not be limited to, the following:



      (1)   Applicant's name, present address, phone number and
email address;



      (2)   Address of property to be used as a short-term rental;



      (3)   Parking plan showing the size and location of all
off-street parking spaces;



      (4)   Name of person (if other than applicant) responsible for
the rental unit;



      (5)   Such other information as the Council shall deem
necessary considering the nature of the use for which the license application
is made.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any applicant to intentionally make a false
statement or omission upon any application form. Any false statement in such
application, or any willful omission to state any information called for on
such application form shall, upon discovery of such falsehood work an
automatic refusal of license, or if already issued, shall render any license
or permit issued pursuant thereto, void.



   (D)   The City Clerk shall, upon receipt of each application
completed in accordance herewith, forthwith investigate the truth of
statements made therein.



   (E)   Applications for renewal licenses may be made in such
abbreviated form as the Council may by resolution adopt.



   (F)   Applications shall be void 30 days after the date of
application. Any fees paid will be nonrefundable.



(Ord. 111, 4th Series, passed 1-7-2019)



§ 157.08  CONDUCT ON LICENSED PROPERTY.



   (A)    It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to take
appropriate action following conduct by occupant(s) or guest of the
occupant(s) which is in violation of any of the following:



      (1)   Anytime, day or night, that the premises are involved in
any of the following:



         (a)   Unlicensed sale of intoxicating liquor or
non-intoxicating malt beverages;



         (b)   Furnishing intoxicating liquor or non-intoxicating
malt beverages by persons under the age of 21 years;



         (c)   Consumption of intoxicating liquor or
non-intoxicating malt beverages by persons under the age of 21 years;



         (d)   Vice crimes;



         (e)   Sale or use of illegal drugs by any person on the
premises;



         (f)   Storage of unlicensed or inoperable vehicles,
trailers, boats, RVs and campers;



         (g)   Allowing grass or weeds to exceed 6 inches in
height;



         (h)   Failure to remove ice or snow on adjacent
sidewalks within 48 hours after snow or ice has ceased to fall;



         (i)   Parking of any vehicles in front yard areas,
except permitted driveways;



         (j)   Failure to pay monthly utility bill by the due
date;



         (k)   Failure to comply with § 92.21: Building
Maintenance and Appearance after notification by the city;



         (l)   Failure to make corrective state building code or
city code changes after notification by the city.



      (2)   Anytime, day or night, that the premises are involved in
a manner affecting the neighborhood for any of the following:



         (a)   Disorderly conduct;



         (b)   Disturbing the peace;



         (c)   Obstructing an officer;



         (d)   Assault (including domestic assault);



         (e)   Criminal damage to property;



         (f)   Vice crimes.



      (3)   Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. for any of
the following:



         (a)   Where the police respond initially and describe
the activity as "loud and intrusive" or in any manner affecting the
tranquility of the neighborhood (such as, excessive littering, public
urination, and the like) and persons involved refusing to comply with police
directive to curtail the behavior within 10 minutes;



         (b)   Where the police respond a second time and
describe the activity as "loud and intrusive" or in any manner affecting the
tranquility of the neighborhood (such as, excessive littering, public
urination, and the like) on both occasions;



         (c)   Where the police respond on 3 separate dates and
describe the activity as "loud and intrusive" or in any manner affecting the
tranquility of the neighborhood (such as, excessive littering, public
urination, and the like).



      (4)   Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. for any 1
or more of the following:



         (a)   Where police describe the noise level outside of
the confines of the dwelling unit as "loud and intrusive." This description
should give some indication of the distance that the noises are heard;



         (b)   Where people are using profanity that can be heard
outside the confines of the dwelling unit;



         (c)   Where music, either from the confines of the
dwelling unit, the yard area of the dwelling unit or any parking area defined
for the dwelling unit, can be heard from the street, alley or neighboring
yards;



         (d)   Where a gathering is going on either in and/or out
of the dwelling unit in a manner that involves any of the following:



            1.   Disruption of the neighbors, such as, revving
of cars, squealing of tires, loud shouting, and the like;



            2.   Littering;



            3.   Inappropriate behavior, such as, urinating in
yards, persons passed out, and the like;



            4.   Damaging of property; and where after
investigation the officer(s) can show that the inappropriate activity was
directly related to the licensed premises. Proof may include, but is not
limited to, direct observation by officers, admissions by persons present or
testimony/statements by complainants and witnesses.



         (e)   Where officers are unable to personally verify the
existence of any of the criteria listed in divisions (d)1. through 4. above,
but complainants/witnesses are willing to testify to 1 or more of those facts
at a criminal or civil proceeding.



   (B)   The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall be
responsible for enforcement and administration of this section.



   (C)   Upon determination by the Chief of Police that a short-term
rental licensed premises was involved in a violation of division (A) of this
section, the Chief of Police shall notify the licensee by first class mail of
the violation and issue a warning.



   (D)   Upon a second violation within 12 months of division (A) of
this section involving a guest or an occupant of a licensed premises, the
notice provided under division (C) of this section shall require the licensee
to submit a written report of the action taken to prevent further violations
on the premises and pay a fine of $200 to be paid within 14 days after
notification is issued. Failure to pay fine will result in immediate
revocation of the rental license. This written report shall be submitted to
the Police Chief within 5 days of request of the report and shall detail all
actions taken by the licensee in response to all notices regarding violations
to division (A) of this section within the preceding 12 months. If the
licensee fails to comply with the requirements of the section, the short-term
rental license for the individual licensed premises may be denied, revoked,
suspended, or such other penalty imposed by the City Council. An action to
deny, revoke, suspend or renew a license under this section shall be
initiated by the City Council at the request of the Police Chief.



   (E)   If a third or subsequent violation of division (A) of this
section involving a guest of or an occupant of a licensed premises occurs
within 12 months after any 2 previous instances for which notices were sent
to the licensee regarding the same licensed premises, the short-term rental
license for the individual rental unit will be revoked. Any action to revoke
a license under this section shall be initiated by the City Council at the
request of the Police Chief.



   (F)   No adverse license action shall be imposed if the violation to
division (A) of this section occurred during the pendency of eviction
proceedings (unlawful detainer) or within 30 days of notice given by the
licensee to an occupant to vacate the premises, where the violation was
related to conduct by that occupant, other occupants, or the occupant's
guests. Eviction proceedings shall not be a bar to adverse license action,
however, unless they are diligently pursued by the licensee. Further, an
action to deny, revoke, suspend, or not renew a license based upon violations
of this section may be postponed or discontinued at any time if it appears
that the licensee has taken appropriate measures which will prevent further
violations to division (A) of this section.



   (G)   A determination that the licensed premises has been used in
violation of division (A) of this section shall be made by the Council upon
substantial evidence to support such a determination. It shall not be
necessary that criminal charges be brought to support a determination of
violation to division (A) of this section, nor shall the facts of dismissal
or acquittal of criminal charges operate as a bar to adverse license action
under this section



(Ord. 111, 4th Series, passed 1-7-2019)



§ 157.09  OFF-STREET PARKING.



   (A)    Garages and off-street parking spaces on short-term licensed
rental properties shall be made available to guests residing on the property.



   (B)   All off-street parking areas shall be hard-surfaced, using
concrete, asphalt or paver brick material.



   (C)   Parking ratio. Any short-term rental shall provide off-street
parking according to the following:



      (1)   For one- and two-family dwellings in R-A, R-1, R-1S and
R-2 zoning districts off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each
dwelling unit based on the following ratio of square footage of sleeping
rooms to required parking stalls.



 


Sleeping Rooms Square Footage

 

Parking Stalls




70 to 119

 

2




120 to 169

 

2




170 to 219

 

3




220 to 269

 

4




270 and greater

 

5




 



      (2)   For a one-family dwelling, not less than 2 off-street
parking stalls shall be provided and not more than 5 off-street parking
stalls shall be required. For a two-family dwelling, not less than 4 parking
stalls shall be provided and not more than 10 parking stalls shall be
required.



(Ord. 111, 4th Series, passed 1-7-2019)



§ 157.10  OCCUPANCY.



   Tenant occupancies shall be limited to 2 persons per Building Code
compliant bedroom plus 2 additional people with the total occupancy not to
exceed 12 persons per dwelling regardless of the number of bedrooms.



(Ord. 111, 4th Series, passed 1-7-2019)



§ 157.11  AGENT REQUIRED.



   Each license holder of a dwelling unit within the city, in which
license holder does not reside within a 30-mile radius of the city, as
measured from the Veterans Memorial Bridge, shall appoint an agent residing
within that area, upon which agent the city may serve notices pertaining to
the administration of this section or of any provisions of the City Code
pertaining to such dwelling unit. The license holder shall provide the City
Clerk with the full name, address and telephone number of such agent(s). A
license holder shall provide written notice to the City Clerk, with the
required information, whenever the agent for a licensed property is changed.
The written notice shall be provided to the City Clerk within 48 hours of
such change(s).



(Ord. 111, 4th Series, passed 1-7-2019)



§ 157.99  PENALTY.



   (A)    Any violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor and is subject
to all penalties provided for such violations.



   (B)   It is a misdemeanor for any person to prevent, delay, or
provide false information to any city official, or his or her representative,
while they are engaged in the performance of their duties as set forth in
this chapter.



   (C)   In addition to bringing criminal charges for violation of this
chapter, the city may seek a civil injunction against any licensee or
occupant who violate any terms of this chapter.



(Ord. 111, 4th Series, passed 1-7-2019)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



      Table



         I.   ZONING CHANGES



         II.   ANNEXATIONS



         III.   FRANCHISES



TABLE I:  ZONING CHANGES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




402
 
8-17-1964
 
Zoning Lot 3, Block 2, Hunt's Addn. as General Business District.


432
 
2-20-1967
 
Zoning the west 81 feet of Lots 1 and 2, Block 2, Page's Addn. as B-1,
Highway Service Business District, but limited to business and professional
offices.


460
 
12-2-1968
 
Zoning Lots 21, 22 and 23 of the Pleasantville Addn., with restriction.


493
 
7-6-1970
 
Zoning the west 194 feet of Outlot 5, S. Lamm's Addn. as I-1, Limited
Industry District, with restrictions.


497
 
8-17-1970
 
Zoning Camelot Subdivision as R-3, Multiple Family Residence District, and
granting conditional use permit.


520
 
1-17-1972
 
Zoning Lots 27 through 35, inclusive, and 38 through 41, inclusive,
Pleasantview Addn., as B-3 and condition.


529
 
7-24-1972
 
Zoning the NW1/4 of NE1/4 of SW 1/4, 11-108-27 as B-2, Shopping Center
Business District, and SW1/4 of NE1/4 of SW1/4, 11-108-27 as R-3, Multiple
Family Residence District, with condition.


533
 
8-28-1972
 
Zoning 7 acres west of Sunrise Acres No. 6 and east of LorRay Drive as R-3
with conditions.


542-1/2
 
5-7-1973
 
Zoning Block 1 of Section 3, Culhane's Addn. as R- 2, and Blocks 2 and 3 of
Section 3, Culhane's Addn. as B-3 with condition.


9, 2nd series
 
4-5-1976
 
Zoning land known as the Bellig property from R-4, Multiple Dwelling District
to B-1, Neighborhood Business District.


10, 2nd series
 
4-19-1976
 
Rezoning Atwood-Smith Crestview Addition #3 and adjoining land from
transitional unzoned district to R- 1, One-Family Dwelling District and R-2,
One- and Two-Family Dwelling District.


11, 2nd series
 
4-19-1976
 
Zoning Valley View Subdivision M-1, R-4 and R-2.


31, 2nd series
 
5-15-1978
 
Zoning established of North Ridge Estates Subdivision.


36, 2nd series
 
9-18-1978
 
Zoning established of North Ridge estates Subdivision, Phase II.


32, 3rd series
 
3-21-1983
 
Zoning of parcel described as east half of Lot 1, Block 3, Section C, Culhane
Addition.


38, 3rd series
 
6-20-1983
 
Zoning a parcel of property described as the SW 1/4 of the NE 1/4, Section
2-T108, Range 27 West.


39, 3rd series
 
7-18-1983
 
Zoning a parcel of property described as the south half of the Northeast
Quarter of Section 11, Township 108 North, Range 27 West, and that part of
Lot 1, Imperial Heights Subdivision to the City of North Mankato.


40, 3rd series
 
8-15-1983
 
Zoning a parcel of property described as the Southwest Quarter to the
Northwest Quarter (SW 1/4 of NW 1/4) and all that tract of land located and
situated north and west of the Creek in Government Lot Nine, all in Section
1, T108N, Range 27W.


50, 3rd series
 
10-15-1984
 
Zoning a parcel of property Lot 1, Block 1, A and B Subdivision from R-4 to
B-3.


68, 3rd series
 
12-16-1985
 
Zoning a parcel of property described as from Nicollet County R-1 to R-1 for
Auditor's plat No. 1, Parkview Subdivision and Forest Heights Subdivision and
R-2 for adjoining properties north of Marie Lane.


87, 3rd series
 
2-17-1987
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as the east 155 feet of Lot 1, Block
3, Culhane Addition C from R-4 to B-1.


89, 3rd series
 
9-21-1987
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as from Nicollet County R-1 to North
Mankato, MN R-2 for Lot 1, Lot 2, and part of Lot 3, Block 1, Turtle
Subdivision.


95, 3rd series
 
8-15-1988
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as the west 199 feet of Lot 1,
Imperial Heights Subdivision from R-4 to I-1.


96, 3rd series
 
8-15-1988
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as part of Lot 1, Block 3, Commerce
Industrial Park and part of northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of
Section 11, Township 108, Range 27 1.91 acres from B-3 to M-2.


97, 3rd series
 
9-5-1988
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as east 200 feet of the south 360
feet of the west half of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter,
Section 10, Township 108, range 27 1.65 acres from TUD to R- 2.


98, 3rd series
 
10-17-1988
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as Lot 1 and 2, Block 1, LaGow
Subdivision from B-3 to I-1.


100, 3rd series
 
12-12-1988
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as: Lots 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5, Block 3
Lakeview Addition from R-2 to R-4;


 
 
 
 
Kinder Addition from R-4 to B-3;


 
 
 
 
Lots in the Forsbergs Subdivision from R-1 to R-2;


 
 
 
 
Lot 2, Block 1, Park View Subdivision plus orderly annexation area and Lots
17 to 20, 20A, 21, Auditor's plat #1 to be zoned R-1;


 
 
 
 
Hoover Heights Subdivision from R-3 and B-2 to R-1;


 
 
 
 
Parts of Pauley and Geyer Subdivision and Wendel Hodapp's Addition from M-2
to B-3.


104, 3rd series
 
3-20-1989
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as Lot 31, Culhane Addition "A" from
R-2 to B-1 and Lot 36, Culhane Addition "A" from R-2 to B-3.


125, 3rd series
 
6-15-1992
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as: Registered Land Survey No. 21
from R-2 to R-1;


 
 
 
 
Outlot A, North Ridge Estates from R-4 to R-1;


 
 
 
 
Lot 12, Quail Creek Townhouses from R-4 to R-1.


129, 3rd series
 
6-21-1993
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as the west 384 feet of Lot 1, Block
2 LaGow Subdivision from R-4 to I-1.


130, 3rd series
 
9-20-1993
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as Highland Plaza Subdivision No. 2,
Peterson's Dairy Queen Subdivision, Balaton Subdivision and M.B.P.
Subdivision from M-2 to B-3.


142, 3rd series
 
8-15-1994
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as Lot 1, Block 1, C&H Industrial
from M-2 to R-4.


145, 3rd series
 
9-6-1994
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as North Ridge Estates Phase VIII
from R-2 to R-1.


153, 3rd series
 
11-20-1995
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as part of northwest quarter of the
northeast quarter of section 2-108N27W to be replatted as Eagle Ridge from
TUD to R-2.


157, 3rd series
 
10-21-1996
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as Lot 1, Block 2 except the
southerly 205 feet of Arnemann's Addition from B-2 to B-4.


165, 3rd series
 
8-18-1997
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as: part of the southeast quarter of
the southwest quarter of Section 3 and part of the northeast quarter of
Section 10 all in Township 108 North Range 27 West to R-1;


 
 
 
 
Part of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 1, Township
108 north of range 27 west to R-2.


167, 3rd series
 
9-15-1997
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as parts of Government Lots 8, 9 and
10 (Lake Street).


171, 3rd series
 
9-22-1997
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as Saucier Addition from R-3 to R-2.


168, 3rd series
 
10-20-1997
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as the southwest quarter of the
northwest quarter of Section 2-108N-27W of the southeast quarter of the
northeast quarter of Section 3-108N-27W to R-3.


169, 3rd series
 
10-20-1997
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as all of Green Acres Subdivision
No. 2 and all of Green Acres Subdivision, except Lots 4 through 6, Block 1
and Lots 2, 3, 6 and 7, Block 5 from R-4 to R-2.


175, 3rd series
 
5-18-1998
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as the northwest quarter of the
northwest quarter Section 1- 108-27W from TUD to R-1.


176, 3rd series
 
6-15-1998
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as: Rist Subdivision Lot 1, Blocks 1
and 2 to R-2;


 
 
 
 
Rist Subdivision Lot 2, Block 1 to I-1;


 
 
 
 
Turtle Subdivision from R-2 to R-1;


 
 
 
 
Northport No. 5 to M-2.


179, 3rd series
 
8-17-1998
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as Mann Subdivision to R-2.


186, 3rd series
 
1-18-1999
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as Good Shepherd Subdivision to R-3.


184, 3rd series
 
2-16-1999
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as Northport No. 6 to R-3.


185, 3rd series
 
4-19-1999
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as Lots 1 through 7, Block 1,
Parkside Addition from R-1 to R- 2.


189, 3rd series
 
10-18-1999
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as Lots 1 and 2 The Willows on Lor
Ray to R-4.


191, 3rd series
 
2-22-2000
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as Lots 1 through 9, Block 1, Lots 1
through 4, Block 2 and Lots 1 through 5, Block 3, North Ridge Estates Phase X
to R-1.


196, 3rd series
 
7-24-2000
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as: Lots 1 through 4, Block 1, Lots
1 and 2, Block 2, Lots 1 through 5, Block 3, and Outlots A, B, C, D, E, and
F, North Ridge Estates Phase XI to R-1;


 
 
 
 
Lot 1, Block 4 and Lot 1, Block 5 North Ridge estates Phase XI to R-3.


197, 3rd series
 
9-18-2000
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as Lots 1 through 13, Block 1, Alpha
Subdivision to R-1.


201, 3rd series
 
1-22-2001
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as Lot 1, Block 1, Covenant Church
Addition from M-2 to R-3.


202, 3rd series
 
1-22-2001
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as Lot 1, Block 1, Covenant Church
Addition and part of Lot 2, Block 1 to M-2.


204, 3rd series
 
2-20-2001
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as: Lots 1 through 11, Block 1,
North Ridge Estates Phase XII to R-1;


 
 
 
 
Outlots A and D of North Ridge Estates Phase XII to R-2.


205, 3rd series
 
3-19-2001
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as Lots 1 through 8, Block 1, Lots 1
through 32, Block 2, Lots 1 through 8, Block 3 and outlots  A, B and C of
Presidential Estates to R-3.


207, 3rd series
 
6-18-2001
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as Lot 2, Block 3, C&H Industrial
Park from M-2 to B-3.


209, 3rd series
 
12-17-2001
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as Isaiah Estates to R-2.


210, 3rd series
 
2-19-2002
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as Lamm's Second Addition to R-3.


218, 3rd series
 
5-20-2002
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as agricultural property recently
annexed to OR-1.


222, 3rd series
 
6-17-2002
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as agricultural property recently
annexed to R-2.


224, 3rd series
 
7-15-2002
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as Burnett's Ravine to R-1.


227, 3rd series
 
7-18-2003
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as: part of outlot C, North Ridge
West Phase One from R-2 to R-1;


 
 
 
 
Lots 1 through 4A, Block 1 and Lots 1 through 4, Block 2 to R-1;


 
 
 
 
Outlot A to R-2.


228, 3rd series
 
7-18-2003
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as Sheffield Woods to R-1.


232, 3rd series
 
8-18-2003
 
Zoning land annexed to the city limits (Burnett's Subdivision) as R-1,
One-Family Dwelling.


242, 3rd series
 
6-21-2004
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as Burnett's Ravine Ridge No. 2 to
R-1.


245, 3rd series
 
9-20-2004
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as Donahue Deerwood Estates to R-1.


247, 3rd series
 
11-15-2004
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as Charles Klingel Subdivision to
R-1.


249, 3rd series
 
2-23-2005
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as Whispering Oaks Twin to R-2.


250, 3rd series
 
3-21-2005
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as Donahue Deerwood Estates No. 2 to
R-1.


252, 3rd series
 
4-4-2005
 
Renamed portion of Howard Drive north of Countryside Drive to "Coventry Lane"
effective 9-1- 2005.


253, 3rd series
 
4-18-2005
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as 348 Wheeler Avenue from R-3 to
R-2.


254, 3rd series
 
5-2-2005
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as all properties currently zoned
R-2 to R-1 except for:


 
 
 
 
348 Wheeler Avenue (Lot 12 and west 1/2 of Lot 11, Block 4 Wheeler Addition);


 
 
 
 
616 Cornelia Street (West 88 1/2 of Lot 11, Auditor's Plat #2).


255, 3rd series
 
5-16-2005
 
To rezone the properties located on the North Mankato Hilltop as follows:




 



 

Legal Description
 
Zoning Change




Atwood-Smith Crestview Addition No. 3


Lots 2-19, Block 2
 
R-2 to R-1


Lots 1-26, Block 3
 
R-2 to R-1


Lots 2-10, Block 4
 
R-2 to R-1


Lots 7-12, Block 5
 
R-2 to R-1


Lots 1-3, Block 7
 
R-2 to R-1


Culhane Addition Section A


Lots 1-30
 
R-2 to R-1


Lots 32-34
 
R-2 to R-1


Culhane Addition Section A


Lots 37 and 38
 
R-2 to R-1


Culhane Addition Section C Lots 1-7, Block 1
 
R-2 to R-1


Eagle Ridge
 
R-2 to R-1


Good Shepherd Subdivision
 
R-3 to R-2


Green Acres
 
R-2 to R-1


Green Acres No. 2
 
R-2 to R-1


Green Acres No. 3
 
R-4 to R-1


Harley Erickson Subdivision
 
R-2 to R-1


North Ridge Estates


Lots 1-6, Block 3
 
R-2 to R-1


Lots 1-10, Block 4
 
R-2 to R-1


Lots 1-56, Block 5
 
R-2 to R-1


North Ridge Estates Phase II
 
R-2 to R-1


North Ridge Estates Phase IV
 
R-2 to R-1


North Ridge Estates Phase V
 
R-2 to R-1


North Ridge Estates Phase VI
 
R-2 to R-1


Presidential Estates


Lots 1-8, Block 1
 
R-3 to R-2


Lots 1-10, Block 2
 
R-3 to R-2


Presidential Estates No. 2
 
R-3 to R-2


Presidential Estates No. 3
 
R-3 to R-1


Presidential Estates No. 4
 
R-3 to R-1


Saucier Addition


Lots 1-8, Block 1
 
R-3 to R-1


Lots 1-8, Block 2
 
R-3 to R-1


Lot 1, Block 3
 
R-3 to R-1


Lot 8, Block 3
 
R-3 to R-1


Lots 23 and 24, Block 3
 
R-3 to R-1


Saucier Addition


Lots 8-10, Block 4
 
R-3 to R-1


Lots 1-11, Block 5
 
R-3 to R-1


Lots 8 and 15, Block 6
 
R-2 to R-1


Lots 1-12, Block 7
 
R-2 to R-1


Lot 23, Block 7
 
R-2 to R-1


Saucier Addition No. 2
 
R-3 to R-1


Saucier Addition No. 3
 
R-3 to R-1


Saucier Addition No. 4
 
R-2 to R-1


Saucier Addition No. 5
 
R-3 to R-1


Saucier Addition No. 6
 
R-2 to R-1


Saucier Addition No. 7
 
R-3 to R-1


Saucier Addition No. 8
 
R-2 to R-1


Tonneson Subdivision No. 1
 
R-4 to R-1


Tonneson Subdivision No. 2
 
R-4 to R-1


Valley View Subdivision


Lots 6-20, Block 1
 
R-4 to R-1


Valley View Subdivision


Lots 1-4, Block 2
 
R-4 to R-1


Lots 5-22, Block 2
 
R-2 to R-1


Valley View Subdivision No. 3
 
R-4 to R-1


Valley View Subdivision No.4 Lot 1, Block 2
 
R-4 to R-1


Valley View Subdivision No. 5
 
R-4 to R-1


Walter S. Farm Subdivision


Lots 1-10, Block 1
 
R-4 to R-1


Lots 1-20, Block 2
 
R-4 to R-1


Lots 21-23, Block 2
 
R-3 to R-1


Lots 1-7, Block 3
 
R-3 to R-1


Lots 8-23, Block 3
 
R-4 to R-1


Walter S. Farm Subdivision


Lots 1-10, Block 4
 
R-3 to R-1


Walter S. Farm Subdivision No. 2
 
R-4 to R-1




 



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




258, 3rd series
 
7-18-2005
 
Zoning of a parcel of property described as Coventry Heights as R-1.


259, 3rd series
 
7-18-2005
 
Rezoning Lot 1, Block 1, Hansen Addition No. 2 from M-2 to I-1 and Lot 2,
Block 1, Hansen Addition No. 2 from M-2 to R-2.


262, 3rd series
 
10-24-2005
 
Rezoning Lots 1 - 3, Block 2, Valley View Subdivision from R-1 to R-2.


2, 4th Series
 
3-20-2006
 
Rezoning Lot 15, Block 1, Northport from M-2 to R-3.


3, 4th Series
 
3-20-2006
 
Rezoning Lot 1, Block 1, Covenant Church Addition from R-3 to P-1.


6, 4th Series
 
7-24-2006
 
Rezoning Burnetts Ravine Ridge No. 3 as R-1.


9, 4th Series
 
2-5-2007
 
Zoning Burnett’s Ravine Ridge No. 4 as P-1.


11, 4th Series
 
3-19-2007
 
Zoning the Landing North, Phase I, Blocks 1 and 2 and Outlots B, C, D, E, F,
and G as R-1, One-Family Dwelling and Outlot A as P-1.


12, 4th Series
 
3-19-2007
 
Rezoning the Family Fellowship Church Addition from TUD to R-2.


14, 4th Series
 
9-17-2007
 
Zoning Lot 3, Block 1, Three Eagles Addition from R-1 to I-1.


15, 4th Series
 
11-19-2007
 
Zoning Northport No. 10 as M-2.


20, 4th Series
 
11-17-2008
 
Rezoning Rist Subdivision No. 2 from I-1 to B-3.


24, 4th Series
 
4-20-2009
 
Zoning Northport No. 12 as M-2.


25, 4th Series
 
4-20-2009
 
Zoning Parks Edge Addition as R1-S.


28, 4th Series
 
8-17-2009
 
Zoning Northport No. 14 as M-2.


37, 4th Series
 
6-20-2011
 
Zoning Northport No. 16 as M-2.


38, 4th Series
 
6-20-2011
 
Zoning Northport No. 15 as M-2.


45, 4th Series
 
10-15-2012
 
Zoning 1620/1622 Sharon Drive and 1624 Sharon Drive/1614 James Drive from
R-1, One-Family Dwelling to R-2, One- and Two-Family Dwelling.


46, 4th Series
 
11-19-2012
 
Zoning 2228/2230 Dream Drive West from R-1, One-Family Dwelling to R-2, One-
and Two-Family Dwelling.


47, 4th Series
 
12-17-2012
 
Zoning 116/116-1/2 Tyler Avenue from R-1, One-Family Dwelling to R-2, One-
and Two-Family Dwelling.


49, 4th Series
 
1-22-2013
 
Zoning 815 Sherman Street from R-1, One-Family Dwelling to R-2, One- and
Two-Family Dwelling.


52, 4th Series
 
9-16-2013
 
Zoning Lot 1, Block 1, Oak Terrace Assisted Living of North Mankato from I-1,
Planned Industrial to R-4, Multiple Dwelling.


55, 4th Series
 
2-18-2014
 
Zoning part of Government Lot 7, Section 7-108-26 (410 Range Street) from
R-3, Limited-Multiple Dwelling to Central Business District (CBD).


59, 4th Series
 
8-18-2014
 
Zoning North Gate and North Gate No. 2 from R-2 One- and Two-Family Dwelling
to R-1, One-Family Dwelling, with the exception of Lots 4-15, Block 5, North
Gate No. 2 which will remain zoned R-2, One- and Two-Family Dwelling.


70, 4th Series
 
7-20-2015
 
Zoning Mayo Addition as B-3, General Commercial.


72, 4th Series
 
1-19-2016
 
Zoning Lots 31 through 41, Pleasant View Subdivision from B-1, Neighborhood
Business to B-2, Community Business.


73, 4th Series
 
1-19-2016
 
Zoning part of Lot 1, Block 1, Camelot II Subdivision from R- 3, Limited
Multiple dwelling to M-2 Heavy Industrial.


74, 4th Series
 
6-20-2016
 
Zoning Lot 2, Block 1, Innovative Power Subdivision from I-1, Planned
Industrial to B-3, General Commercial.


75, 4th Series
 
7-18-2016
 
Zoning Lot 1, Block 1, Schorn Subdivision from I-1, Planned Industrial to
B-3, General Commercial.


84, 4th Series
 
12-19-2016
 
Zoning 1610 Lor Ray Drive from Transitional Unzoned District to R-3A.


85, 4th Series
 
1-17-2017
 
Zoning Outlot A, North Gate No. 2 from R-1, One- Family Dwelling to R-1S,
One-Family Dwelling, Small Lot.


89, 4th series
 
5-15-2017
 
Zoning Northport No. 20 as M-2, Heavy Industrial.


95, 4th series
 
8-21-2017
 
Amending the zoning of property as found in Trail’s West Estates as R-1S.


98, 4th series
 
12-18-2017
 
Rezoning part of Section 10-108-27 from AG to R-1, One-Family Dwelling.


101, 4th series
 
3-19-2018
 
Rezoning a part of Section 9-108-27 as R-1, One Family Dwelling.


104, 4th series
 
5-21-2018
 
Zoning part of Section 4-108-27W as M-2, Heavy Industrial.


110, 4th series
 
12-3-2018
 
Rezoning the property addressed as 1901 Lee Boulevard from I-1, Planned
Industrial to B-3, General Commercial.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE II:  ANNEXATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Acres
 
Description




114
 
4-19-1954
 
 
 
Annexing Sunrise Acres Subdivision.


122
 
9-17-1956
 
2.04 acres
 
Annexing two tracts in SE1/4, 11-108-27 (Hoerr property).


125
 
9-3-1957
 
2.16 acres
 
Annexing part of SE1/4 of 11-108-27.


126
 
10- -1957
 
 
 
Annexing part of north 400 feet of north 6 acres of E1/2 of E1/2 of Govt. Lot
1 of 11-108-27 and part of E1/2 of E1/2 of Govt. Lot 1 of 11-108-27 lying
north of public road.


130
 
5-5-1958
 
 
 
Annexing three tracts in SE1/4 of 11- 108-27.


132A
 
12-21-1959
 
 
 
Annexing Lots 1 through 23 except Lots 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11, and all of Outlot
42, Pleasant View Subd.


139
 
4-20-1959
 
10 acres
 
Annexing part of E1/2 of SW1/4, 11- 108-27.


141
 
5-21-1962
 
 
 
Annexing tract in NW1/4 of SW1/4 of 11-108-27.


143
 
10-2-1961
 
 
 
Annexing Lot 8, Pleasant View Subd., part of E1/2 of NE1/4 of SE1/4, Section
10 and part of NW1/4 of SW1/4, Section 11, 11-108-27.


144
 
4-15-1963
 
 
 
Annexing part of NW1/4 of Section 12, part of SW1/4 of SW1/4 of Section 1,
part of Govt. Lot 10, Section 1, 108-27, and part of Blocks 5 and 6, Wendell
Hodapp’s Addn.


406
 
12-16-1965
 
 
 
Annexing four tracts in Govt. Lot 1, 11-108-27.


413
 
3-18-1966
 
10 acres
 
Annexing NE1/4 of NE1/4 of SW1/4, 11-108-27.


416
 
3-14-1967
 
20 acres
 
Annexing Section A of Culhane's Addn.


417
 
4-14-1967
 
3 acres
 
Annexing Sunrise Acres Addition No. 2.


418
 
4-14-1967
 
15 acres
 
Annexing Sunrise Acres Addition No. 3.


420
 
12-12-1966
 
 
 
Annexing Lot 6, Forest Heights.


421
 
12-12-1966
 
1.615 acres
 
Annexing two tracts in N1/2 of NE1/4 of 11-108-27.


430
 
3-10-1967
 
 
 
Annexing tract in part of SW1/4 of NW1/4 of Section 11 and tract in part of
SE1/4 of NE1/4 of Section 10, 108-27.


437
 
7-14-1967
 
 
 
Annexing the south 158 feet of SW1/4 of NE1/4, south 173.33 feet of W1/2 of
SE1/4 of NW1/4 and south 158 feet of E1/2 of SE1/4 of NW1/4, 11-108-27.


440
 
10-9-1967
 
 
 
Annexing Lot 29, Pleasantview Subdivision.


441
 
10-20-1967
 
 
 
Annexing three tracts in NW1/4 of SW1/4, 11-108-27.


446
 
5-13-1968
 
 
 
Annexing Lots 24 through 28, 31 and 32, and 34 through 41, all inclusive,
Pleasantview Subdivision.


450
 
5-13-1968
 
 
 
Annexing Lots 2 through 12, inclusive, and Lot 14, Block 6, Sunrise Acres
Addition No. 4.


451
 
5-24-1968
 
 
 
Annexing LenAl Acres Addition.


452
 
6-17-1968
 
 
 
Annexing Lots 24 through 28, Lots 31 and 32 and Lots 34 through 41,
inclusive, Pleasantview Subdivision.


455
 
8-8-1968
 
 
 
Annexing Lot 8, Forest Heights.


456
 
9-7-1968
 
 
 
Amends Ordinance 451.


459
 
3-1-1969
 
 
 
Annexing a tract in NW1/4 of NW1/4, 12-108-27.


463
 
6-13-1969
 
38 acres
 
Annexing Sunrise Acres No. 5.


464
 
6-13-1969
 
 
 
Annexing north 20 acres of SW1/4 of NE1/4, 11-108-27.


466
 
6-11-1969
 
 
 
Annexing Lot 10, Pitcher's Subdivision of NE1/4 of SE1/4 in Section 11; SE1/4
of NE1/4 of Section 11 and all of SW1/4 of Section 12; all of NE1/4 of SE1/4
of Section 11 north of Lee Boulevard; and S1/4 of SW1/4 of NE1/4 of Section
11 with exception, all in 108- 27.


468
 
6-14-1969
 
10.8 acres
 
Annexing a tract in NW1/4 of NW1/4, 12-108-27, and in SW1/4 of SW1/4 of
Section 1-108-27.


469
 
6-20-1969
 
2 acres
 
Annexing tract in Section 11-108-27.


475
 
9-13-1969
 
10.8 acres
 
Amends Ord. 468.


476
 
9-13-1969
 
3.27 acres
 
Annexing tract in N1/2 of NE1/4, 11-108-27.


478
 
9-26-1969
 
 
 
Annexing Lot 13, Sunrise Acres Addition No. 4 and Lot 33, Pleasantview
Subdivision.


479
 
9-26-1969
 
 
 
Annexing SE1/4 of NE1/4, 11-108- 27, and SW1/4 of NE11/4, 12-108-27, except
Sunrise Acres Subdivision No. 5.


480
 
11- -1969
 
 
 
Annexing tract in 14-108-27 except LenAl Acres.


482
 
2-20-1970
 
9.64 acres
 
Annexing NW1/4 of NW1/4 and part of SW1/4 of NW1/4, 11-108-27.


490
 
5-8-1970
 
 
 
Annexing Lots 1 through 5 and Lots 7, 9 and 10 of Forest Heights Subdivision;
Lots 7, 9, 10 and 11 of Pleasantview Subdivision and a tract in SE1/4 of
SE1/4, all in 10-108-27.


491
 
5-22-1970
 
297 acres
 
Annexing S1/2 of SW1/4 of SW1/4, S1/2 of SE1/4 of SW1/4, SW1/4 of SE1/4, and
SE1/4 of SE1/4, 2-108- 27; SW1/4 of SW1/4, 1-108-27, except portions of
Crestview Addn. and Atwood-Smith Crestview Addn. No. 2; NW1/4 of NW1/4,
12-108-27 except portions of Crestview Addn., Atwood-Smith Crestview Addn.
No. 1 and Addn. No. 2; NE1/4 of NE1/4 except Section A, Culhane's Addn.,
NW1/4 of NE1/4 with exception, NE1/4 of NW1/4, and SE1/4 of NW1/4 with
exception, all in 11-108- 27.


495
 
7-6-1970
 
40 acres
 
Annexing NE1/4 of SW1/4, 2-108- 27.


496
 
7-28-1970
 
2 acres
 
Amends Ordinance 469.


530
 
8-11-1972
 
 
 
Annexing Lot 16, Forest Heights.


535
 
12-9-1972
 
 
 
Annexing Lot 14, Forest Heights.


536
 
12-27-1972
 
 
 
Annexing Lot 12, Forest Heights Subdivision.


537
 
12-27-1972
 
less than 1 acre
 
Annexing Lot 22, Forest Heights Subdivision of Auditor’s Plat No. 1.


543
 
6-11-1973
 
10 acres
 
Annexing west 5 acres of NW1/4 of SE1/4 of SW1/4, 2-108-27 and a tract in
SE1/4 of SE1/4 of 10-108-27.


547
 
11-10-1973
 
39 acres
 
Annexing NW1/4 of SE1/4 of 2-108-27, with exception.


550
 
1-10-1974
 
39.73 acres
 
Annexing NE1/4 of SE1/4 and SE1/4 of SE1/4, 2-108-27.


552
 
5- -1974
 
5.83 acres
 
Annexing plat of Makato Area Vocational-Technical Institute Addition.


3, 2nd series
 
12-8-1975
 
36 acres
 
Annexing NW1/4 of the SW1/4 of Section 1, Township 108 North, Range 27 west
lying NW of right-of way of Minnesota Trunk Highway No. 14.


14, 2nd series
 
6-21-1976
 
40 acres
 
Annexing SW1/4 of the NE1/4 of Section 2, Township 108 North, Range 27 West.


15, 2nd series
 
9-7-1976
 
15.48 acres
 
Annexing all that part of Government Lot 9 in Section 1, Township 108 North,
range 27 West.


24, 2nd series
 
10-3-1997
 
 
 
Annexing part of a Trunk Highway 14.


27, 2nd series
 
3-20-1978
 
138.5 acres
 
Annexing part of the SW1/4 of the SE1/4 of Section 3, in Township 108 North,
Range 27 West and that part of the NW1/4 of the NE1/4 of Section 10; the
SE1/4 of the NW1/4 of Section 10, the NE1/4 of the NW1/4 of Section 10 lying
southeasterly of the centerline of the ravine and that part of the east 1/2
of the SW1/4 of the NW1/4 of Section 10, all in Township 108 North, Range 27
West.


30, 2nd series
 
5-1-1978
 
20.4 acres
 
Annexing property identified as: the North 550 feet of the NE1/4 of the SW1/4
of Section 10, Township 108 North, range 27 West, containing 16.7 acres;


 
 
 
 
 
 
the North 725 feet of the West 1/2 of the NW1/4 of the SE 1/4 of Section 10,
Township 108 North, Range 27 West, containing 11 acres; and


 
 
 
 
 
 
the East 1/2 of the NE1/4 of Section 10, Township 108 North, Range 27 West
lying West of the westerly right-of-way line of Lookout Drive, containing
20.4 acres.


32, 2nd series
 
6-5-1978
 
 
 
Annexing parcel of land along Trunk Highway 14 and area between Lee Boulevard
and Marie Lane.


39, 2nd series
 
12-18-1978
 
 
 
Annexing the Southerly 33 feet of the SE1/4 of the NE1/4 of Section 10,
Township 108 North, Range 27 West.


43, 2nd series
 
5-10-1979
 
 
 
Annexing the SW1/4 of the NE1/4 of Section 2, Township 108 North, Range 27
West.


7, 3rd series
 
4-6-1981
 
 
 
Annexing the NW1/4 of the SE1/4 of the NE1/4 of Section 2, Township 108
North, Range 27 West.


9, 3rd series
 
4-4-1981
 
1.65 acres
 
Annexing the part of the West 1/2 of the NE1/4 of the SE1/4 of Section 10,
Township 108 North, Range 27 West.


10, 3rd series
 
4-4-1981
 
30 acres
 
Annexing the part of the SE1/4 of the SE1/4 of Section3, Township 108 North,
Range 27 West.


14, 3rd series
 
8-3-1981
 
 
 
Annexing the extension of Lookout Drive and Howard drive between Lookout
Drive and the current corporate limits.


18, 3rd series
 
8-21-1981
 
30 acres
 
Annexing land owned by the Seven-Up Bottling Company on Howard Drive.


26, 3rd series
 
11-1-1982
 
 
 
Annexing land identified as the Drummer property.


27, 3rd series
 
11-15-1982
 
 
 
Annexing land identified as Commerce Drive.


28, 3rd series
 
11-15-1982
 
 
 
Annexing land identified as Richard H. Johnson property,


34, 3rd series
 
7-18-1983
 
 
 
Annexing land identified as Saucier Addition.


42, 3rd series
 
11-7-1983
 
 
 
Annexing land identified as Lot 30, Pleasant View Subdivision.


43, 3rd series
 
1-16-1984
 
12.49 acres
 
Annexing land identified as Gotham property.


56, 3rd series
 
2-4-1985
 
 
 
Amends Ord. 34, Saucier Addition.


59, 3rd series
 
7-15-1985
 
 
 
Annexing land identified as portions of the SW1/4 as well as the NW1/4 of the
SE1/4 of Section 2-108-27.


61, 3rd series
 
9-16-1985
 
 
 
Annexing land identified as parts of Forsbergs Subdivision and adjacent lands.


62, 3rd series
 
9-16-1985
 
 
 
Annexing land identified as Auditor's Plat No. 1 and Forest Heights.


64, 3rd series
 
10-21-1985
 
 
 
Annexing land identified as the Rist property.


65, 3rd series
 
12-2-1985
 
 
 
Annexing land identified as abutting Staley Lane.


71, 3rd series
 
1-21-1986
 
31.7 acres
 
Annexing land identified as the Turtle property, SE1/4 of the SE1/4, Section
10-108-27.


75, 3rd series
 
3-17-1986
 
 
 
Annexing land identified as the Turtle property.


76, 3rd series
 
4-7-1986
 
1.2 acres
 
Annexing land identified as the Rutjes-Ziegler property.


77, 3rd series
 
4-7-1986
 
2.15 acres
 
Annexing land identified as the Loney and Kruse properties.


78, 3rd series
 
5-5-1986
 
1.0 acres
 
Annexing land identified as the Mongeau property.


79, 3rd series
 
5-5-1986
 
less than 1 acre
 
Annexing land identified as part of Pleasantview Drive.


83, 3rd series
 
6-16-1986
 
 
 
Annexing land identified as the extension of Lake Street.


85, 3rd series
 
12-8-1986
 
 
 
Amends Ords. 65, 75, and 76, 3rd series, clarifying legal descriptions.


111, 3rd series
 
2-5-1990
 
.36 acres
 
Annexing land identified as the Forsberg property.


112, 3rd series
 
2-5-1990
 
2.19 acres
 
Annexing land identified as the Drummer property.


113, 3rd series
 
4-16-1990
 
2.55 acres
 
Annexing land identified as the Drummer and Forsberg properties.


115, 3rd series
 
6-18-1990
 
15.42 acres
 
Annexing land identified as Belgrade Roads/Water Tower Site.


118, 3rd series
 
9-17-1990
 
1.35 acres
 
Annexing land identified as former County Road 13 Site.


119, 3rd series
 
10-1-1990
 
2.50 acres
 
Annexing land identified as the Smith  property.


122, 3rd series
 
3-2-1992
 
20.12 acres
 
Annexing land identified as District 77 School Site.


139, 3rd series
 
4-18-1994
 
25 acres
 
Annexing land identified as Northport Subdivision.


144, 3rd series
 
9-6-1994
 
3.61 acres
 
Annexing land identified as a portion of North Ridge VIII.


147, 3rd series
 
1-17-1995
 
15 acres
 
Annexing land identified as the Drummer and State Bank and Trust Company.


150, 3rd series
 
4-3-1995
 
41.87 acres
 
Annexing land identified as the Harvey and Zimmerman property.


151, 3rd series
 
4-17-1995
 
40 acres
 
Annexing land identified as Northport Subdivision #1 and Northport
Subdivision #2.


154, 3rd series
 
5-6-1996
 
12.85 acres
 
Annexing land identified as part of the SE1/4 of the SW1/4 of Section 2,
Township 108 North, Range 27 West.


158, 3rd series
 
11-18-1996
 
25.5 acres
 
Annexing land identified as the Lake Street property.


162, 3rd series
 
7-7-1997
 
7.27 acres
 
Annexing land identified as Countryside Drive right-of-way.


163, 3rd series
 
7-21-1997
 
4.5 acres
 
Annexing land identified as the Mann property.


164, 3rd series
 
7-21-1997
 
21.81 acres
 
Annexing land identified as North Ridge Estates IX.


166, 3rd series
 
8-18-1997
 
5.0 acres
 
Annexing land identified as the Harley Erickson Addition.


170, 3rd series
 
12-8-1997
 
43.79 acres
 
Annexing land identified as the Drummer property, the SW1/4 of the NW1/4 of
Section 1, Township 108 North, Range 27 West, except the north 40 feet of the
East 1/2 of the SE1/4 of the SE1/4 of the NE1/4 of Section 3, Township 108
North, Range 27 West.


173, 3rd series
 
4-6-1998
 
32 acres
 
Annexing land identified as the Rist property, Lots 1 and 2, Commerce
Industrial Park West, a portion of Section 10, Township 108 North, Range 27
West.


174, 3rd series
 
5-18-1998
 
99.41 acres
 
Annexing land identified as Forsberg Property/Northport No. 5.


178, 3rd series
 
7-20-1998
 
13 acres
 
Annexing land identified as Timm Road right-of-way and Northport Pond
right-of-way.


180, 3rd series
 
9-8-1998
 
15.80 acres
 
Annexing land identified as the Lorray Drive right-of-way and Rist Pond
right-of-way.


181, 3rd series
 
12-7-1998
 
10.75 acres
 
Annexing land identified as the Lutheran Church of Good Shepherd.


186, 3rd series
 
7-6-1999
 
4.79 acres
 
Annexing land identified as Outlot E of North Ridge Estates Phase IX.


188, 3rd series
 
10-18-1999
 
7.36 acres
 
Annexing land identified as part of the NE1/4 of the NW1/4 of Section 2,
Township 108, Range 27 West.


190, 3rd series
 
2-22-2000
 
5.76 acres
 
Annexing land identified as part of the NE1/4 of the NW1/4 of Section 10, and
that part of the SE1/4 of the SW1/4 of Section3, Township 108, Range 27 West.


192, 3rd series
 
6-19-2000
 
43.43 acres
 
Annexing land identified as:  part of the SE1/4 of the SW1/4 of Section 3,
and that part of the NE1/4 of the NW1/4 of Section 10, all in Township 108
North, Range 27 West;


 
 
 
 
 
 
part of the East 1/2 of the West 1/2 of the SW1/4 of Section 3 and the East
1/2 of the NW 1/4 of Section 10, all in Township 108 North, Range 27 West; and


 
 
 
 
 
 
part of the West 1/2 of the West 1/2 of the SW1/4 of Section 3 and part of
the SE1/4 of Section 4, all in Township 108 North, Range 27 West.


195, 3rd series
 
7-24-2000
 
6.32 acres
 
Annexing land identified as the East 501.00 feet of the NW1/4 of the NE1/4 of
Section 2, Township 108 North, Range 27, except the North 1192.00 feet.


198, 3rd series
 
11-20-2000
 
29.87 acres
 
Annexing land identified as part of the NE1/4 of the NW1/4 of Section 2,
Township 108 North, Range 27 West.


199, 3rd series
 
12-18-2000
 
14.6 acres
 
Annexing land identified as the North 1/2 of the SW1/4 of the SW1/4 of
Section 2, Township 108 North, Range 27 West, except the West 293.06 feet of
the North 1/2 of the SW1/4 of the SW1/4 of Section 2 and except the East
66.00 feet of the North 1/2 of the SW1/4 of the SW1/4 of Section 2.


203, 3rd series
 
2-20-2001
 
9.09 acres
 
Annexing land identified as part of the East 1/2 of the SW1/4 of the NW1/4 of
Section 10 and that part of the SE1/4 of the NW 1/4 of Section 10 all in
Township 108 North, Range 27 West lying westerly of Outlot A, Northridge
Estates Phase V.


208, 3rd series
 
12-17-2001
 
41.60 acres
 
Annexing land identified as the part of the South 1/2 of the South 1/2 of the
SW1/4 of Section 35 and the SW1/4 of the SE1/4 of Section 35 all in Township
109 North, Range 27 West.


211, 3rd series
 
3-4-2002
 
38.38 acres
 
Annexing land identified as part of the NE1/4 of the NE1/4 of Section 3,
Township 108 North, Range 27 West.


212, 3rd series
 
3-18-2002
 
40.12 acres
 
Annexing land identified as part of the NW1/4 of the NW1/4 of Section 2,
Township 108, Range 27 West.


221, 3rd series
 
6-3-2002
 
33.85 acres
 
Annexing land identified as part of the South 1/4 of the SW1/4 of Section 35,
Township 109 North, Range 27 West.


225, 3rd series
 
8-5-2002
 
14.97 acres
 
Annexing land identified as part of the West 1/2 of the NW1/4 of the NW 1/4
of Section 10 and that part of the West 1/2 of the SW1/4 of the NW1/4 of
Section 10 all in Township 108 North, Range 27 West.


226, 3rd series
 
2-18-2003
 
4.01 acres
 
Annexing land identified as part of the West 1/2 of the SW1/4 of the NW1/4 of
Section 10 and that part of the West 1/2 of the NW1/4 of the NW1/4 of Section
10 all in Township 108 North, Range 27 West.


230, 3rd series
 
8-18-2003
 
1.71 acres
 
Annexing land identified as the part of the West 1/2 of the NW1/4 of the
NW1/4 of Section 10, Township 108 North, range 27 West.


236, 3rd series
 
4-19-2004
 
37.79 acres
 
Annexing land identified as the SE1/4 of the NW1/4 of Section 2, Township 108
North, Range 27 West.


237, 3rd series
 
5-17-2004
 
4.90 acres
 
Annexing land identified as:  part of the NW1/4 of the NW1/4 of Section 1,
Township 108 North, Range 27 West;


 
 
 
 
 
 
part of Government Lot 8 in Section 36, Township 109 North, Range 27 West; and


 
 
 
 
 
 
part of the SE1/4 of the SE1/4 of section 35, Township 109 North, Range 27
West.


238, 3rd series
 
5-17-2004
 
5.76 acres
 
Annexing land identified as part of the SW1/4 of the NW1/4 of Section 10,
Township 108 North, Range 27 West.


240, 3rd series
 
6-21-2004
 
12.35 acres
 
Annexing land identified as part of the SE1/4 of the SE1/4 of Section 35,
Township 109 North, Range 27 West.


241, 3rd series
 
6-21-2004
 
5.00 acres
 
Annexing land identified as Government Lot 8 in the South 1/2 of the SW1/4 of
Section 36, Township 109 North, Range 27 West.


243, 3rd series
 
7-19-2004
 
13.96 acres
 
Annexing land identified as all that part of the SE1/4 of the SE1/4 of
Section 35, Township 109 North, Range 27 West.


244, 3rd series
 
8-16-2004
 
5.39 acres
 
Annexing land identified as all that part of the South 1/2 of the South 1/2
of the SW1/4 of Section 35, Township 109 North, Range 27 West.


246, 3rd series
 
11-15-2004
 
13.16 acres
 
Annexing land identified as all that part of the SE1/4 of the SE1/4 of
Section 35, Township 109 North, Range 27 West.


251, 3rd series
 
4-4-2005
 
3.03 acres
 
Annexing land identified as part of Government Lot 7 in Section 36, Township
109 North, Range 27 West.


260, 3rd series
 
8-1-2005
 
2.50 acres
 
Annexing land identified as part of Government Lot 8 in Section 36, Township
109 North, Range 27 West.


261, 3rd series
 
10-10-2005
 
6.30 acres
 
Annexing land identified as the 66-foot wide township road right-of-way over
and across that part of the Southeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of
Section 34 and that part of the Southwest Quarter of Section 35 and that part
of the Southwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of Section 35, all in
Township 109 North, Range 27 West.


263, 3rd series
 
11-7-2005
 
13.35 acres
 
Annexing land identified as part of Government Lot 8 in Section 36 Township
109 North, Range 27 West.


4, 4th Series
 
7-10-2006
 
19.98 acres
 
Annexing land identified as part of the Southwest Quarter of the Southwest
Quarter of Section 3; part of the Southeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter
of Section 4; part of the Northeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of
Section 9, and part of the Northwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of
Section 10 in Township 108 North, Range 27 West.


5, 4th Series
 
7-24-2006
 
58.49 acres
 
Annexing land identified as part of the south half of the Northwest Quarter
of Section 35, Township 109 North, Range 27 West.


10, 4th Series
 
2-20-2007
 
9.45 acres
 
Annexing land identified as part of the West 1/2 of the West 1/2 of the SW1/4
of Section 3 and that part of the SE1/4 of the SE1/4 of Section 4 and that
part of the NE1/4 of the NE1/4 of Section 9, all in Township 108 North, Range
27 West.


13, 4th Series
 
9-17-2007
 
6.88 acres
 
Annexing land identified as part of the East 1/2 of the NE1/4 of Section 34
and that part of the North 1/2 of Section 35, all in Township 109 North,
Range 27 West.


16, 4th Series
 
12-17-2007
 
30.13 acres
 
Annexing land identified as part of the East 1/2 of the SW1/4 of Section 3,
Township 108 North, Range 27 West.


22, 4th Series
 
3-16-2009
 
3.85 acres
 
Annexing land identified as part of the Southwest 1/4 of Section 3, Township
108 North Range 27 West.


23, 4th Series
 
4-20-2009
 
67.72 acres
 
Annexing land identified as part of the East 1/2 of the Southeast 1/4 of
Section 34, 109 North Range 27 West.


27, 4th Series
 
8-17-2009
 
10.32 acres
 
Annexing land identified as part of Sections 3, 4, 5 and 9, Township 108
North Range 27 West.


31, 4th Series
 
6-21-2010
 
3.22
 
Annexing all that part of the Northwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of
Section 3, Township 108 North, Range 27 West, lying northeasterly of Parcel
7N2, Nicollet County Right-of-Way Plat No. 26.


32, 4th Series
 
7-8-2010
 
107.60
 
Annexing Nicollet County Right-of-Way Plat No. 26.


36, 4th Series
 
3-21-2011
 
50.40
 
Annexing the Northwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of Section 3,
Township 108 North, Range 27 West, excepting therefrom the Southerly 40 feet.


44, 4th Series
 
8-20-2012
 
1.88
 
Annexing part of Government Lot 8 in Section 36, Township 109 North, Range 27
West.


71, 4th Series
 
8-17-2015
 
18.49
 
Annexing land identified as part of the Northwest 1/4 of the Northwest 1/4
and the Southwest 1/4 of the Northwest 1/4, Section 3 Township 108 North,
Range 27 West.


90, 4th series
 
5-25-2017
 
50.134
 
Annexing land identified as part of the northeast quarter of the northwest
quarter of Section 3, Township 108 North, Range 27 West.


96, 4th series
 
9-18-2017
 
9.07
 
Annexing land identified as part of the southwest quarter of Section 35,
Township 109 North, Range 27 West.


97, 4th series
 
12-18-2017
 
20.75
 
Annexing land identified as part of the east half of the east half of the
northeast quarter of Section 4, Township 108 North, Range 27 West.


99, 4th series
 
2-20-2018
 
25.55
 
Annexing land identified as part of the Northeast Quarter of the Southwest
Quarter of Section 10 and that part of the West Half of the Northwest Quarter
of the Southeast Quarter of Section 10, all in Township 108 North Range 27
West.


103, 4th series
 
4-16-2018
 
2.38
 
Annexing land identified as part of the Northeast Quarter of the Northeast
Quarter of Section 9, Township 108 North Range 27 West.


 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE III:  FRANCHISES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




444
 
2-22-1968
 
Granting to Blue Earth-Nicollet Cooperative Electric Association a franchise
for constructing, operating, repairing and maintaining an electric
transmission line for a period of 20 years.


445
 
2-22-1968
 
Granting to Northern States Power Company a franchise for constructing,
operating, repairing, and maintaining an electric distribution system for a
period of 20 years.


467
 
5-19-1969
 
Granting to Minnesota Natural Gas Company a franchise to erect, construct,
operate and maintain a gas plant and/or gas system for a period of 20 years.


123
 
1-21-1957
 
Granting to Minnesota T.V. Signal Distributing Company a franchise to erect,
construct utility poles and operate and maintain a T.V. signal service system
for a period of 25 years.


16, 3rd series
 
9-8-1981
 
Granting to American Television and Communications, Inc. a franchise to
erect, construct utility poles and operate and maintain a cable
communications system until 12-31-1997.


69, 3rd series
 
- -
 
Amending Ord. 123.


105, 3rd series
 
5-15-1989
 
Amending Ord. 467.


106, 3rd series
 
6-5-1989
 
Granting to Minnegasco, Inc. a franchise to construct, operate, repair and
maintain facilities and equipment for the sale of gas energy for a period of
20 years.


128, 3rd series
 
6-7-1993
 
Amending Section 3.40 entitled "Franchise-Blue Earth Nicollet Cooperative
Electric Association" and Section 3.41 entitled "Franchise-Northern States
Power Company".


131, 3rd series
 
9-20-1993
 
Amending Section 3.40 entitled "Franchise-Blue Earth- Nicollet Cooperative
Electric Association" and Section 3.41 entitled "Franchise-Northern States
Power Company".


134, 3rd series
 
1-3-1994
 
Amending Ordinance 123.


140, 3rd series
 
4-18-1994
 
Granting to Northern States Power Company a franchise to construct, operate,
repair and maintain an electric distribution system for a period of 20 years.


141, 3rd series
 
4-18-1994
 
Granting to Blue Earth-Nicollet-Fairbault Cooperative Electric Association
a/k/a Frost-Benco-Wells Electric a franchise to construct, operate, repair
and maintain an electric distribution system for a period of 20 years.


156, 3rd series
 
9-16-1996
 
Granting to Bresnan Communications Company a franchise to construct, operate,
and maintain a cable television system for a period of 15 years.


7, 4th Series
 
10-16-2006
 
Granting to Crystal Communications, Inc., d/b/a HickoryTech, a franchise to
construct, operate, and maintain a cable television system for a period of 15
years.


26, 4th Series
 
4-20-2009
 
Granting to Centerpoint Energy Resources Corp., d/b/a Centerpoint Energy
Minnesota Gas (“Centerpoint Energy”), a nonexclusive franchise to
construct, operate, repair and maintain facilities and equipment for the
transportation, distribution, manufacture and sale of gas energy for public
and private use and to use the public ways and grounds of the city for such
purpose.


61, 4th Series
 
10-6-2014
 
Granting to Blue Earth Nicollet-Fairbault Cooperative Electric Association,
d/b/a BENCO, a franchise to construct, operate, repair and maintain an
electric distribution system and transmission lines for a period of 20 years.


62, 4th Series
 
10-6-2014
 
Granting to Northern States Power Company, d/b/a Xcel Energy, a franchise to
construct, operate, repair and maintain an electric distribution system and
transmission lines for a period of 20 years.


76, 4th Series
 
7-18-2016
 
Extending the franchise term, amending the franchise fee, and deleting the
peg fee obligation for the franchise currently held by CC VIII Operating, LLC.


 
 
 
 
 




 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Minnesota Code





References to 1975 Code





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA CODE



 

M.S. Cites
 
Code Section




13
 
32.01, 110.071


13D.04
 
30.03


15.99
 
155.25


16B.59 to 16B.75
 
150.01


16B.61
 
156.003


16B.62, Subd. 1
 
150.01


16B.65, Subd. 1
 
150.01


16B.69
 
150.01


16B.70
 
150.01


84.81 to 84.91
 
72.01


84.92, Subd. 8
 
73.02


84.787, Subd. 7
 
73.02


84.872
 
72.06


88.16 to 88.22
 
92.70


115.07
 
53.01


144.411 to 144.417
 
110.22


157.01
 
151.05


160.29
 
33.06


161.46
 
33.06


168B
 
90.240


168B.011, Subd. 3
 
92.20


169
 
70.01, 72.01, 73.09, 90.243


169.01, Subd. 3
 
70.09


169.011, Subd. 40(a)
 
73.09


169.045
 
73.09


169.045, Subd. 7
 
73.09


169.69
 
70.10


169.70
 
73.09


169.222
 
74.26


169.693
 
70.10


205.07
 
33.01


216B.40
 
33.06


237.01 et seq.
 
33.06


237.162
 
93.29


237.163
 
93.29


238.01
 
33.06


238.01 et seq.
 
33.06


238.02, Subd. 3
 
33.06


238.14
 
33.06


238.083
 
33.06


260.185
 
130.99


270C
 
34.42


270C.72
 
34.50


274.01
 
32.29


274.01, Subd. 1
 
32.29


274.01, Subd. 2
 
32.29


289A
 
34.42, 34.49


297A
 
34.41, 34.42, 34.44, 34.49, 34.50


300.06
 
93.23


325J.04, Subd. 2
 
110.27


326B.121
 
150.02


327
 
152.02


327.14, Subd. 7
 
156.003


327.31
 
152.03, 156.003


331A.01, Subd. 10
 
110.22


340A
 
111.001


340A.301
 
111.002


340A.301, Subd. 6(d)
 
111.051


340A.301, Subd. 6(i)
 
111.051


340A.301, Subd. 6(j)
 
111.051


347.51
 
91.13


347.54
 
91.13


347.151
 
91.13


349
 
111.208


364.06
 
32.01, 110.071


364.09
 
32.01, 110.071


412.023
 
33.01


412-191, Subd. 4
 
110.22


415.11
 
30.11


429
 
54.09, 90.210–90.212, 155.01


429.041
 
33.07


429.061
 
33.03, 54.09, 90.211, 92.24


429.081
 
54.12


429.101
 
92.01, 92.02, 92.24


462
 
153.01, 155.01


462.357, Subd. 7
 
151.05, 151.15


462.358
 
155.08, 155.25


462.361
 
155.25


462.425
 
32.30


462.3593
 
156.057


462.3593, Subd. 9
 
156.057


463
 
90.178


463.17
 
92.23


463.15 through 463.26
 
92.01


469.190
 
34.29


471
 
155.01


505
 
155.01


514.67
 
92.01


624.20, Subd. 1(c)
 
130.11


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 1975 CODE



 

1975 Code
 
2005 Code




2.01
 
30.01


2.02
 
30.02


2.03
 
30.03


2.04
 
30.04


2.05
 
31.01


2.06
 
31.02


2.07
 
30.05


2.08
 
30.06


2.09
 
30.07


2.10
 
30.08


2.11
 
30.09


2.12
 
30.10


2.20
 
32.01


2.21
 
32.02


2.22
 
32.03


2.23
 
32.04


2.24
 
32.05


2.25
 
32.06


2.26
 
32.07


2.27
 
32.08


2.28
 
32.09


2.40
 
32.25


2.43
 
32.27


2.44
 
32.28


2.60
 
90.243


2.61
 
33.01


2.71
 
33.02


2.72
 
33.03


2.73
 
33.04


2.74
 
33.05


3.01
 
50.01


3.02
 
50.02


3.03
 
50.03


3.04
 
50.04


3.05
 
50.05


3.70, Subd. 1
 
51.01, 52.02


3.70, Subd. 2
 
51.02, 52.03


3.70, Subd. 3
 
51.03, 52.04


3.70, Subd. 4
 
51.04, 52.05


3.70, Subd. 5
 
51.05, 52.06


3.70, Subd. 6
 
52.08


3.70, Subd. 7
 
52.09


3.70, Subd. 8
 
52.10


3.99
 
50.98


4.01
 
150.01


4.03
 
150.02


4.04
 
150.03


4.05
 
150.04


4.07
 
150.05


4.08
 
150.06


4.09, Subd. 1
 
150.20


4.09, Subd. 2
 
150.21


4.09, Subd. 3
 
150.22


4.09, Subd. 4
 
150.23


4.09, Subd. 5
 
150.24


4.09, Subd. 6
 
150.25


4.09, Subd. 7
 
150.26


4.40
 
150.07


4.50, Subd. 3
 
152.03


4.50, Subd. 4
 
152.04


4.50, Subd. 5
 
152.05


4.50, Subd. 6
 
152.06


4.50, Subd. 7
 
152.07


4.50, Subd. 8
 
152.20


4.50, Subd. 9
 
152.21


4.50, Subd. 10
 
152.22


4.50, Subd. 11
 
152.23


4.50, Subd. 12
 
152.24


4.50, Subd. 13
 
152.25


4.50, Subd. 14
 
152.26


4.50, Subd. 15
 
152.27


4.50, Subd. 16
 
152.08


4.50, Subd. 17
 
152.09


4.99
 
150.98


6.01
 
110.01


6.02
 
110.02


6.03
 
110.03, 110.04


6.04
 
110.05


6.06
 
110.06


6.07
 
110.07


6.20
 
110.20


6.21
 
110.21


6.22
 
110.22


6.23
 
110.23


6.24
 
110.24


6.25
 
110.25


6.99
 
110.98


9.01
 
71.01


9.02
 
71.02


9.06
 
71.05


9.04
 
71.05


9.10
 
71.05


9.13
 
71.05


9.20
 
71.05


11.01
 
156.001


11.02
 
156.002


11.03
 
156.003


11.04, Subd. 1
 
156.020


11.04, Subd. 2
 
156.021


11.04, Subd. 3
 
156.022


11.05
 
156.023


11.06
 
156.035


11.07
 
156.036


11.08
 
156.037


11.09
 
156.38


11.10
 
156.040


11.11
 
156.041


11.12
 
156.042


11.13
 
156.043


11.14
 
156.044


11.15
 
156.045


11.16
 
156.046


11.17
 
156.047


11.18
 
156.048


11.19
 
156.049


11.20
 
156.052


11.21
 
156.053


11.22
 
156.054


11.23
 
156.055


11.26
 
156.086


11.27, Subd. 1
 
156.087


11.27, Subd. 2
 
156.088


11.27, Subd. 3
 
156.999


12.01, Subd. 1
 
155.01


12.01, Subd. 2
 
155.02


12.01, Subd. 3
 
155.03


12.01, Subd. 4
 
155.04


12.01, Subd. 5
 
155.05


12.01, Subd. 6
 
155.06


12.02
 
155.07


12.03, Subd. 1
 
155.26


12.03, Subd. 2
 
155.27


12.03, Subd. 3
 
155.28


12.04
 
155.29


12.05
 
155.30


12.06, Subd. 1
 
155.45


12.06, Subd. 2
 
155.46


12.06, Subd. 3
 
155.47


12.06, Subd. 4
 
155.48


12.06, Subd. 5
 
155.50


12.07, Subd. 1
 
155.65


12.07, Subd. 2
 
155.66


12.07, Subd. 3
 
155.67


12.07, Subd. 4
 
155.68


12.07, Subd. 5
 
155.69


12.07, Subd. 6
 
155.70


12.08
 
155.08


12.09
 
155.09


12.10
 
155.98


12.11
 
155.10


12.99
 
155.99


 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




–
 
- -
 
156.038


114
 
4-19-1954
 
TSO Table II


122
 
9-17-1956
 
TSO Table II


123
 
1-21-1957
 
TSO Table III


125
 
9-3-1957
 
TSO Table II


126
 
10- -1957
 
TSO Table II


130
 
5-5-1958
 
TSO Table II


132A
 
12-21-1959
 
TSO Table II


139
 
4-20-1959
 
TSO Table II


139
 
1-22-1960
 
32.28


143
 
10-2-1961
 
TSO Table II


141
 
5-21-1962
 
TSO Table II


144
 
4-15-1963
 
TSO Table II


402
 
8-17-1964
 
TSO Table I


406
 
12-16-1965
 
TSO Table II


413
 
3-18-1966
 
TSO Table II


420
 
12-12-1966
 
TSO Table II


421
 
12-12-1966
 
TSO Table II


416
 
3-14-1967
 
TSO Table II


417
 
4-14-1967
 
TSO Table II


418
 
4-14-1967
 
TSO Table II


430
 
3-10-1967
 
TSO Table II


432
 
2-20-1967
 
TSO Table I


437
 
7-14-1967
 
TSO Table II


440
 
10-9-1967
 
TSO Table II


441
 
10-20-1967
 
TSO Table II


444
 
2-22-1968
 
TSO Table III


445
 
2-22-1968
 
TSO Table III


446
 
5-13-1968
 
TSO Table II


447
 
2-19-1968
 
32.28


450
 
5-13-1968
 
TSO Table II


451
 
5-24-1968
 
TSO Table II


452
 
6-17-1968
 
TSO Table II


455
 
8-8-1968
 
TSO Table II


456
 
9-7-1968
 
TSO Table II


460
 
12-2-1968
 
TSO Table I


459
 
3-1-1969
 
TSO Table II


463
 
6-13-1969
 
TSO Table II


464
 
6-13-1969
 
TSO Table II


466
 
6-11-1969
 
TSO Table II


467
 
5-19-1969
 
TSO Table III


468
 
6-14-1969
 
TSO Table II


469
 
6-20-1969
 
TSO Table II


470
 
6-16-1969
 
31.01


472
 
7-7-1969
 
33.03


475
 
9-13-1969
 
TSO Table II


476
 
9-13-1969
 
TSO Table II


478
 
9-26-1969
 
TSO Table II


479
 
9-26-1969
 
TSO Table II


480
 
11- -1969
 
TSO Table II


482
 
2-20-1970
 
TSO Table II


484
 
3-2-1970
 
150.07


489
 
4-20-1970
 
33.03


490
 
5-8-1970
 
TSO Table II


491
 
5-22-1970
 
TSO Table II


493
 
7-6-1970
 
TSO Table I


495
 
7-6-1970
 
TSO Table II


496
 
7-28-1970
 
TSO Table II


497
 
8-17-1970
 
TSO Table I


520
 
1-17-1972
 
TSO Table I


529
 
7-24-1972
 
TSO Table I


530
 
8-11-1972
 
TSO Table II


533
 
8-28-1972
 
TSO Table I


535
 
12-9-1972
 
TSO Table II


536
 
12-27-1972
 
TSO Table II


537
 
12-27-1972
 
TSO Table II


559
 
3-3-1973
 
31.01


542-1/2
 
5-7-1973
 
TSO Table I


543
 
6-11-1973
 
TSO Table II


547
 
11-10-1973
 
TSO Table II


549
 
12-3-1973
 
33.02


551
 
12-17-1973
 
33.01


550
 
1-10-1974
 
TSO Table II


552
 
5- -1974
 
TSO Table II


3, 2nd series
 
12-8-1975
 
TSO Table II


9, 2nd series
 
4-5-1976
 
TSO Table I


10, 2nd series
 
4-19-1976
 
TSO Table I


11, 2nd series
 
4-19-1976
 
TSO Table I


14, 2nd series
 
6-21-1976
 
TSO Table II


15, 2nd series
 
9-7-1976
 
TSO Table II


27, 2nd series
 
3-20-1978
 
TSO Table II


31, 2nd series
 
5-15-1978
 
TSO Table I


32, 2nd series
 
6-5-1978
 
TSO Table II


30, 2nd series
 
5-1-1978
 
TSO Table II


36, 2nd series
 
9-18-1978
 
TSO Table I


39, 2nd series
 
12-18-1978
 
TSO Table II


43, 2nd series
 
5-10-1979
 
TSO Table II


2
 
12-1-1980
 
110.24


3
 
3-2-1981
 
156.003, 156.035, 156.036, 156.054


4
 
3-2-1981
 
155.46


5
 
3-16-1981
 
156.003, 156.035


9, 3rd series
 
4-4-1981
 
TSO Table II


10, 3rd series
 
4-4-1981
 
TSO Table II


7, 3rd series
 
4-6-1981
 
TSO Table II


11
 
5-4-1981
 
31.02


13
 
7-6-1981
 
156.003


14, 3rd series
 
8-3-1981
 
TSO Table II


15
 
8-17-1981
 
30.09, 31.02


16, 3rd series
 
9-8-1981
 
TSO Table III


18, 3rd series
 
8-21-1981
 
TSO Table II


21
 
4-8-1982
 
156.003, 156.035


22
 
7-19-1982
 
156.036


23
 
8-16-1982
 
152.03, 156.003, 156.035, 156.040, 156.054


24
 
10-18-1982
 
152.03, 156.003, 156.035, 156.040, 156.054


24, 2nd series
 
10-3-1997
 
TSO Table II


26, 3rd series
 
11-1-1982
 
TSO Table II


27, 3rd series
 
11-15-1982
 
TSO Table II


28, 3rd series
 
11-15-1982
 
TSO Table II


29-82
 
12-6-1982
 
156.003, 156.038


30
 
2-22-1983
 
156.044


31
 
2-22-1983
 
156.055, 156.086


32, 3rd series
 
3-21-1983
 
TSO Table I


33
 
3-21-1983
 
156.045


34, 3rd series
 
7-18-1983
 
TSO Table II


35
 
8-1-1983
 
34.15–34.30


36
 
8-15-1983
 
156.035


37
 
8-15-1983
 
156.003


38, 3rd series
 
6-20-1983
 
TSO Table I


39, 3rd series
 
7-18-1983
 
TSO Table I


40, 3rd series
 
8-15-1983
 
TSO Table I


42, 3rd series
 
11-7-1983
 
TSO Table II


43, 3rd series
 
1-16-1984
 
TSO Table II


46
 
6-18-1984
 
156.045


47
 
7-2-1984
 
51.01, 51.07


50, 3rd series
 
10-15-1984
 
TSO Table I


54
 
12-17-1984
 
156.038, 156.040, 156.041


56, 3rd series
 
2-4-1985
 
TSO Table II


59, 3rd series
 
7-15-1985
 
TSO Table II


61, 3rd series
 
9-16-1985
 
TSO Table II


62, 3rd series
 
9-16-1985
 
TSO Table II


64, 3rd series
 
10-21-1985
 
TSO Table II


65, 3rd series
 
12-2-1985
 
TSO Table II


68, 3rd series
 
12-16-1985
 
TSO Table I


69, 3rd series
 
- -
 
TSO Table III


70
 
1-21-1986
 
156.052


71, 3rd series
 
1-21-1986
 
TSO Table II


72
 
3-3-1986
 
53.01, 53.02, 53.20–53.25, 53.55–53.58


73
 
3-3-1986
 
53.40–53.43


75, 3rd series
 
3-17-1986
 
TSO Table II


76, 3rd series
 
4-7-1986
 
TSO Table II


77, 3rd series
 
4-7-1986
 
TSO Table II


78, 3rd series
 
5-5-1986
 
TSO Table II


79, 3rd series
 
5-5-1986
 
TSO Table II


81
 
5-19-1986
 
155.03


83, 3rd series
 
6-16-1986
 
TSO Table II


85, 3rd series
 
12-8-1986
 
TSO Table II


87, 3rd series
 
2-17-1987
 
TSO Table I


88
 
5-18-1987
 
52.01


89, 3rd series
 
9-21-1987
 
TSO Table I


90
 
9-21-1987
 
154.01–154.08, 154.16–154.18, 154.98


95, 3rd series
 
8-15-1988
 
TSO Table I


96, 3rd series
 
8-15-1988
 
TSO Table I


97, 3rd series
 
9-5-1988
 
TSO Table I


98, 3rd series
 
10-17-1988
 
TSO Table I


100, 3rd series
 
12-12-1988
 
TSO Table I


101
 
1-17-1989
 
51.06


104, 3rd series
 
3-20-1989
 
TSO Table I


105, 3rd series
 
5-15-1989
 
TSO Table III


106, 3rd series
 
6-5-1989
 
TSO Table III


107
 
6-5-1989
 
111.208


109
 
9-18-1989
 
153.01–153.09


111, 3rd series
 
2-5-1990
 
TSO Table II


112, 3rd series
 
2-5-1990
 
TSO Table II


113, 3rd series
 
4-16-1990
 
TSO Table II


114
 
5-7-1990
 
156.035


115, 3rd series
 
6-18-1990
 
TSO Table II


118, 3rd series
 
9-17-1990
 
TSO Table II


119, 3rd series
 
10-1-1990
 
TSO Table II


120
 
1-22-1991
 
55.01–55.05


121
 
9-16-1991
 
10.05, 90.001, 90.002, 90.020–90.026, 90.040–90.050, 90.060–90.064,
90.075–90.082, 90.095–90.097, 90.110, 90.111, 90.125, 90.126,
90.140–90.143, 90.155–90.158, 90.175–90.179, 90.190–90.198,
90.210–91.213, 90.225–90.227, 90.240–90.244, 94.01–94.04,
111.001–111.004, 111.020–111.035, 111.050–111.054, 111.065–111.070,
111.085–111.091, 111.115–111.120, 111.135–111.140, 111.155, 111.156,
111.170–111.175, 111.190, 111.192, 111.205–111.208, 111.999,
130.01–130.07


122, 3rd series
 
3-2-1992
 
TSO Table II


124
 
4-20-1992
 
110.26


125, 3rd series
 
6-15-1992
 
TSO Table I


127
 
3-15-1993
 
32.29


128, 3rd series
 
6-7-1993
 
TSO Table III


129, 3rd series
 
6-21-1993
 
TSO Table I


130, 3rd series
 
9-20-1993
 
TSO Table I


131, 3rd series
 
9-20-1993
 
TSO Table III


132
 
9-20-1993
 
31.02, 32.01


134, 3rd series
 
1-3-1994
 
TSO Table III


136
 
2-22-1994
 
33.07


138
 
4-4-1994
 
111.036


139, 3rd series
 
4-18-1994
 
TSO Table II


140, 3rd series
 
4-18-1994
 
TSO Table III


141, 3rd series
 
4-18-1994
 
TSO Table III


142, 3rd series
 
8-15-1994
 
TSO Table I


144, 3rd series
 
9-6-1994
 
TSO Table II


145, 3rd series
 
9-6-1994
 
TSO Table I


146
 
3-6-1995
 
156.035


147, 3rd series
 
1-17-1995
 
TSO Table II


150, 3rd series
 
4-3-1995
 
TSO Table II


151, 3rd series
 
4-17-1995
 
TSO Table II


153, 3rd series
 
11-20-1995
 
TSO Table I


154, 3rd series
 
5-6-1996
 
TSO Table II


155
 
5-20-1996
 
111.208


156, 3rd series
 
9-16-1996
 
TSO Table III


157, 3rd series
 
10-21-1996
 
TSO Table I


158, 3rd series
 
11-18-1996
 
TSO Table II


159
 
3-17-1997
 
53.22


162, 3rd series
 
7-7-1997
 
TSO Table II


163, 3rd series
 
7-21-1997
 
TSO Table II


164, 3rd series
 
7-21-1997
 
TSO Table II


165, 3rd series
 
8-18-1997
 
TSO Table I


166, 3rd series
 
8-18-1997
 
TSO Table II


167, 3rd series
 
9-15-1997
 
TSO Table I


168, 3rd series
 
10-20-1997
 
TSO Table I


169, 3rd series
 
10-20-1997
 
TSO Table I


170, 3rd series
 
12-8-1997
 
TSO Table II


171, 3rd series
 
9-22-1997
 
TSO Table I


173, 3rd series
 
4-6-1998
 
TSO Table II


174, 3rd series
 
5-18-1998
 
TSO Table II


175, 3rd series
 
5-18-1998
 
TSO Table I


176, 3rd series
 
6-15-1998
 
TSO Table I


178, 3rd series
 
7-20-1998
 
TSO Table II


179, 3rd series
 
8-17-1998
 
TSO Table I


180, 3rd series
 
9-8-1998
 
TSO Table II


181, 3rd series
 
12-7-1998
 
TSO Table II


184, 3rd series
 
2-16-1999
 
TSO Table I


185, 3rd series
 
4-19-1999
 
TSO Table I


186, 3rd series
 
1-18-1999
 
TSO Table I


186, 3rd series
 
7-6-1999
 
TSO Table II


187
 
6-21-1999
 
153.01, 153.03, 153.04


188, 3rd series
 
10-18-1999
 
TSO Table II


189, 3rd series
 
10-18-1999
 
TSO Table I


190, 3rd series
 
2-22-2000
 
TSO Table II


191, 3rd series
 
2-22-2000
 
TSO Table I


192, 3rd series
 
6-19-2000
 
TSO Table II


193
 
7-24-2000
 
156.035


194
 
7-24-2000
 
156.035


195, 3rd series
 
7-24-2000
 
TSO Table II


196, 3rd series
 
7-24-2000
 
TSO Table I


197, 3rd series
 
9-18-2000
 
TSO Table I


198, 3rd series
 
11-20-2000
 
TSO Table II


199, 3rd series
 
12-18-2000
 
TSO Table II


201, 3rd series
 
1-22-2001
 
TSO Table I


202, 3rd series
 
1-22-2001
 
TSO Table I


203, 3rd series
 
2-20-2001
 
TSO Table II


204, 3rd series
 
2-20-2001
 
TSO Table I


205, 3rd series
 
3-19-2001
 
TSO Table I


206
 
4-16-2001
 
156.035


207, 3rd series
 
6-18-2001
 
TSO Table I


208, 3rd series
 
12-17-2001
 
TSO Table II


209, 3rd series
 
12-17-2001
 
TSO Table I


210, 3rd series
 
2-19-2002
 
TSO Table I


211, 3rd series
 
3-4-2002
 
TSO Table II


212, 3rd series
 
3-18-2002
 
TSO Table II


213
 
3-18-2002
 
156.020, 156.050


214
 
4-15-2002
 
156.003, 156.037


215
 
4-15-2002
 
112.01–112.06, 112.99


216
 
4-15-2002
 
111.209


218, 3rd series
 
5-20-2002
 
TSO Table I


219
 
6-3-2002
 
150.02


220
 
6-3-2002
 
156.085


221, 3rd series
 
6-3-2002
 
TSO Table II


222, 3rd series
 
6-17-2002
 
TSO Table I


224, 3rd series
 
7-15-2002
 
TSO Table I


225, 3rd series
 
8-5-2002
 
TSO Table II


226, 3rd series
 
2-18-2003
 
TSO Table II


227, 3rd series
 
7-18-2003
 
TSO Table I


228, 3rd series
 
7-18-2003
 
TSO Table I


229
 
6-2-2003
 
150.01


230, 3rd series
 
8-18-2003
 
TSO Table II


231
 
8-18-2003
 
111.205


232, 3rd series
 
8-18-2003
 
TSO Table I


233
 
12-1-2003
 
156.035


234
 
12-1-2003
 
151.01–151.08, 151.10–151.12, 151.99


235
 
1-20-2004
 
156.035


236, 3rd series
 
4-19-2004
 
TSO Table II


237, 3rd series
 
5-17-2004
 
TSO Table II


238, 3rd series
 
5-17-2004
 
TSO Table II


239
 
5-17-2004
 
156.039


240, 3rd series
 
6-21-2004
 
TSO Table II


241, 3rd series
 
6-21-2004
 
TSO Table II


242, 3rd series
 
6-21-2004
 
TSO Table I


243, 3rd series
 
7-19-2004
 
TSO Table II


244, 3rd series
 
8-16-2004
 
TSO Table II


245, 3rd series
 
9-20-2004
 
TSO Table I


246, 3rd series
 
11-15-2004
 
TSO Table II


247, 3rd series
 
11-15-2004
 
TSO Table I


248
 
12-20-2004
 
156.050


249, 3rd series
 
2-23-2005
 
TSO Table I


250, 3rd series
 
3-21-2005
 
TSO Table I


251, 3rd series
 
4-4-2005
 
TSO Table II


252, 3rd series
 
4-4-2005
 
TSO Table I


215
 
4-15-2005
 
112.99


253, 3rd series
 
4-18-2005
 
TSO Table I


254, 3rd series
 
5-2-2005
 
TSO Table I


255, 3rd series
 
5-16-2005
 
TSO Table I


–
 
5-2-2005
 
151.13


–
 
5-16-2005
 
151.13


258, 3rd series
 
7-18-2005
 
TSO Table I


259, 3rd series
 
7-18-2005
 
TSO Table I


260, 3rd series
 
8-1-2005
 
TSO Table II


261, 3rd series
 
10-10-2005
 
TSO Table II


262, 3rd series
 
10-24-2005
 
TSO Table I


263, 3rd series
 
11-7-2005
 
TSO Table II


264
 
11-21-2005
 
151.01–151.08, 151.10–151.13, 151.99


2, 4th series
 
3-20-2006
 
TSO Table I


3, 4th series
 
3-20-2006
 
TSO Table I


4, 4th series
 
7-10-2006
 
TSO Table II


5, 4th series
 
7-24-2006
 
TSO Table II


6, 4th series
 
7-24-2006
 
TSO Table I


7, 4th series
 
10-16-2006
 
TSO Table III


8, 4th series
 
1-16-2007
 
55.01–55.05, 90.063, 90.111, 92.01, 92.18, 92.19, 130.99, 151.11, 151.13,
154.05, 154.11, 154.13, 155.11, 155.46, 156.035, 156.037–156.048, 156.053,
156.054, 156.056, 156.086


9, 4th series
 
2-5-2007
 
TSO Table I


10, 4th series
 
2-20-2007
 
TSO Table II


11, 4th series
 
3-19-2007
 
TSO Table I


12, 4th series
 
3-19-2007
 
TSO Table I


13, 4th series
 
9-17-2007
 
TSO Table II


14, 4th series
 
9-17-2007
 
TSO Table I


15, 4th series
 
11-19-2007
 
TSO Table I


16, 4th series
 
12-17-2007
 
TSO Table II


17, 4th series
 
1-17-2008
 
52.05, 71.10, 90.060, 91.02, 92.19, 92.20, 92.22, 151.11, 151.13, 154.03,
154.05, 156.003, 156.035, 156.042 - 156.045, 156.054


18, 4th series
 
6-16-2008
 
34.40–34.50


19, 4th series
 
7-7-2008
 
154.13, 154.15


20, 4th series
 
11-17-2008
 
TSO Table I


21, 4th series
 
1-20-2009
 
110.08, 112.04, 112.07, 130.03, 130.09, 151.11, 154.13, 154.15, 156.035,
156.037


22, 4th series
 
3-16-2009
 
TSO Table II


23, 4th series
 
4-20-2009
 
TSO Table II


24, 4th series
 
4-20-2009
 
TSO Table I


25, 4th series
 
4-20-2009
 
TSO Table I


26, 4th series
 
4-20-2009
 
TSO Table III


27, 4th series
 
8-17-2009
 
TSO Table II


28, 4th series
 
8-17-2009
 
TSO Table I


30, 4th series
 
1-4-2010
 
52.05, 52.07, 71.06, 151.09, 154.04, 154.15, 156.052–156.044


31, 4th Series
 
6-21-2010
 
TSO Table II


32, 4th Series
 
7-8-2010
 
TSO Table II


34, 4th Series
 
1-18-2011
 
32.01, 52.12, 92.16, 110.071, 110.24, 150.02, 151.07, 151.14, 154.16, 156.035


35, 4th Series
 
2-22-2011
 
54.05, 54.06, 54.08, 54.10–54.12, 54.15


36, 4th Series
 
3-21-2011
 
TSO Table II


37, 4th Series
 
6-20-2011
 
TSO Table I


38, 4th Series
 
6-20-2011
 
TSO Table I


39, 4th Series
 
7-18-2011
 
110.27


43, 4th Series
 
1-17-2012
 
91.05, 110.071, 151.07, 154.16


44, 4th Series
 
8-20-2012
 
TSO Table II


45, 4th Series
 
10-15-2012
 
TSO Table I


46, 4th Series
 
11-19-2012
 
TSO Table I


47, 4th Series
 
12-17-2012
 
TSO Table I


48, 4th Series
 
1-22-2013
 
11.01, 52.01, 54.05, 54.12-54.14, 73.09, 111.208, 156.035, 156.054


49, 4th Series
 
1-22-2013
 
TSO Table I


50, 4th Series
 
6-3-2013
 
30.04


52, 4th Series
 
9-16-2013
 
TSO Table I


53, 4th Series
 
1-21-2014
 
156.040, 156.041, 156.045


54, 4th Series
 
2-18-2014
 
32.30


55, 4th Series
 
2-18-2014
 
TSO Table I


56, 4th Series
 
3-17-2014
 
52.03


57, 4th Series
 
5-5-2014
 
155.46


58, 4th Series
 
7-7-2014
 
110.22


59, 4th Series
 
8-18-2014
 
TSO Table I


60, 4th Series
 
9-2-2014
 
151.05, 151.15


61, 4th Series
 
10-6-2014
 
TSO Table III


62, 4th Series
 
10-6-2014
 
TSO Table III


63, 4th Series
 
1-5-2015
 
30.08, 50.04, 50.06, 52.05, 53.22, 91.01, 91.02, 91.05, 92.18, 111.002,
111.003, 111.050, 111.155, 151.06 - 151.10, 151.16, 151.17, 154.04, 154.12,
154.15, 155.65, 156.035, 156.054, 156.056


64, 4th Series
 
2-17-2015
 
156.0401


65, 4th Series
 
3-2-2015
 
156.095–156.110


66, 4th Series
 
5-18-2015
 
50.04


67, 4th Series
 
6-1-2015
 
111.051


68, 4th Series
 
7-7-2015
 
111.205


70, 4th Series
 
7-20-2015
 
TSO Table I


71, 4th Series
 
8-17-2015
 
TSO Table II


72, 4th Series
 
1-19-2016
 
TSO Table I


73, 4th Series
 
1-19-2016
 
TSO Table I


74, 4th Series
 
6-20-2016
 
TSO Table I


75, 4th Series
 
7-18-2016
 
TSO Table I


76, 4th Series
 
7-18-2016
 
TSO Table III


77, 4th Series
 
8-1-2016
 
111.054


78, 4th Series
 
8-1-2016
 
156.057


79, 4th Series
 
8-1-2016
 
156.042–156.044


80, 4th Series
 
9-6-2016
 
151.11, 151.14, 151.16, 151.18–151.20


81, 4th Series
 
9-19-2016
 
155.46


82, 4th Series
 
12-5-2016
 
54.01–54.15, 54.98


83, 4th Series
 
12-5-2016
 
156.038


84, 4th Series
 
12-19-2016
 
TSO Table I


85, 4th Series
 
1-17-2017
 
TSO Table I


86, 4th Series
 
4-3-2017
 
50.04, 150.02, 150.04, 156.035, 156.053, 156.054


87, 4th Series
 
3-6-2017
 
91.19


88, 4th Series
 
5-1-2017
 
111.205


89, 4th Series
 
5-15-2017
 
TSO Table I


90, 4th Series
 
5-25-2017
 
TSO Table II


91, 4th Series
 
6-5-2017
 
154.12


92, 4th Series
 
6-5-2017
 
154.15


93, 4th Series
 
2-5-2018
 
110.22


94, 4th Series
 
8-7-2017
 
111.036


95, 4th Series
 
8-21-2017
 
TSO Table I


96, 4th Series
 
9-18-2017
 
TSO Table II


97, 4th Series
 
12-18-2017
 
TSO Table II


98, 4th Series
 
12-18-2017
 
TSO Table I


99, 4th Series
 
2-20-2018
 
TSO Table II


100, 4th Series
 
3-5-2018
 
155.50


101, 4th Series
 
3-19-2018
 
TSO Table I


102, 4th Series
 
4-2-2018
 
52.07, 91.04, 150.08, 150.09, 151.11, 156.035, 156.052, 156.054


103, 4th Series
 
4-16-2018
 
TSO Table II


104, 4th Series
 
5-21-2018
 
TSO Table I


105, 4th Series
 
8-20-2018
 
156.036 - 156.041


106, 4th Series
 
8-20-2018
 
71.05


107, 4th Series
 
9-4-2018
 
51.03


108, 4th Series
 
9-4-2018
 
33.07


109, 4th Series
 
9-17-2018
 
154.05


110, 4th Series
 
12-3-2018
 
TSO Table I


111, 4th Series
 
1-7-2019
 
157.01 - 157.11, 157.99


112, 4th Series
 
1-22-2019
 
54.16, 93.04, 156.035, 156.044, 156.051


 
 
 
 
 




 


