6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 1/497
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Ordinances listed under this folder in the table of contents to the left, have been passed, but
have not been incorporated in the actual code. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are
any questions concerning the ordinances listed.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO.: 2016-12
CITY OF OTSEGO
COUNTY OF WRIGHT, MINNESOTA
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY CODE REGULATING PARK HOURS.
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF OTSEGO DOES HEREBY ORDAIN:
Section 1. Section 6-7-3.A of the City Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
A. No person shall be upon any City of Otsego property, nor shall any person park a vehicle upon any City park, greenway, or parking lot within a City
park property between sunset and sunrise of the following day except as otherwise regulated by this Section or other provisions of the City Code.
Section 2. Section 6-7-3 of the City Code is hereby amended to read to include the following provisions:
C. Use of ice staking rinks or designated dog parks within a City park property shall be allowed between the hours of 5:00 AM to 10:00PM each
day.
Section 3. This Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its passage and publication.
MOTION BY: Heidner
SECOND BY: Schroeder
ALL IN FAVOR: Stockamp, Heidner, Schroeder, Warehime
THOSE OPPOSED: None
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 2/497
ADOPTED by the City Council of the City of Otsego this 24th day of October, 2016.
CITY OF OTSEGO
BY:_____________________________
Jessica L. Stockamp, Mayor
ATTEST:______________________________
Tami Loff, City Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO.: 2017-08
CITY OF OTSEGO
COUNTY OF WRIGHT, MINNESOTA
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY CODE RELATED TO BACKFLOW PREVENTER DEVICE REQUIREMENTS.
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF OTSEGO DOES HEREBY ORDAIN:
Section 1. Section 6-2-6.I of the City Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
I. Backflow Preventer Device Monitoring Program:
1. Requirements. Backflow Preventer Device monitoring requirements for Reduced Pressure Zone (RPZ) and testable non-RPZ devices as
established by the State of Minnesota Plumbing Code:
a. The owner is responsible for testing and inspection of the device to be completed at least annually by a person certified in
accordance with the State of Minnesota Plumbing Code.
b. Change of use for an establishment requiring a device shall require verification of proper sizing and functionality for compliance with
the Minnesota Plumbing Code as if a new device is being installed.
2. Inspection and Rebuild Reports:
a. An inspections and maintenance report shall be submitted annually to the Utility Department within 30 days of testing.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 3/497
b. Required report information:
(1) Address and location of Device.
(2) Type of device, manufacturer, model, and serial number.
(3) Date of service.
(4) Type of service (inspection or maintenance).
(5) License number and signature of the certified tester.
c. A test inspection tag shall be affixed to the device including the date, signature, and tester identification number.
d. Failure to complete an inspection or submit an inspection report as required by this Section shall be subject to issuance of an
administrative citation in accordance with Section 2-5-3 of the City Code and assessed to the utility account of the owner.
Section 2. This Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its passage and publication.
MOTION BY: Darkenwald
SECOND BY: Warehime
ALL IN FAVOR: Stockamp, Darkenwald, Warehime, Tanner, Heidner
THOSE OPPOSED: None
ADOPTED by the City Council of the City of Otsego this 10th day of July, 2017.
CITY OF OTSEGO
BY:_____________________________
Jessica L. Stockamp, Mayor
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 4/497
ATTEST:______________________________
Tami Loff, City Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO.: 2019-07
CITY OF OTSEGO
COUNTY OF WRIGHT, MINNESOTA
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY CODE REGARDING SMALL CELL WIRELESS FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT.
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF OTSEGO DOES HEREBY ORDAIN:
Section 1. Section 3-1-2.I of the City Code (Fee Schedule – Engineering; ROW Permit) is hereby amendment to add the following provisions:
ROW permit Title 8, chapter 6
Excavation fee $200.00 + cost
incurred
Obstruction fee $2.50/ft. or
$2,000.00
whichever is less
Obstruction escrow $5,000 or
$2.50/ft.
whichever is
greater
Small wireless facility
Management fee $200.00
Annual lease fee for use of City structure $150.00
Annual collocation maintenance fee $25.00
Electrical service fee Cost incurred.
Section 2. Title 8, Chapter 6 of the City Code (public rights-of-way management) is hereby amended to include the following provisions with subsequent
sections renumbered accordingly:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 5/497
8-6-2: ELECTION TO MANAGE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY: Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under state and federal statutory, administrative and
common law, the city hereby elects pursuant to Minnesota statutes 237.163 subdivision 2(b), to manage rights of way within its jurisdiction. All right of way users,
including the city, are subject to the provisions in this chapter. The city is exempt from the obligation of paying for permits or other fees imposed by this chapter. This
chapter shall be interpreted consistently with the 1997 session laws, chapter 123 and 2017 session laws, chapter 94, substantially codified in Minnesota statutes
sections 237.16, 237.162, 237.163, 237.79, 237.81 and 238.086 (the "act"), Minnesota statutes chapter 216D and other laws governing applicable rights of the city and
users of the right of way. This chapter shall also be interpreted consistent with Minnesota rules 7819.0050 _ 7819.9950 and Minnesota rules chapter 7560 where
possible. To the extent any provisions of this chapter cannot be interpreted consistently with Minnesota rules, that interpretation most consistent with the act and other
applicable statutory and case law is intended.
Section 3. Section 8-6-3 of the City Code (Public Rights-of-Way Management - Definitions) is hereby amended to revise the following definitions:
MANAGEMENT COSTS: The actual costs incurred by the city for managing its public rights-of-way, including, but not limited to, costs associated with registering
applicants; issuing, processing and verifying right of way or small wireless facility permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration projects; maintaining,
supporting, protecting, or moving user facilities during right of way work; determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration; restoring work inadequately performed,
including turf, sidewalks, trails and pavement, after providing notice and the opportunity to correct the work; revoking right of way or small wireless facility permits; and
creating and updating mapping systems. Management costs do not include payment by a telecommunications right of way user for the use of the right of way, ;
unreasonable fees of a third-party contractor used by the city as part of managing public right-of-way, including but not limited to any third-party contractor fee tied to or
based upon customer counts, access lines, revenue generated by the telecommunications right of way user, or revenue generated for the city; or the fees and cost of
litigation relating to the interpretation of Minnesota session laws 2017, chapter 94, Minnesota session laws 1997, chapter 123; Minnesota statutes section 237.162 or
237.163 or any ordinance enacted under those sections, or the city fees and costs related to appeals taken pursuant to section 8-6-22 of this chapter,
RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT: Either the An excavation permit or the, obstruction permit, or both, depending on the context or a small wireless facility permit, required by this
chapter.
TELECOMMUNICATION RIGHT OF WAY USER: A person owning or controlling a facility in the right of way, or seeking to own or control the same, which is used or is
intended to be used for providing wireless service, or transporting telecommunication or other video, voice or data information. For purposes of this chapter, a cable
communication system defined and regulated under Minnesota statutes chapter 238, and telecommunications activities related to providing natural gas or electric energy
services, whether provided by a public utility as defined in Minnesota statutes section 216B.02, a municipality, a municipal gas or power agency organized under
Minnesota statutes chapters 453 and 453A, or a cooperative electric association organized under Minnesota statutes chapter 308A, are not telecommunications right of
way users for purposes of this chapter, except to the extent these entities are offering wireless services.
Section 4. Section 8-6-3 of the City Code (Public Rights-of-Way Management - Definitions) is hereby amended to add the following definitions:
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace a small wireless facility on, under, within, or adjacent to an existing wireless
support structure that is owned privately or by the city.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: A small wireless facility that is no larger than 24 inches long, 15 inches wide, and 12 inches high, and whose exterior antenna, if any, is
no longer than 11 inches.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY OR RIGHT OF WAY: The surface, airspace above the surface and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path, alley,
sidewalk, trail, avenue, boulevard, drive, court, concourse, bridge, tunnel, park, parkway, skyway, waterway, dock, bulkhead, wharf, pier, easement or similar property or
waters within the city owned by or under control of the city, or dedicated or otherwise conveyed to the city for general public use, including, but not limited to, any riparian
right, which, consistent with the purposes for which it was created, obtained or dedicated, may be used for the purpose of installing, operating and maintaining utility
service facilities. No reference herein to a "public right of way" or “right of way” shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the city that its interest or other
right to control or use such property is sufficient to permit its use for the purpose of installing, operating and maintaining utility service facilities.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY USER:
A. A telecommunications right-of-way user as defined by Minnesota statutes section 237.162, subdivision 4; or
B. A person or entity owning or controlling a facility in the right-of-way that is used or intended to be used for providing utility service, and who has a right under law,
franchise, or ordinance to use the right-of-way.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 6/497
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: (1) A wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six (6)
cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all its exposed elements could fit within an enclosure of no more than six
(6) cubic feet; and (ii) all other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility, excluding electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications
demarcation boxes, battery backup power systems, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, cable conduit, vertical cable runs for connection of
power and other services, and any equipment concealed from public view within or behind an existing structure or concealment, is in aggregate no more than twenty
eight (28) cubic feet in volume; or (2) a micro wireless facility.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY PERMIT: The permit issued by the city authorizing the permittee to collocate a small wireless facility or install and maintain a wireless
support structure.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY PERMIT FEE: Money paid to the city by the permittee to cover the costs as provided in section 8-6-7 of this chapter.
UTILITY POLE: A pole that is used in whole or in part to facilitate telecommunications or electric service.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables the provision of wireless services between user equipment and a wireless service network, including:
(1) equipment associated with wireless service; (2) a radio transceiver, antenna, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable
equipment, regardless of technological configuration; and (3) a small wireless facility. Wireless facility does not include: (1) wireless support structures, (2) wireline
backhaul facilities, or (3) coaxial or fiber-optic cables between utility poles or wireless support structures, or that are not otherwise immediately adjacent to or directly
associated with a specific antenna.
WIRELESS SERVICE: Any service using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi whether at a fixed location or by means of a mobile
device, that is provided using wireless facilities. Wireless service does not include services regulated under Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended,
including a cable service under United States Code, title 47, section 522 clause (6).
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A new or existing structure in a public right of way designed to support or capable of supporting small wireless facilities, as
reasonably determined by the city.
WIRELINE BACKHAUL FACILITY: A facility used to transport communications data by wire from a wireless facility to a communications network.
Section 5. Section 8-6-3 of the City Code (Public Rights-of-Way Management - Definitions) is hereby amended to repeal the following definition:
RIGHT-OF-WAY: The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane, and public sidewalk in which the City has an interest, including
other dedicated rights-of-way for travel purposes and utility easements of the City. A right-of-way does not include the air waves above a right-of-way with regard to
cellular or other nonwire telecommunications or broadcast service.
Section 6. Section 8-6-5.A of the City Code (Public Rights-of-Way Management – Registration Requirements) is hereby amended to read as follows:
A. Registration Required:
1. Each person who occupies, uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the right-of-way for purposes of placing, maintaining or repairing any equipment or facilities
or small wireless facilities or wireless support structures in the right-of-way, including persons with installation and maintenance responsibilities by lease,
sublease or assignment, must register with the Director. Registration will consist of providing application information and paying a registration fee.
2. No person may construct, install, repair, remove, relocate, collocate, or perform any other work on, or use any facilities or any part thereof in any right-ofway
without first being registered with the Director.
Section 7. Section 8-6-7.A of the City Code (Public Rights-of-Way Management – Permit Requirements) is hereby amended to read as follows:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 7/497
A. Permits Required: Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no person may obstruct or excavate excavate, place a utility service, install or place facilities, or
obstruct any right-of-way without first having obtained the appropriate right-of-way permit from the Director to do so.
1. Excavation Permit: An excavation permit is required by a registrant to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit and to hinder free
and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified therein.
2. Obstruction Permit: An obstruction permit is required by a registrant to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of right-of-way by placing
equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the extent and for the duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is not required if a person
already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same project.
3. Small Wireless Facility Permit: A small wireless facility permit is required by a registrant to erect or install a wireless support structure, to collocate a small
wireless facility, or to otherwise install a small wireless facility in the specified portion of the right of way, to the extent specified therein, provided that such
permit shall remain in effect for the length of time the facility is in use, unless lawfully revoked.
Section 8. Section 8-6-7 of the City Code (Public Rights-of-Way Management – Permit Requirements) is hereby amended to add the following provisions with
subsequent sections renumbered accordingly:
C. Small Wireless Facility Permit Applications:
1. Deadline for Action: The City shall approve or deny a small wireless facility permit application within ninety (90) days after receiving a complete
application. The small wireless facility permit, and any associated encroachment or building permit shall be deemed approved if the city fails to approve or
deny the application within the review periods established in this section.
2. Consolidated Applications:
a. An applicant may file a consolidated small wireless facility permit application addressing the proposed collocation of up to fifteen (15) small
wireless facilities, or a greater number if agreed by the city, provided that all small wireless facilities in an application:
(1) are located within a two (2) mile radius;
(2) consist of substantially similar equipment; and
(3) are to be placed on similar types of wireless support structures.
b. In rendering a decision on a consolidated permit application, the city may approve some small wireless facilities and deny others, but may not use
denial of one or more permits as a basis to deny all small wireless facilities in the application.
3. Tolling of Deadline for Action: The ninety (90) day deadline for action may be tolled if:
a. The city receives applications within a single seven-day period from one or more applicants seeking approval of permits for more than thirty (30)
small wireless facilities. In such case, the city may extend the ninety (90) day deadline for all such applications by an additional 30 days by
informing the affected applicants in writing of such extension.
b. The applicant fails to submit all required documents or information and the city provides written notice of incompleteness to the applicant within
thirty (30) business days of receipt of the application, clearly and specifically delineating all missing documents or information. Information
delineated in the notice is limited to documents or information publicly required as of the date of application and reasonably related to the city’s
determination whether the proposed equipment falls within the definition of a small wireless facility and whether the proposed deployment satisfies
all health, safety, and welfare regulations applicable to the small wireless facility permit request. Upon applicant’s submittal of additional
information in response to a notice of incompleteness, the city has ten (10) days to notify the applicant in writing of any information requested in
the initial notice of incompleteness that is still missing. Second or subsequent notices of incompleteness may not specify documents or information
that were delineated in the original notice of incompleteness. Requests for information not requested in the initial notice of incompleteness do not
toll the ninety (90) day deadline for action.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 8/497
c. The city and applicant may agree in writing to toll the review period.
Section 9. Section 8-6-7.D of the City Code (Public Rights-of-Way Management – Issuance of Permit; Conditions) is hereby amended to read as follows:
D. Issuance Of Permit; Conditions:
1. If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of this chapter, the Director shall issue a permit.
2. The Director may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to protect the health,
safety, and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current and future use.
a. Installation, placement, location and relocation of facilities shall comply with all federal, state and local laws.
b. Installation of all underground utilities shall be in accordance with the underground utilities regulations set forth in this section and all other
applicable federal, state and local laws.
c. Precautions shall be taken as are necessary to avoid creating unsafe or unsanitary conditions.
d. Project operations and work shall be conducted in a manner so as to ensure the least obstruction to and interference with present and continued
use of the right-of-way.
e. Precautions shall be taken to assure the safety of the general public, employees, invitees and those who require access to abutting property,
including appropriate signage.
f. The permittee shall notify abutting property owners with a forty eight (48) hour written notice prior to commencement of any permitted project.
g. The permittee involved in underground projects shall register with Gopher State One Call and comply with the requirements thereof.
h. The permittee shall comply with the "Minnesota Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (MMUTCD) at all times during any project work and
shall protect and identify excavations and work operations with barricade flags in the daylight hours and by warning lights at dusk and night.
i. The permittee shall comply with all conditions of the permit.
j. When any trail, sidewalk or driveway has been cut, city approved signage must be kept in place and maintained until restoration is complete.
k. The permittee shall provide proper trench protection as required by OSHA to prevent any cave in; injury to property or persons; or enlargement of
the excavation.
l. Excavations, trenches and jacking pits off the roadway surface area or adjacent to the roadway or curbing shall be sheathed and braced. When
unattended, all excavations, trenches and jacking pits shall be secured and protected to prevent surface drainage and access by unauthorized
persons.
m. The permittee shall protect the root growth of trees and shrubbery located within the right of way and adjacent thereto.
n. The permittee shall coordinate project work and installation of facilities in collocations involving other right of way users.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 9/497
o. The permittee shall maintain access to all properties and cross streets during project work, including emergency vehicle access.
p. The permittee shall physically locate property lines abutting the project work. The permittee shall replace, with the services of a Minnesota
licensed surveyor, any property corners or monuments disturbed as a result of the project.
q. The permittee shall complete restoration of the right of way in conformance with this section.
r. No permittee, or any agent, subcontractor or employee thereof, shall use lugs (steel tracks) on any roadway surfaces.
s. The permittee shall remove daily, or as required by the city, all dirt or debris from sidewalks, trails, public and private roadway surfaces and curbs
and gutters during project work.
t. The permittee shall obtain all other necessary permits, licenses and approvals, pay all required fees therefor and comply with all requirements of
local, state and federal laws.
u. The permittee shall not do any work outside the project area as specified in the permit.
v. The permittee shall conduct a public informational meeting for all major projects as deemed necessary by the city.
w. In new subdivisions in which public utilities have been constructed, permit applications will not be accepted for review prior to construction plan
completion by the subdivider's engineer and the mapping requirements specified in section 8-6-14 of this chapter have been satisfied.
Construction plans shall be submitted to the small utility companies by the subdivider.
x. Trenchless excavation/directional boring is prohibited more than forty eight inches (48") below grade unless the city engineer finds as built record
drawings indicate that there are no existing utilities in the vicinity that could be impacted.
3. Small Wireless Facility Conditions:
a. In addition to section 8-6-7.D.2 of this section, the erection or installation of a wireless support structure, the collocation of a small wireless facility,
or other installation of a small wireless facility in the right of way, shall be subject to the following conditions:
(1) A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on the particular wireless support structure, under those attachment specifications, and at
the height indicated in the applicable permit application.
(2) No new wireless support structure installed within the right of way shall exceed fifty (50) feet above ground level in height without the city’s
written authorization, provided that the city may impose a lower height limit in the applicable permit to protect the public health, safety and
welfare or to protect the right of way and its current use, and further provided that a wireless support structure that replaces an existing
wireless support structure in the public right of way that is greater than fifty (50) feet above ground level in height may be placed at the
height of the existing wireless support structure, subject to such conditions or requirements as may be imposed in the applicable permit.
(3) No wireless facility constructed in the right of way after EFFECTIVE DATE may extend more than ten (10) feet above a wireless support
structure existing on EFFECTIVE DATE.
(4) Where an applicant proposes to install a new wireless support structure in the right-of-way, the new wireless support structure shall not be
located within (600) feet of any existing wireless support structure in and around the right-of-way.
(5) Wireless support structures:
(a) All new wireless support structures shall be of a monopole design not exceeding eighteen (18) inches in diameter.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 10/497
(b) All replacement wireless support structure and equipment shall match the surrounding poles in structure design, materials, and
color.
(6) All of a small wireless facility that is affixed to a wireless support structure shall be the same or similar color of the wireless support
structure as practical.
(6) All electric, telephone, cable, fiber, or other utility lines necessary to operate a small wireless facility shall be installed within the applicable
wireless support structure where practical and shall not be coiled or rolled up and externally attached to the wireless support structure or
equipment boxes.
(7) Where an applicant proposes collocation on a decorative wireless support structure, sign, or other structure not intended to support small
wireless facilities, the city may impose reasonable requirements to accommodate the particular design, appearance, or intended purpose
of such structure.
(8) Where an applicant proposes to replace a wireless support structure, the city may impose reasonable restocking, replacement, or
relocation requirements on the replacement of such structure.
b. Small Wireless Facility Agreement:
(1) A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on a small wireless support structure owned or controlled by the city, or any other city
asset in the right-of-way, after applicant has executed a standard small wireless facility collocation agreement with the city. The standard
collocation agreement may require payment of the following set forth in section 3-2-1 of this title:
(a) Management costs;
(b) Annual rent on the city structure;
(c) An annual fee for maintenance associated with the collocation;
(d) Costs incurred for electrical service.
(2) The standard collocation agreement shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, the required small wireless facility permit provided, however,
that the applicant shall not be additionally required to obtain a license or franchise in order to collocate. Issuance of a small wireless facility
permit does not supersede, alter or affect any then-existing agreement between the city and applicant.
Section 10. Section 8-6-7.E of the City Code (Public Rights-of-Way Management – Denial of Permit) is hereby amended to read as follows:
E. Denial Of Permit:
1. The Director may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and conditions of this chapter or if the Director determines that the denial is
necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current and future use, and:
a. The city may deny a permit if the utility has failed to comply with previous permit conditions.
b. The city may withhold issuance of a permit until conditions of previous permits are complied with.
2. The denial of a permit must be made in writing and must document the basis for the denial. The city must notify the applicant in writing within three (3)
business days of the decision to deny a permit.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 11/497
3. If an application is denied, the applicant may address the reasons for denial identified by the city and resubmit its application. If the application is
resubmitted within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice of denial, no additional application fee shall be imposed. The city must approve or deny the
resubmitted application within thirty (30) days after submission
Section 11. Section 8-6-7.F.1 of the City Code (Public Rights-of-Way Management – Permit Fees) is hereby amended to read as follows:
F. Permit Fees:
a. Excavation Permit: The excavation permit fee shall be established in section 3-1-2 of this Code in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs:
(1) The City management costs.
(2) Degradation costs, if applicable.
(3) Use of the limited area within the public right-of-way.
b. Obstruction Permit:
(1) The obstruction permit fee shall be established by the Director in Section 3-1-2 of this Code and shall be in an amount sufficient to recover the
City management costs, as provided in section 3-1-2 of this Code.following costs:
(1) The City management costs.
(2) Degradation costs, if applicable.
(3) Use of the limited area within the public right-of-way.
(2) In addition to the obstruction permit fee, the applicant shall provide for securities as set forth in section 3-1-2 of this Code in an amount and form
determined by the Director to guarantee restoration or repair of the public right-of-way in compliance with this chapter.
c. Small Wireless Facility Permit Fee: The city shall impose a small wireless facility permit fee for the placement of small wireless facilities and wireless
support structures in the public right of way in an amount sufficient to recover:
(1) Management costs; and,
(2) City engineering, make-ready, and construction costs associated with collocation of small wireless facilities.
d. Cost of Initial Engineering Survey and Preparatory Construction Work Associated with Collocation: Any initial engineering survey and preparatory
construction work associated with collocation must be paid by the cost causer in the form of a onetime, nonrecurring, commercially reasonable,
nondiscriminatory, and competitively neutral charge to recover costs associated with a proposed attachment.
Section 12. Section 8-6-7.E.2 of the City Code (Public Rights-of-Way Management – Permit Fees) is hereby amended to read as follows:
2. Payment Of Fees: Payment Of Permit Fees: No excavation permit, or obstruction permit, or small wireless facility permit shall be issued without payment
of the respective excavation, or obstruction, or small wireless facility permit fees. The city may allow the applicant to pay such fees within thirty (30) days
of billing.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 12/497
Section 13. Section 11-2-2 of the City Code (Zoning Ordinance - Definitions) is hereby amended to add the following definitions:
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY:
A. A wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in
the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all its exposed elements could fit within an enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and
(ii) all other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility, excluding electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation
boxes, battery backup power systems, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, cable conduit, vertical cable runs for connection of power
and other services, and any equipment concealed from public view within or behind an existing structure or concealment, is in aggregate no more than twenty
eight (28) cubic feet in volume; or,
B. A micro wireless facility.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables the provision of wireless services between user equipment and a wireless service network, including:
A. Equipment associated with wireless service;
B. A radio transceiver, antenna, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological
configuration; and
C. A small wireless facility does not include:
1. Wireless support structures.
2. Wireline backhaul facilities.
3. Coaxial or fiber-optic cables between utility poles or wireless support structures, or that are not otherwise immediately adjacent to or directly associated
with a specific antenna.
WIRELESS SERVICE: Any service using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi whether at a fixed location or by means of a mobile
device, that is provided using wireless facilities. Wireless service does not include services regulated under Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended,
including a cable service under United States Code, title 47, section 522 clause (6).
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A new or existing structure designed to support or capable of supporting small wireless facilities.
WIRELINE BACKHAUL FACILITY: A facility used to transport communications data by wire from a wireless facility to a communications network.
Section 14. Section 11-34-4.B of the City Code (Zoning Ordinance – Antennas) is hereby amended to read as follows:
B. Business And Institutional District Standards:
1. Antennas, Other Than Small Wireless, Located Upon A Public Structure: Personal wireless service antennas located upon a public structure shall comply
with the following standards:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 13/497
a. Transmitting, receiving and switching equipment shall be housed within an existing structure whenever possible. If a new equipment building is
necessary for transmitting, receiving and switching equipment, it shall be situated in the rear yard of the principal use and shall be screened from
view by landscaping where appropriate.
b. An administrative permit is issued in compliance with the provisions of chapter 8 of this title.
2. Antennas, Other Than Small Wireless, Not Located Upon A Public Structure: Personal wireless service antennas not located upon a public structure shall
require the processing of a conditional use permit and shall comply with the following standards:
a. The applicant shall demonstrate by providing a coverage/interference analysis and capacity analysis prepared by a registered professional
engineer that location of the antennas as proposed is necessary to meet the frequency reuse and spacing needs of the personal wireless service
system and to provide adequate portable personal wireless service coverage and capacity to areas which cannot be adequately served by locating
the antennas in a less restrictive district.
b. The antennas shall be located on an existing structure, if possible, and shall not extend more than fifteen feet (15') above the structural height of
the structure to which they are attached.
c. If no existing structure which meets the height requirements for the antennas is available for mounting purposes, the antennas may be mounted
on a single ground mounted pole; provided, that:
(1) The pole not exceed seventy five feet (75') in height.
(2) The setback of the pole from the nearest residential structure is not less than the height of the antenna. Exceptions to such setback may
be granted if a qualified structural engineer specifies in writing that any collapse of the pole will occur within a lesser distance under all
foreseeable circumstances.
d. Transmitting, receiving and switching equipment shall be housed within an existing structure whenever possible. If a new equipment building is
necessary for transmitting, receiving and switching equipment, it shall be situated in the rear yard of the principal use and shall be screened from
view by landscaping where appropriate.
e. Unless the antenna is mounted on an existing structure, a security fence not greater than eight feet (8') in height with a maximum opacity of fifty
percent (50%) shall be provided around the support structure.
f. The conditional use permit provisions of chapter 4 of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
3. Small wireless facilities and equipment as a permitted use, subject to the following standards:
a. A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on the particular wireless support structure, under those attachment specifications, and at the
height indicated in the applicable permit application.
b. No new wireless support structure shall exceed fifty (50) feet above ground level in height.
c. No wireless facility shall extend more than ten (10) feet above a wireless support structure.
d. Where an applicant proposes to install a new wireless support structure, the new wireless support structure shall not be located within (600) feet of
any existing wireless support structure.
e. Wireless support structures:
(1) All new wireless support structures shall be of a monopole design not exceeding eighteen (18) inches in diameter.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 14/497
(2) All replacement wireless support structure and equipment shall match the surrounding poles in structure design, materials, and color.
(3) All of a small wireless facility that is affixed to a wireless support structure shall be the same or similar color of the wireless support
structure as practical.
(4) All electric, telephone, cable, fiber, or other utility lines necessary to operate a small wireless facility shall be installed within the applicable
wireless support structure where practical and shall not be coiled or rolled up and externally attached to the wireless support structure or
equipment boxes.
Section 15. Section 11-34-4.C of the City Code (Zoning Ordinance – Antennas) is hereby amended to read as follows:
C. Industrial District Standards:
1. Antennas, Other Than Small Wireless Facilities, Located Upon A Public Structure: Personal wireless service antennas located upon a public structure
shall require the processing of an administrative permit and shall comply with the following standards: An administrative permit is issued in compliance
with the provisions of chapter 8 of this title.
2. Antennas, Other Than Small Wireless Facilities, Not Located Upon A Public Structure: Personal wireless service antennas not located upon a
public structure shall require the processing of an administrative permit and shall comply with the following standards:
a. The antennas shall be located upon a structure if possible.
b. If no existing structure which meets the height requirements for mounting the antennas, the antennas may be mounted upon a supporting
pole or tower not exceeding one hundred fifty feet (150') in height. Such pole or tower shall be located on a parcel having a dimension
equal to the height of the pole or tower measured between the base of the pole or tower located nearest the property line and said
property line, unless a qualified structural engineer specifies in writing that the collapse of the pole or tower will occur within a lesser
distance under all foreseeable circumstances.
c. An administrative permit is issued in compliance with the provisions of chapter 8 of this title.
3. Small wireless facilities and equipment as a permitted use, subject to the following standards:
a. A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on the particular wireless support structure, under those attachment specifications, and at the
height indicated in the applicable permit application.
b. No new wireless support structure shall exceed fifty (50) feet above ground level in height.
c. No wireless facility shall extend more than ten (10) feet above a wireless support structure.
d. Where an applicant proposes to install a new wireless support structure, the new wireless support structure shall not be located within (600) feet of
any existing wireless support structure.
e. Wireless support structures:
(1) All new wireless support structures shall be of a monopole design not exceeding eighteen (18) inches in diameter.
(2) All replacement wireless support structure and equipment shall match the surrounding poles in structure design, materials, and color.
(3) All of a small wireless facility that is affixed to a wireless support structure shall be the same or similar color of the wireless support
structure as practical.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 15/497
(4) All electric, telephone, cable, fiber, or other utility lines necessary to operate a small wireless facility shall be installed within the applicable
wireless support structure where practical and shall not be coiled or rolled up and externally attached to the wireless support structure or
equipment boxes.
Section 16. This Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its passage and publication.
MOTION BY: Darkenwald
SECOND BY: Goede
ALL IN FAVOR: Stockamp, Darkenwald, Tanner, Goede
THOSE OPPOSED: None
ADOPTED by the City Council of the City of Otsego this 8th day of April, 2019.
CITY OF OTSEGO
BY:_____________________________
Jessica L. Stockamp, Mayor
ATTEST:______________________________
Tami Loff, City Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO.: 2019-08
CITY OF OTSEGO
COUNTY OF WRIGHT, MINNESOTA
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY CODE REGARDING
PLAY FIELD USE FEES
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF OTSEGO DOES HEREBY ORDAIN:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 16/497
Section 1. Section 3-1-2.B of the City Code (Fee Schedule –Play Field Use) is hereby amended as follows:
City Sponsored Users No-Charge
Ballfield $75/ Seasonal Field Assignment
$150/ Seasonal Field Assignment
Soccer 4v4
(Non-Irrigated)
$50/ Seasonal Field Assignment
$75/ Seasonal Field Assignment
Soccer 4v4
Irrigated
$70/ Seasonal Field Assignment
$105 Seasonal Field Assignment
Soccer Full Size Fields $100 Seasonal Field Assignment
$200 Seasonal Field Assignment
Baseball/ Softball
Tournaments
$150 Per Tournament
Soccer Tournaments $150 Per Tournament
Day Camps $20 Per day
Section 2. This Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its passage and publication.
MOTION BY: Darkenwald
SECOND BY: Tanner
ALL IN FAVOR: Stockamp, Darkenwald, Tanner, Goede, Warehime
THOSE OPPOSED: None
ADOPTED by the City Council of the City of Otsego this 8th day of April, 2019.
CITY OF OTSEGO
BY:_____________________________
Jessica L. Stockamp, Mayor
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 17/497
ATTEST:______________________________
Tami Loff, City Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO.: 2019-11
CITY OF OTSEGO
COUNTY OF WRIGHT, MINNESOTA
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY CODE REGARDING WINTER PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF OTSEGO DOES HEREBY ORDAIN:
Section 1. Section 7-2-2.C of the City Code (Motor Vehicle and Traffic – On Street Parking Regulations) is hereby amended to read as follows:
C. Night Parking: No vehicle shall be parked upon any public streets, boulevards, ditches, and rights-of-way in the City between the hours of
two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., inclusive, between November 1 and April 30, including, but not limited to, Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays.
Section 2. This Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its passage and publication.
MOTION BY: Tanner
SECOND BY: Darkenwald
ALL IN FAVOR: Stockamp, Tanner, Darkenwald, Goede, Warehime
THOSE OPPOSED: None
ADOPTED by the City Council of the City of Otsego this 13th day of May, 2019.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 18/497
CITY OF OTSEGO
BY:_____________________________
Jessica L. Stockamp, Mayor
ATTEST:______________________________
Tami Loff, City Clerk
PREFACE
This City Code of the City of Otsego, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 2019-06, passed February 25, 2019.
Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent
herewith. Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO.: 2018-04
CITY OF OTSEGO
COUNTY OF WRIGHT, MINNESOTA
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF OTSEGO, AMENDING, RESTATING, REVISING, UPDATING, AND
CODIFYING THE CITY'S ZONING AND SUBDIVISION ORDINANCES AS WELL AS THE OTHER ORDINANCES INCLUDED IN THE CITY CODE.
WHEREAS, Minnesota Statutes 415.021 authorizes the City to cause its ordinances to be codified, and
WHEREAS, the City Council authorized the City to cause its ordinances to be revised and codified,
NOW, THEREFORE, the City Council of the City of Otsego does ordain: the ordinances of the City as amended, restated, revised, updated and codified
therefor, are adopted and shall constitute the Code of Ordinances of the City of Otsego. The Code of Ordinances as adopted shall consist of the following
titles:
Title 1 - Administration
Title 2 - Boards and Commissions
Title 3 - Finances and Taxation
Title 4 - Business and License Regulations
Title 5 - Health, Sanitation and Environment
Title 6 - Public Safety
Title 7 - Motor Vehicles and Traffic
Title 8 - Public Ways, Property and Utilities
Title 9 - Building and Development
Title 10 - Subdivision Regulations
Title 11 - Zoning Regulations
NOW IT BE RESOLVED by the City Council of the City of Otsego that: This Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its passage and
publication. The official copy of this Code of Ordinances shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk.
MOTION BY: Heidner
SECOND BY: Warehime
ALL IN FAVOR: Stockamp, Heidner, Warehime, Tanner
THOSE OPPOSED: None
ADOPTED by the City Council of the City of Otsego this 25th day of June, 2018.
CITY OF OTSEGO
BY:
Jessica L. Stockamp, Mayor
ATTEST:
Tami Loff, City Clerk
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 19/497
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
OTSEGO CITY CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the City Council, this Code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official City Code of the City of Otsego. This Code
of ordinances shall be known and cited as the OTSEGO CITY CODE, and it is hereby published by authority of the City Council and shall be kept up to
date as provided in section 1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position
of the same number, its appropriate chapter and title headings, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when
reference is made to this Code by title in any legal documents. (Prior Code § 1-1-1)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this State
as the ordinances of the City of general and permanent effect. (Prior Code § 1-1-2)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this Code shall set forth the title, chapter and section numbers of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this Code. All such amendments
or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately codified, and the ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this
Code. Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this Code. (Prior Code § 1-1-3)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this Code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized
by the City Council. The City Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the Office of the Clerk.
Any person having in his custody an official copy of this Code shall make every effort to maintain the Code in an up to date and efficient manner. He shall
see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are delivered to him or made available to him through the Office of the City Clerk.
The Code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the City and shall be returned to
the Office of the Clerk when directed to do so by order of the City Council. (Prior Code § 1-1-4)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the adoption of this Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this Code or are by
necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed:
A. Tax levy ordinances;
B. Appropriation ordinances;
C. Ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
D. Franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations;
E. Contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants;
F. Salary ordinances;
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 20/497
G. Ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
H. Improvement ordinances;
I. Bond ordinances;
J. Ordinances relating to elections;
K. Ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the City; and
L. All special ordinances. (Prior Code § 1-1-5)
1-2-2: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
A. Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to
any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall
conform to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance
takes effect.
B. Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any
new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
C. Current Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the City herein repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued
or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the City under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this Code. (2018 Code)
1-2-3: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code, or any part thereof, or codes or portions of codes adopted
herein by reference, is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof, or codes or portions of codes adopted herein by reference.
The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid, or ineffective. (Prior
Code § 1-1-5; amd. 2018 Code)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS; INTERPRETATION
1-3-1: GENERAL RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
A. Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true
intent and meaning of the Corporate Authorities may be fully carried out.
B. Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for
the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
C. Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or some other City officer to do some act or perform some
duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise.
D. Gender: The use of any gender based pronoun should not be construed to be gender biased, but is only used for grammatical simplicity.
E. May; Shall: The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is mandatory.
F. Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical
words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to
such meaning.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 21/497
G. Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
H. Officers And Employees Generally: Whenever any officer or employee is referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the
words "of the City of Otsego".
I. Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.
J. Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the City has been changed in the content of this Code to "title", "chapter", "section"
and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification purposes only. Such change to City ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (2018 Code)
1-3-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them unless the context makes such
meaning repugnant thereto:
CITY: The City of Otsego, County of Wright, State of Minnesota.
CODE: The City Code of the City of Otsego.
COUNTY: The County of Wright, State of Minnesota.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
STATE: The State of Minnesota. (2018 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections,
including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (2018 Code)
Chapter 4
GENERAL PENALTY
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY1:
A. Misdemeanor Violation; Penalties: Violation of a provision of this Code is a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, a person may be punished by a
fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or such other amount set by law, or imprisonment for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days, or
such other term set by law, or both, but in either case, the costs of prosecution may be added. Each act of violation and each day on which a violation
occurs or continues is a separate violation.
B. Definition Of Misdemeanor And Petty Misdemeanor: A "misdemeanor" is an offense or crime that the City Council is empowered to punish with fine or
imprisonment; a "petty misdemeanor" is as defined by law.
C. Limitation; Compliance With Statute: The provisions of subsection A of this section notwithstanding, no penalty shall be greater than that established by
State Statute for the same offense. (2018 Code)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. Application Of Penalty: The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of this Code the same as though it were a part of each
and every separate section.
B. Acts Punishable Under Different Sections: In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this
Code, the Prosecuting Officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same
offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
C. Breach Of Provisions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this Code and
there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. (2018 Code)
1-4-3: NONLIABILITY OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 22/497
No provision of this Code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or
penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the City Council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (2018 Code)
Chapter 5
ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS
1-5-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
The administrative enforcement procedures established within this chapter are intended to provide the City with an informal, cost effective and more
efficient alternative to criminal prosecution or civil litigation for certain violations of this Code. The City retains the right, at its sole discretion, to enforce
provisions of this Code by bringing criminal charges or commencing civil litigation in any case where the City determines it is appropriate or necessary, but
finds that an administrative process is beneficial to the residents of the City and further finds that such a process is a legitimate and necessary alternative
method of enforcing Code violations. (Prior Code § 2-5-1)
1-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
CODE COMPLIANCE OFFICER: Any officer of the Wright County Sheriff's Department, any employee of the City of Otsego, or any person or company
contracted to provide Code enforcement services who has received official authority by the Otsego City Council to enforce this Code. There may be more
than one person designated as Code Compliance Officer at any given time.
CODE OFFENSE: A violation of any section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of this Code and is subject to a civil penalty determined according to a
schedule adopted by resolution of the Otsego City Council from time to time and payable directly to the City Treasurer. Each day the violation exists
constitutes a separate Code offense.
OWNER: An individual, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, trust or any other legal entity holding an equitable or
legal ownership interest in land, buildings, structures, dwelling unit(s) or other property.
PERSON: A natural person of either sex, a firm, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, any other association of people, and includes the
manager or agent of that person or organization. (Prior Code § 2-5-2)
1-5-3: PROCEDURE:
A. Administrative Notice: A Code Compliance Officer may issue, either in person or by United States first class mail, an administrative notice to a person
suspected or known to have committed a Code offense and/or to be the owner of property upon which a Code offense is being committed. The
administrative notice shall identify the Code offense, the location upon which the Code offense occurred or is occurring, and the recommended
corrective action for the Code offense. The administrative notice may also state that the alleged violator has, at the discretion of the Code Compliance
Officer, up to fifteen (15) days to correct or abate the Code offense. If the alleged violator and/or owner of property upon which a Code offense is being
committed is unable to correct or abate the Code offense within the prescribed time, that person may request in writing an extension of no more than
thirty (30) additional days from the Code Compliance Officer. Any extension granted by the Code Compliance Officer shall be in writing and shall
specifically state the date of expiration. If the Code offense is not corrected or abated, as outlined in the administrative notice, within the prescribed
time or any extension thereto, the Code Compliance Officer may issue a citation, as provided in subsection B of this section.
B. Citation: A Code Compliance Officer is authorized to issue a citation upon the belief that a Code offense has occurred, whether or not an administrative
notice has first been issued in regard to said Code offense. The citation shall be given to the person responsible for the violation and/or to the owner of
the property upon which the violation has occurred, either by personal service or by United States first class mail. Said citation shall state the nature of
the Code offense, the time and date said Code offense occurred, the civil penalty applicable to that Code offense as set forth in a schedule of civil
penalties which shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time, and the manner for paying the civil penalty or requesting a hearing
before a Hearing Officer to contest the citation.
C. Response To Citation; Payment Of Penalty: Once a citation is issued, the alleged violator and/or the owner of the property upon which the violation has
occurred shall, within fifteen (15) days of the time of issuance of the citation, either pay the civil penalty set forth in the citation or request a hearing in
writing according to the procedure set forth in this chapter. The civil penalty may be paid either in person at City Hall, or by United States first class
mail, postage prepaid and postmarked within said prescribed fifteen (15) days. Payment of the civil penalty shall be deemed to be an admission of the
Code offense. (Prior Code § 2-5-3)
1-5-4: APPEALS:
A. Appeal To Hearing Officer:
1. Request For Hearing; Hearing Held: Any person contesting a citation issued pursuant to this chapter may, within fifteen (15) days of the time of
issuance of the citation, request a hearing before a Hearing Officer. Any request for a hearing before a Hearing Officer shall be made in writing on a
form provided by the City for such a request and either delivered personally to the City at City Hall or mailed to the City by United States first class
mail, postage prepaid and postmarked within said prescribed fifteen (15) days. The hearing shall be held at City Hall within thirty (30) days of the
date the City received a timely written notice that a hearing has been requested. Failure to attend the hearing constitutes a waiver of the violator's
rights to an administrative hearing and an admission of the violation. A Hearing Officer may waive this result upon good cause shown. A
determination of good cause shall be made by the Hearing Officer, but does specifically not include forgetfulness or intentional delay.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 23/497
2. Hearing Officer: The City Council shall, by resolution from time to time, appoint a list of persons authorized to act as a Hearing Officer. The Hearing
Officer is authorized to conduct an informal hearing to determine if a Code offense has occurred. The Hearing Officer may be compensated by the
City for such hearings and related findings. The Hearing Officer shall have the authority to uphold or dismiss the citation or reduce, stay or waive the
civil penalty imposed upon such terms and conditions as the Hearing Officer shall determine. The Hearing Officer's decision shall be made in writing
on a form provided by the City for such purpose. A copy of the Hearing Officer's decision shall be served by United States first class mail upon the
person requesting the hearing. The Hearing Officer's decision is final, except for appeal of the Hearing Officer's decision in limited cases to the City
Council, as set forth herein.
3. Conduct Of Hearing: At the hearing, the parties will have the opportunity to present testimony, documents and exhibits and question witnesses. The
Hearing Officer shall tape record the proceedings and receive testimony and exhibits. Strict rules of evidence will not apply. The Hearing Officer must
receive and give weight to evidence, including hearsay evidence, that possesses probative value commonly accepted by reasonable and prudent
persons in the conduct of their affairs. (Prior Code § 2-5-4)
B. Appeal Of Hearing Officer Decision:
1. The Hearing Officer's decision shall be appealable to the City Council only for the following matters:
a. An alleged failure to obtain a required permit, license, or other approval from the City Council as required by this Code;
b. An alleged violation of a permit, license, or other approval, or the conditions attached to the permit, license or approval, that was issued by the City
Council; or
c. An alleged violation of regulations governing a person or entity who has received a license issued by the City Council.
2. An appeal to the City Council of the Hearing Officer's decision must be made in writing on a form provided by the City for such an appeal and must
be served on the City Clerk by United States first class mail, postage prepaid, within ten (10) days after the date of the Hearing Officer's decision.
3. A timely appeal will be heard by the City Council after a notice of hearing is served by the City upon the appellant in person or by certified mail at
least ten (10) days in advance of the date of the hearing. The parties to the hearing will have an opportunity to present oral or written arguments
regarding the Hearing Officer's decision.
4. The City Council shall consider the record, the Hearing Officer's decision, and any additional arguments before making a determination. The City
Council is not bound by the Hearing Officer's decision, but may adopt all or part of the Hearing Officer's decision. The City Council's decision may be
voted upon and given at the hearing or may be given in writing within fifteen (15) days of the hearing.
5. The failure of the appellant to appear in front of the City Council or participate in the appeal constitutes a waiver of the violator's right of appeal and
an admission of the violation. The Council may waive the result upon good cause shown. The determination of a showing of good cause shown shall
be made solely at the discretion of the City Council but does not include forgetfulness and intentional delay. (Prior Code § 2-5-5)
1-5-5: FAILURE TO PAY AND CORRECT AND ABATE THE OFFENSE:
A. An unpaid civil penalty and accrued late charges will constitute a personal obligation of the person(s) to whom the citation was issued, and the City shall
have the right to collect such unpaid civil penalty and accrued late charges, together with the City's costs and reasonable attorney fees, in criminal or
civil proceedings.
B. Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes section 429.101, Minnesota Statutes section 514.67 and other applicable law, a lien in the amount of the civil penalty
and any accrued late charges may be assessed against the property where the Code offense occurred and collected in the same manner as taxes.
Any such assessment shall not preclude the City from issuing additional citations for a continuing Code offense, nor shall it preclude the City from
making additional assessments against the same property resulting from a continuing or new Code offense.
C. The City may suspend or revoke a license or permit or other approval associated with the Code offense if the civil penalty and accrued late charges are
not timely paid. (Prior Code § 2-5-6; amd. Ord. 2018-13, 12-10-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
Chapter 6
CRIMINAL BACKGROUND INVESTIGATIONS
1-6-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to establish regulations that will allow law enforcement or City access to Minnesota's computerized criminal
history information for the purpose of undertaking employment, appointment, volunteer or other background investigations for positions described in this
chapter and licensing background checks. (Prior Code § 2-8-1)
1-6-2: PERSONS TO BE INVESTIGATED:
A. Applicants For City Employment: The City shall conduct a criminal history background investigation, including criminal data authorized under the Child
Protection Background Check Act1 on the applicants for all full and part time employment positions with the City. All employees hired on or after the
effective date hereof shall be subject to additional periodic criminal history background investigations at least yearly or more often at the discretion of
the City during the term of their employment. (Prior Code § 2-8-2)
B. Applicants For City Appointments And City Volunteers: The City shall conduct a criminal history background investigation, including criminal data
authorized under the Child Protection Background Check Act2, on those applicants the City Council deems such investigation to be necessary based
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 24/497
upon anticipated interaction with children, seniors or vulnerable persons or for any other reason or as a matter of general practice, as determined at the
sole discretion of the City. Recreation volunteers may be excluded if the volunteer activity is only for a short period of time and the Recreation
Department determines, at its discretion, that the background investigation is not necessary in light of the circumstances. This subsection specifically
excludes members elected or appointed to the City Council. Those persons appointed by the City Council or approved as volunteers by the City on or
after the effective date hereof shall be subject to additional periodic criminal history background investigations at least yearly or more often at the
discretion of the City during the term of their appointment and service to the City. (Prior Code § 2-8-3)
C. Applicants For City Licenses: The City shall conduct a criminal history background investigation on the applicants for the following licenses within the
City:
1. Criminal history background investigation:
a. 3.2 percent malt liquor.
b. Intoxicating liquors.
c. Sunday liquor.
d. Lawful gambling.
e. Pawnshops and secondhand goods business. (Prior Code § 2-8-4)
f. Massage businesses and services. (Ord. 2017-01, 1-9-2017)
2. Criminal history background investigation including criminal data authorized under the Child Protection Background Check Act3:
a. Peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants. (Prior Code § 2-8-4)
D. Others:
1. The City shall conduct a criminal history background investigation, including (when appropriate) criminal data authorized under the Child Protection
Background Check Act4 on the following:
a. Persons employed by or representing entities contracted by the City to perform work that relates to City utilities or City utility structures where the
work requires the person to be on site at the utility or structure or on City property.
b. Persons employed by or representing entities contracted by the City to perform work on City computer or City security systems where the work
requires access to the computer or security system or any other service that the City, at its sole discretion, determines that a criminal background
investigation is appropriate. The City may exclude from this provision persons providing only design services.
c. Persons employed by, contracting for or representing entities with leased structures or equipment located on City facilities and/or property by a
lease agreement with the City for the construction, repair, replacement or maintenance of said structures or equipment.
d. Persons providing recreational services to the City as an independent contractor or volunteering such services, at the discretion of the City.
2. Those persons subject to this chapter on or after the effective date hereof shall be subject to additional periodic criminal history background
investigations at least yearly or more often at the discretion of the City during the time period they are subject to this chapter. (Prior Code § 2-8-5)
1-6-3: INVESTIGATION PROCESS:
A. The applicant, employee, or other individual must authorize the City, Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension and/or Wright County Sheriff's Office,
by written or other specified means, of consent to conduct the criminal history background investigation before the investigation is undertaken with such
consent fully compliant with the provisions of Minnesota Statutes chapter 13 regarding the collection, maintenance and use of the information. (Prior
Code § 2-8-6; amd. 2018 Code)
B. Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the City Hall under the care and custody of the City Administrator or his designee.
C. Any data that is acquired or summary of the results of the criminal history background investigation may be released to the City Council, City
Administrator, City Attorney or designated human resources staff.
D. The cost of the criminal background investigations for City employees, City appointments and City volunteers shall be paid by the City. The cost of all
other criminal background investigations shall be paid in advance by the applicant or other persons or entities subject to this chapter. (Prior Code § 2-8-
6)
1-6-4: RESULTS AND ACTION BY CITY:
A. Nonemployment Applicants:
1. The City will, at its sole discretion, determine whether or not the results of a criminal background investigation for nonemployment applications are
acceptable.
2. If criminal background investigations for nonemployment applications are questionable, the final decision as to whether or not results are acceptable
to the City shall be made by the City Administrator, in consultation with the City Attorney or other appropriate parties.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 25/497
3. The City will notify nonemployment applicants that the criminal background investigation has been successfully completed or that the results have
disqualified them. (Prior Code § 2-8-7)
B. Employment Applicants: Except for the positions set forth in Minnesota Statutes section 364.09, the City will not reject an applicant for employment on
the basis of the applicant's prior conviction unless the crime is directly related to the position of employment sought and the conviction is for a felony,
gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If the City rejects the applicant's request on this basis, the City shall notify the applicant in
writing of the following:
1. The grounds and reasons for the denial.
2. The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in Minnesota Statutes section 364.06.
3. The earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment or issuance of a license.
4. That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon reapplication. (Prior Code § 2-8-8)
1-6-5: IDENTIFICATION AND CONTACT INFORMATION:
Prior to access to any City utility structure or facilities located on City property, any individual or individuals seeking access and having successfully
completed a criminal background investigation must provide acceptable identification and contact information to the City or the City representative on site.
Failure to provide acceptable identification will result in denial of access to the City utility structure, City facilities or City property. The City reserves the
right to deny access to City utility structures, City facilities, or the surrounding City property at any time and for any reason. (Prior Code § 2-8-9)
1-6-6: ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS:
Nothing in this chapter limits the City's right to establish additional conditions or requirements above and beyond a criminal background investigation in
circumstances where the City Council or City staff determine that such additional conditions or requirements will serve to better protect the City and/or the
health, safety and welfare of its residents or the public in general. (Prior Code § 2-8-10)
Chapter 7
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
1-7-1: COMPENSATION:
A. The salary of the Mayor shall be four thousand two hundred dollars ($4,200.00) per year ($350.00 per month) and the salary of each City Council
member shall be three thousand six hundred dollars ($3,600.00) per year ($300.00 per month).
B. The Mayor and City Council members, as of September 1, 2015, shall be compensated in the amount of forty five dollars ($45.00) for each special City
Council meeting attended, each meeting of any established committee or commission which the Mayor or any City Council member is the appointed
liaison or alternate, any meeting with the City Administrator and City Attorney to discuss or receive information related to City legal issues, any City
sponsored event or any private event, tour or function where the Mayor or Council member is attending as representative of the City, any public hearing
of a City board or commission, any meeting of another political subdivision, State agency or committee or the State Legislature where the Mayor or City
Council member is appearing or functioning as a representative of the City and any other meeting, event or function which the City Council has directed
or authorized the Mayor or any City Council member to attend either prior to or after the meeting, event or function has occurred.
C. The Mayor and City Council members shall also receive reimbursement for expenses related to attendance at said additional meetings as well as any
other functions which they are authorized to attend on behalf of the City, including mileage costs at the then applicable IRS rate. (Prior Code § 2-3-1)
D. In addition to that compensation listed in this section, the Mayor and Council members shall receive as compensation for attendance at workshops,
seminars, or conventions one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each day of attendance or seventy five dollars ($75.00) for each half day of
attendance, plus reimbursement for expenses related to attendance, including mileage costs at the then applicable IRS rate. Written claims for all
additional compensation and related expenses shall be submitted to the City Clerk. (Prior Code § 2-3-2)
E. The Mayor or City Council members shall submit written claims to the City Clerk for compensation and for reimbursement expenses. The claims shall
be approved by the City Council at a regularly scheduled or special City Council meeting held after submission of the claim. (Prior Code § 2-3-1)
1-7-2: CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS:
A. Notify Public:
1. It is the policy of the City Council that all of its meetings shall be open to the public in accordance with State Open Meeting Law requirements.
2. A schedule of the regular meetings of the City Council shall be kept on file at City Hall.
3. If a meeting is recessed or a continued session of a previous meeting, and the time and place of the meeting was established during the previous
meeting and recorded in the minutes of the meeting, then no further published or mailed notice is necessary.
B. Regular City Council Meetings:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 26/497
1. There shall be two (2) regularly scheduled meetings of the City Council on the second and fourth Mondays of each month.
2. A regular meeting of the City Council may be cancelled due to a lack of a quorum or by a majority vote of the City Council at least one regular
meeting prior to the meeting to be cancelled due to a lack of business items.
C. Special City Council Meetings:
1. Special meetings of the City Council may be called by the Mayor or by any two (2) members of the City Council by writing filed with the City Clerk.
2. The City Clerk shall then provide notice to all the members of the time, place and agenda at least three (3) days before the meeting.
3. The City Clerk shall also post written notice of the date, time, place and purpose of the meeting on the official bulletin board at least three (3) days
before the date of the meeting.
D. Emergency Meetings:
1. An "emergency" meeting is a special meeting called because of circumstances that, in the judgment of the City, require immediate consideration by
the City Council. If matters not directly related to the emergency are discussed or acted upon at an emergency meeting, the minutes of the meeting
shall include a specific description of the matters.
2. Notice of the emergency meeting shall be given by telephone, e-mail, or by any other method used to notify the members of the City Council.
3. Notice shall be provided to each news medium that has filed a written request for notice by telephone or email as soon as reasonably practicable
after notice has been given to City Council members.
4. Notice shall include the subject of the meeting. Posted or published notice of an emergency meeting shall not be required. (Ord. 2018-12, 11-26-
2018)
Chapter 8
CITY OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL GENERALLY
1-8-1: BONDS:
A. The following officers and employees of the City, before entering upon the discharge of their duties, shall each execute and furnish an official bond, the
respective amounts thereof to be as follows: (Prior Code § 2-2-1)
City Clerk $100,000.00
Deputy City Clerk 100,000.00
City Treasurer 100,000.00
Finance Director 100,000.00
(Prior Code § 2-2-1; amd. 2018 Code)
B. The official bonds of all officers and employees shall be executed in favor of the City of Otsego, Minnesota, and shall be approved and filed as required
by law. The official bond of each officer and employee shall be executed in such form as to require the faithful performance of official duties and the
proper application of, and payment upon demand for, all monies officially received by each such officer and employee. (Prior Code §§ 2-2-2, 2-2-3)
C. The official bond of each officer and employee required to be furnished shall be covered by a blanket bond obtained by the City. (Prior Code § 2-2-4)
D. The premiums for the official bonds shall be paid from the General Fund of the City. (Prior Code § 2-2-5)
Chapter 9
CITY CLERK AND CITY TREASURER
1-9-1: OFFICES ESTABLISHED; STATUTE AUTHORITY:
Separate offices of the City Clerk and City Treasurer are hereby established. (Prior Code § 2-7-1; amd. 2018 Code)
1-9-2: APPOINTMENT BY RESOLUTION:
The City Clerk and City Treasurer shall be appointed by resolution of the City Council. (Prior Code § 2-7-1)
1-9-3: ACCOUNTING DUTIES; ANNUAL AUDIT:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 27/497
The accounting duties of the City Clerk are delegated to the City Treasurer, and the City Council shall provide for an annual audit of the City's financial
affairs in accordance with the minimum procedures prescribed by the State Auditor. (Prior Code § 2-7-1)
Chapter 10
CODE OF ETHICS
1-10-1: POLICY AND PURPOSE:
A. It is imperative that all persons acting in the public service not only maintain the highest possible standards of ethical conduct in their transaction of
public business, and that such standards be clearly defined and known to the public as well as to the persons acting in public service.
B. The proper operation of a democratic government requires that public officials be independent, impartial, and responsible to the people. Governmental
decisions and policies must be made in the proper channels of the governmental structure. Public office may not be used for personal gain. Citizens
must have confidence in the integrity of their government officials.
C. Employees and contracted staff of the City must also be held to the highest ethical standards, but the standards established for them should be
contained within the City's Employee Manual and/or individual contracts.
D. In recognition of these goals, there is hereby established a Code of Ethics for the City's elected and appointed public officials. The purpose of this Code
is to establish ethical standards of conduct for such persons by prohibiting acts which are incompatible with the City's best interests, and to
demonstrate to the public the City's commitment to hold said public officials to the highest possible standard of conduct. The provisions and purpose of
this Code are declared to be in the best interests of the City. (Prior Code § 2-1-1)
1-10-2: RESPONSIBILITIES OF PUBLIC OFFICE:
Public officials hold office on behalf of the public. They are bound to uphold the Constitution of the United States of America and the Constitution of the
State of Minnesota. Public officials must carry out impartially the laws of the Nation, State, and City in fostering respect for all government. They are bound
in their official acts to the highest standards of morality, and to discharge faithfully the duties of their office. Public officials shall be dedicated to fulfilling the
responsibilities of their office. They shall be dedicated to the public purpose, and all programs developed by them shall be in the community interest. Public
officials shall not exceed their authority or breach the law or ask others to do so. They shall work in full cooperation with other public officials and
employees unless prohibited from doing so by law. (Prior Code § 2-1-2)
1-10-3: SCOPE OF PERSONS COVERED:
A. The provisions of this Code of Ethics are applicable to the Mayor, all members of the City Council, and all appointed City officials. It shall not include
City employees who are not otherwise appointed officials, contracted City staff, nor citizen volunteers. (Prior Code § 2-1-3)
B. The disclosure provisions of section 1-10-5 of this chapter are applicable only to elected public officials, and members of the following boards and
commissions: Planning Commission, Public Safety Commission, Heritage Preservation Commission, and Parks and Recreation Commission. (Prior
Code § 2-1-3; amd. 2018 Code)
1-10-4: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
A. 1. No person covered by this Code shall knowingly engage in any conflict of interest, or knowingly engage in any business or transaction, or shall have
a direct or indirect financial or other personal interest which is incompatible with the proper discharge of the person's official duties or would tend to
impair the person's independent judgment or action in the performance of his official duties.
2. In determining whether or not a conflict of interest exists, factors to be considered include the nature of the matter before the City, the effect or
potential effect of the actions taken by the public officials, and the need for action on the matter in question.
3. While a conflict of interest could conceivably exist in many instances, a conflict only falls within the scope of this policy when it arises to the level of a
disqualifying conflict of interest. A disqualifying conflict of interest is a conflict which rises to such a level that a reasonable person viewing the matter
in an objective fashion would conclude that the apparent or real conflict would not allow the involved official to make an unbiased decision in the
matter.
4. In the case of a proposal of general application throughout the City, the issue as to whether or not a conflict of interest exists is not as closely
scrutinized as when a conflict of interest exists regarding an application for action regarding a defined specific parcel of property, or in a case where
the action affects a particular individual or a narrowly defined class of individuals rather than the public in general. In the case of a specific
application, a disqualifying conflict of interest exists when there is a reasonable perception (whether it actually exists or not) of a conflict of interest. In
the case of an ordinance or decision of general application, the standard shall be an actual conflict of interest, since it is in the nature of the system
of City government that various conflicting views and interests be represented in any vote on an ordinance or policy of general application.
5. Conflict of interest shall include both personal and financial conflicts. A "personal interest" is an interest arising from blood or marriage relationships,
or from close business or political association. A "financial interest" means any monetary interest in a contract before the City, or a direct financial
interest in the matter through the ownership of stocks, bonds, notes, or other securities.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 28/497
B. 1. If a public official determines that he has a disqualifying conflict of interest, he shall bring it to the attention of the Council, board or commission at the
time that consideration of the matter is before that body. The public official shall then recuse himself from any further discussion or action regarding that
matter. If he so chooses, he may leave the table and be seated in the audience, where he has the same rights as any other citizen.
2. In the event that the Chair, or any other member of the Council, board or commission, reasonably believes that another member has a disqualifying
conflict of interest, he may raise the matter with the member who has a perceived conflict of interest. In the event that the member does not believe
that a conflict exists, and will not voluntarily recuse himself, the matter may be called to a vote of the affected body. Notwithstanding that vote, it will
still be up to the affected member to voluntarily recuse himself or not recuse himself.
3. With the understanding that a failure to recuse may have legal implications in a matter where the vote directly affects the rights of an individual in a
matter before the City Council, in such a case, the Council may request that the City Attorney render an opinion as to whether or not the conflict of
interest alleged exists, and whether or not it is a disqualifying conflict of interest.
C. A conflict of interest shall include, but shall not necessarily be limited to, the following:
1. Holding a private or other public position in addition to the person's primary public position which interferes with the proper discharge of public duty.
2. Use of confidential information, obtained as a result of public position, for personal gain.
3. Soliciting of personal gifts and favors.
4. Use of official position for personal gain.
5. Holding investments which will interfere with the proper discharge of public duty.
6. Representation for profit of private interests before City governmental agencies.
7. Participation as a public representative in a business transaction in which the person has a direct or indirect financial or other personal interest,
without full disclosure.
8. Personal interest in any matter which prevents the person from properly fulfilling his public duty.
D. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, no person subject to this chapter shall directly or indirectly solicit any gift or accept or
receive any gift of substance, whether in the form of money, services, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, promise, or any other form, under
circumstance in which it could reasonably be expected to influence him or her in the performance of his or her official duties or was intended as a
reward for any official action on his or her part. (Prior Code § 2-1-4)
1-10-5: DISCLOSURE:
A. Any Council member, board member, or commission member, prior to consideration of any matter affected by this chapter, shall disclose to the body on
which he serves any fact or circumstance constituting a conflict of interest as set forth in this Code. If the matter is of such a nature that the member
does not wish to specifically state the facts or circumstances of the conflict, he may state simply that he has a conflict.
B. In the event that the conflict of interest is a disqualifying conflict of interest, the member shall recuse himself from any discussion or action regarding the
issue in front of the body.
C. All Council members, board members, or commission members are encouraged to recuse themselves in any situation where facts and circumstances
would lead an objective observer to the reasonable conclusion that a conflict of interest may exist. (Prior Code § 2-1-5)
1-10-6: ENFORCEMENT:
Failure of any commission or board member to properly recuse himself in a conflict of interest situation may result in City Council initiated removal from the
public body. (Prior Code § 2-1-6)
Title 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter 1
PLANNING COMMISSION
2-1-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
The Planning Commission of the City is hereby established. (Prior Code § 3-1-1)
2-1-2: MEMBERSHIP AND ELIGIBILITY; APPOINTMENT AND TERMS:
A. 1. The Planning Commission shall consist of seven (7) members, all of whom are appointed by majority vote of the City Council. Any and all adult
resident property owners of the City are eligible to be appointed to the Planning Commission at the discretion of the City Council by majority vote.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 29/497
2. The City Council shall also appoint one of its members as a nonvoting ex officio member of the Planning Commission who shall attend Planning
Commission meetings and act as a liaison between the City Council and the Planning Commission.
3. The City Council may also appoint alternate member(s) to a term determined by the City Council from time to time as they deem necessary. The
alternate(s) shall attend all regular and special meetings of the Planning Commission and shall act as a replacement at any specific meeting in the
event of the absence, for whatever reason, of any regularly appointed member of the Planning Commission.
4. The Zoning Administrator shall serve as the City staff liaison to the Planning Commission.
B. The terms of each member of the Planning Commission shall be four (4) years staggered and overlapping as presently established beginning March 1
of the first year and shall expire on the last day of February of the last year of the respective term. (Prior Code § 3-1-2)
2-1-3: VACANCIES AND REMOVALS:
A. Vacancy In Office: In the event of a vacancy during the term of any member of the Planning Commission, the vacancy shall be filled by appointment by
the City Council and shall run until the current term expires.
B. Removal From Office:
1. Any member of the Planning Commission may be removed from office with or without cause by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the entire City Council.
2. Any member of the Planning Commission who misses three (3) consecutive Planning Commission meetings in a calendar year, calculated at the end
of each calendar year, due to unexcused absences, may be removed from office upon approval of the City Council. Excused absences include: a
serious personal or family medical condition, death in the immediate family or unanticipated work related commitment. It shall be the duty of each
member to notify the City staff liaison or Recording Secretary if the member will be unable to attend a meeting. (Prior Code § 3-1-2)
2-1-4: ORGANIZATION:
A. Officers:
1. The Planning Commission shall elect officers from its membership at its first meeting in March. The officers of the Planning Commission shall be:
a. Chair.
b. Vice Chair.
2. Duties of the officers are as follows:
a. Chair:
(1) The Chair shall preside at all meetings of the Planning Commission and shall preserve order and decorum and shall decide all questions of
order.
(2) The Chair shall appoint any necessary committees and shall appoint any committees requested by a majority of the members.
b. Vice Chair: The Vice Chair shall preside at all meetings in the absence of the Chair and perform such duties as requested by the Chair.
B. Meetings:
1. Regular Meetings: There shall be two (2) regularly scheduled meetings of the Planning Commission on the first and third Mondays of each month
unless canceled by the Chair due to a lack of business items or lack of a quorum.
2. Special Meetings:
a. A special meeting of the Planning Commission may be called by the Chair or by approval of a motion of the majority of the members stating the
purpose of such meeting with written notice posted at least three (3) days in advance of the meeting.
b. Any site inspection involving four (4) or more members as a group must be scheduled and noticed as a special meeting of the Planning
Commission.
3. Open Meetings: All meetings of the Planning Commission shall be open to the public and comply with the State Open Meeting Law requirements.
4. Quorum: A quorum of the commission shall consist of four (4) members.
5. Conduct Of Meetings: The conduct of the Planning Commission meetings shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order. (Prior Code § 3-1-3)
2-1-5: FUNCTION AND DUTIES:
A. The Planning Commission shall meet regularly pursuant to this chapter, shall hold public hearings when required by this Code or any other applicable
law, and it or the City Council may, at their discretion, initiate any additional hearing they deem necessary.
B. The Planning Commission shall have such duties as assigned in State Statutes and this Code, and shall act in an advisory capacity to the City Council
in all such matters including, but not limited to:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 30/497
1. To prepare and keep current a Comprehensive Plan for meeting present requirements and such future needs as may be foreseen, based on
demographic and statistical trends and data available.
2. To establish principles and policies for guiding action affecting development in the City and its environs.
3. To prepare and recommend to the City Council ordinances, regulations and other proposals promoting orderly and economically sound development
along lines indicated as desirable by the Comprehensive Plan.
4. To determine whether specific proposed developments conform to the principles and requirements for the Comprehensive Plan and this Code.
5. To keep the City Council and the general public informed and advised as to all planning and development matters.
C. The Planning Commission shall transmit recommendations to the City Council on all matters which it considers. If such matter involves a decision
regarding the application of this Code, the Planning Commission shall transmit to the Council specific and particular information regarding the basis for
such recommendation and the information which was considered in arriving at such recommendation.
D. Any member having a personal interest, a financial interest, or a family member with a financial interest in any individual action to be considered by the
Planning Commission shall:
1. Notify the Chair of the conflict in advance of the meeting.
2. Allow the Chair to explain the potential conflict to the Planning Commission.
3. At the request of the Chair, the member shall excuse himself from the Planning Commission in advance of the discussion and voting on the item.
E. In the event that a member is contacted prior to a Planning Commission meeting by a person with a concern regarding a pending issue, the member
must:
1. Refrain from discussing any Planning Commission business with any individual outside of a Planning Commission meeting. This includes his own
stand on the pending issue.
2. Refrain from speculating on other Planning Commission members' stand on the pending issue. (Prior Code § 3-1-4)
2-1-6: RECORDS:
The Zoning Administrator shall provide for permanent records of the Planning Commission proceedings, which shall include minutes of its meetings, its
findings of fact, recommendations, and the action taken on each matter which it considers. (Prior Code § 3-1-5)
2-1-7: COMPENSATION:
As compensation for services rendered as a member of the Planning Commission, each member and the designated alternate shall receive twenty dollars
($20.00) for attendance at each regularly scheduled or special meeting of the Planning Commission, plus ten dollars ($10.00) for each site inspection.
(Prior Code § 3-1-6)
Chapter 2
PUBLIC SAFETY COMMISSION
2-2-1: ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSE:
A Public Safety Commission is hereby established to advise the City Council on police, fire protection, emergency management and other public safety
matters and to provide better communication with public safety service providers, to provide a forum for complaints and suggestions regarding public
safety service and to educate the public on issues related to public safety service. (Prior Code § 3-3-1)
2-2-2: MEMBERSHIP AND ELIGIBILITY; APPOINTMENT AND TERMS:
A. 1. The Public Safety Commission shall consist of seven (7) members, all of whom are appointed by majority vote of the City Council. Any and all adult
residents or business property owners of the City are eligible to be appointed to the Public Safety Commission at the discretion of the City Council by
majority vote.
2. The City Council shall also appoint one of its members as a nonvoting ex officio member of the Public Safety Commission who shall attend Public
Safety Commission meetings and act as a liaison between the City Council and the Public Safety Commission.
3. The Wright County Sheriff or his designated representative shall attend the Public Safety Commission meetings as a nonvoting ex officio member
and act as a liaison between the City and the Wright County Sheriff's Office.
4. The Fire Chief or his designated representative shall attend the Public Safety Commission meetings as necessary as a nonvoting ex officio member
and act as a liaison between the City and respective Fire Department.
5. The City Council may also appoint alternate member(s) to a term determined by the City Council from time to time as they deem necessary. The
alternate(s) shall attend all regular and special meetings of the Public Safety Commission and shall act as a replacement at any specific meeting in
the event of the absence, for whatever reason, of any regularly appointed member of the Public Safety Commission.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 31/497
B. The terms of each member of the Public Safety Commission shall be four (4) years staggered and overlapping as presently established beginning
March 1 of the first year and shall expire on the last day of February of the last year of the respective term. (Prior Code § 3-3-2)
2-2-3: VACANCIES AND REMOVALS:
A. Vacancy In Office: In the event of a vacancy during the term of any member of the Public Safety Commission, the vacancy shall be filled by appointment
by the City Council and shall run until the current term expires.
B. Removal From Office:
1. Any member of the Public Safety Commission may be removed from office, with or without cause, by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the entire City Council.
2. Any member of the Public Safety Commission who misses three (3) consecutive Public Safety Commission meetings in a calendar year, calculated
at the end of each calendar year, due to unexcused absences, may be removed from office upon approval of the City Council. Excused absences
include: a serious personal or family medical condition, death in the immediate family or unanticipated work related commitment. It shall be the duty
of each member to notify the City staff liaison or Recording Secretary if the member will be unable to attend a meeting.
3. The Public Safety Commission may make a recommendation to the City Council by majority vote to remove a member prior to the expiration of his
term with said recommendation to include the cause for such action. (Prior Code § 3-3-2)
2-2-4: LEGAL ADVISOR:
The City Attorney shall serve as the legal advisor to the Public Safety Commission. Questions of the City Attorney shall be directed through the City
Council liaison or the City Administrator. (Prior Code § 3-3-3)
2-2-5: ORGANIZATION:
A. Officers:
1. The Public Safety Commission shall elect officers from its membership at its first meeting in March. The officers of the Public Safety Commission
shall be:
a. Chair.
b. Vice Chair.
c. Secretary.
2. Duties of officers are as follows:
a. Chair:
(1) The Chair shall preside at all meetings of the Public Safety Commission and shall preserve order and decorum and shall decide all questions of
order.
(2) The Chair shall appoint any necessary committees and shall appoint any committees requested by a majority of the members.
b. Vice Chair: The Vice Chair shall preside at all meetings in the absence of the Chair and perform such duties as requested by the Chair.
c. Secretary: The Secretary shall provide for permanent records of the Public Safety Commission proceedings, which shall include minutes of its
meetings, its findings of fact, recommendations, and the action taken on each matter which it considers, and are to be submitted to the City Clerk.
B. Meetings:
1. Regular Meetings: The Public Safety Commission shall hold a minimum of one regular meeting per month on the second Tuesday of each month
unless canceled by the Chair due to a lack of business items or lack of a quorum.
2. Special Meetings:
a. A special meeting of the Public Safety Commission may be called by the Chair or by approval of a motion of the majority of the members stating
the purpose of such meeting with written notice posted at least three (3) days in advance of the meeting.
b. Any site inspection involving four (4) or more members as a group must be scheduled and noticed as a special meeting of the Public Safety
Commission.
3. Open Meetings: All meetings of the Public Safety Commission shall be open to the public and comply with the State Open Meeting Law
requirements.
4. Quorum: A quorum of the Public Safety Commission shall consist of four (4) members.
5. Agenda: The agenda for each meeting shall include an open forum for citizen comments.
6. Conduct Of Meetings: The conduct of the Public Safety Commission meetings shall be governed by "Robert's Rules of Order". (Prior Code § 3-3-4)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 32/497
2-2-6: DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS:
The duties and functions of the Public Safety Commission shall be as follows:
A. To develop a citizen complaint procedure on matters regarding police, fire, ambulance and other emergency response services.
B. To promote public interest in and an understanding of public safety and the provision of these services in Otsego.
C. To serve as a forum for the citizens of Otsego to voice their opinions regarding public safety within the community.
D. The Public Safety Commission shall advise the City Council on the duties and responsibilities of the Wright County Sheriff and the deputies of the
Wright County Sheriff's Office in providing police service to Otsego, but is not a Police Civil Service Commission with those powers granted such a
commission under State law.
E. The Public Safety Commission shall advise the City Council on matters related to the provision of fire protection services to Otsego by the Fire
Departments the City is contracted with to receive these services. (Prior Code § 3-3-5)
2-2-7: COMPENSATION:
As compensation for services rendered as a member of the Public Safety Commission, each member and designated alternate(s) shall receive ten dollars
($10.00) for attendance at each regularly scheduled or special meeting. (Prior Code § 3-3-6)
Chapter 3
PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
2-3-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
A Parks and Recreation Commission is hereby established. (Prior Code § 3-2-1)
2-3-2: MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT AND TERMS:
A. 1. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall consist of seven (7) members, all of whom are appointed by majority vote of the City Council.
2. Persons appointed to the Parks and Recreation Commission shall be at the discretion of the City Council. Persons eligible for appointment shall
include any and all adult residents of the City; except, that the City Council may appoint one person that is an official of an athletic association
recognized by the City, but not a resident property owner.
3. The City Council shall also appoint one of its members as a nonvoting ex officio member of the Parks and Recreation Commission who shall attend
Parks and Recreation Commission meetings and act as a liaison between the City Council and the Parks and Recreation Commission.
4. The City Council may also appoint alternate member(s) to a term determined by the City Council from time to time as they deem necessary. The
alternate(s) shall attend all regular and special meetings of the commission and shall act as a replacement at any specific meeting in the event of the
absence, for whatever reason, of any regularly appointed member of the Parks and Recreation Commission.
B. The terms of each member of the Parks and Recreation Commission shall be four (4) years staggered and overlapping as presently established
beginning March 1 of the first year and shall expire on the last day of February of the last year of the respective term.
C. The Parks and Recreation Manager shall serve as the City staff liaison to the Parks and Recreation Commission. (Prior Code § 3-2-2)
2-3-3: VACANCIES AND REMOVALS:
A. Vacancy In Office: In the event of a vacancy during the term of any member of the Parks and Recreation Commission, the vacancy shall be filled by
appointment by the City Council and shall run until the current term expires.
B. Removal From Office:
1. Any member of the Parks and Recreation Commission may be removed from office, with or without cause, by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the entire City
Council.
2. Any member of the Parks and Recreation Commission who misses three (3) consecutive commission meetings in a calendar year, calculated at the
end of each calendar year, due to unexcused absences, may be removed from office upon approval of the City Council. Excused absences include:
a serious personal or family medical condition, death in the immediate family or unanticipated work related commitment. It shall be the duty of each
member to notify the City staff liaison or Recording Secretary if the member will be unable to attend a meeting. (Prior Code § 3-2-2)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 33/497
2-3-4: ORGANIZATION:
A. Officers:
1. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall elect officers from its membership at its first meeting in March. The officers of the commission shall be:
a. Chair.
b. Vice Chair.
2. Duties of officers are as follows:
a. Chair:
(1) The Chair shall preside at all meetings of the Parks and Recreation Commission and shall preserve order and decorum and shall decide all
questions of order.
(2) The Chair shall appoint any necessary committees and shall appoint any committees requested by a majority of the members.
b. Vice Chair: The Vice Chair shall preside at all meetings in the absence of the Chair and perform such duties as requested by the Chair.
B. Meetings:
1. Regular Meetings: The Parks and Recreation Commission shall hold a minimum of one regular meeting per month on the third Tuesday of each
month unless canceled by the Chair due to a lack of business items or lack of a quorum.
2. Special Meetings:
a. A special meeting of the Parks and Recreation Commission may be called by the Chair or by approval of a motion of the majority of the members
stating the purpose of such meeting with written notice posted at least three (3) days in advance of the meeting.
b. Any site inspection involving four (4) or more members as a group must be scheduled and noticed as a special meeting of the Parks and
Recreation Commission.
3. Open Meetings: All meetings of the Parks and Recreation Commission shall be open to the public and comply with the State Open Meeting Law
requirements.
4. Quorum: A quorum of the Parks and Recreation Commission shall consist of four (4) members.
5. Agenda: The agenda for each meeting shall include an open forum for citizen comments.
6. Conduct Of Meetings: The conduct of the Parks and Recreation Commission meetings shall be governed by "Robert's Rules of Order". (Prior Code
§ 3-2-3)
2-3-5: DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS:
The duties and functions of the Parks and Recreation Commission shall be as follows:
A. Develop and recommend to the City Council a Comprehensive Plan for development of the future parks and trails system. (Prior Code § 3-2-4)
B. Provide recommendations and act in an advisory capacity to the City Council regarding parks, trails, facilities, park maintenance and related capital
improvement plan (CIP) project and the study of current recreation programs, and desires of citizens for such services.
C. This is not a Parks and Recreation Commission as enabled by Minnesota Statutes section 412.501. (Prior Code § 3-2-4; amd. 2018 Code)
2-3-6: RECORDS:
The Recording Secretary shall provide for permanent records of the Parks and Recreation Commission proceedings, which shall include minutes of its
meetings, its findings of fact, recommendations, and the action taken on each matter which it considers. (Prior Code § 3-2-5)
2-3-7: COMPENSATION:
As compensation for services rendered as a member of the Parks and Recreation Commission, each member and designated alternate(s) shall receive
ten dollars ($10.00) for attendance at each regularly scheduled or special meeting. (Prior Code § 3-2-6)
Chapter 4
HERITAGE PRESERVATION COMMISSION
2-4-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 34/497
A Heritage Preservation Commission is hereby established in accordance with the provisions of title 11, chapter 96 of this Code. (Prior Code § 3-4-1)
2-4-2: MEMBERSHIP AND ELIGIBILITY; APPOINTMENT AND TERMS:
A. 1. The Heritage Preservation Commission shall consist of five (5) members, all of whom are appointed by majority vote of the City Council.
2. Persons appointed to the Heritage Preservation Commission shall be at the discretion of the City Council. Persons eligible for appointment shall
meet the criteria set forth in section 11-96-3 of this Code and include any and all adult resident property owners of the City; except, that the City
Council may appoint up to two (2) persons that are not resident property owners. Appointment to the Heritage Preservation Commission shall be by
majority vote of the City Council.
3. The City Council shall also appoint one of its members as a nonvoting ex officio member of the Heritage Preservation Commission who shall attend
commission meetings and act as a liaison between the City Council and the commission. The Zoning Administrator shall serve as the City staff
liaison to the Heritage Preservation Commission.
4. The City Council may also appoint alternate member(s) to a term determined by the City Council from time to time as they deem necessary. The
alternate(s) shall attend all regular and special meetings of the Heritage Preservation Commission and shall act as a replacement at any specific
meeting in the event of the absence, for whatever reason, of any regularly appointed member of the Heritage Preservation Commission.
B. The terms of each member of the Heritage Preservation Commission shall be four (4) years staggered and overlapping as presently established
beginning March 1 of the first year and shall expire on the last day of February of the last year of the respective term. (Prior Code § 3-4-2)
2-4-3: VACANCIES AND REMOVALS:
A. Vacancy In Office: In the event of a vacancy during the term of any member of the Heritage Preservation Commission, the vacancy shall be filled by
appointment by the City Council and shall run until the current term expires.
B. Removal From Office:
1. Any member of the Heritage Preservation Commission may be removed from office, with or without cause, by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the entire City
Council.
2. Any member of the Heritage Preservation Commission who misses three (3) consecutive commission meetings in a calendar year, calculated at the
end of each calendar year, due to unexcused absences, may be removed from office upon approval of the City Council. Excused absences include:
a serious personal or family medical condition, death in the immediate family or unanticipated work related commitment. It shall be the duty of each
member to notify the City staff liaison or Recording Secretary if the member will be unable to attend a meeting. (Prior Code § 3-4-2)
2-4-4: ORGANIZATION:
A. Officers:
1. The Heritage Preservation Commission shall elect officers from its membership at its first meeting in March. The officers of the commission shall be:
a. Chair.
b. Vice Chair.
c. Secretary.
2. Duties of officers are as follows:
a. Chair:
(1) The Chair shall preside at all meetings of the Heritage Preservation Commission and shall preserve order and decorum and shall decide all
questions of order.
(2) The Chair shall appoint any necessary committees and shall appoint any committees requested by a majority of the members.
b. Vice Chair: The Vice Chair shall preside at all meetings in the absence of the Chair and perform such duties as requested by the Chair.
c. Secretary: The Secretary shall provide for permanent records of the Heritage Preservation Commission proceedings, which shall include minutes
of its meetings, its findings of fact, recommendations, and the action taken on each matter which it considers, and are to be submitted to the City
Clerk.
B. Meetings:
1. Regular Meetings: The Heritage Preservation Commission shall hold a minimum of one regular meeting per month on the second Tuesday of each
month unless canceled by the Chair due to a lack of business items or lack of a quorum.
2. Special Meetings:
a. A special meeting of the Heritage Preservation Commission may be called by the Chair or by approval of a motion of the majority of the members
stating the purpose of such meeting with written notice posted at least three (3) days in advance of the meeting.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 35/497
b. Any site inspection involving four (4) or more members as a group must be scheduled and noticed as a special meeting of the Heritage
Preservation Commission.
3. Open Meetings: All meetings of the Heritage Preservation Commission shall be open to the public and comply with the State Open Meeting Law
requirements.
4. Quorum: A quorum of the Heritage Preservation Commission shall consist of three (3) members.
5. Conduct Of Meetings: The conduct of the Heritage Preservation Commission meetings shall be governed by "Robert's Rules of Order". (Prior Code
§ 3-4-3)
2-4-5: DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS:
The duties and functions of the Heritage Preservation Commission shall be as set forth in sections 11-96-2 and 11-96-4 of this Code. (Prior Code § 3-4-4)
2-4-6: COMPENSATION:
As compensation for services rendered as a member of the Heritage Preservation Commission, each member and designated alternate(s) shall receive
ten dollars ($10.00) for attendance at each regularly scheduled or special meeting. (Prior Code § 3-4-5)
Title 3
FINANCES AND TAXATION
Chapter 1
FEE SCHEDULE
3-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish certain fees for the delivery of services and processing of various permits and licenses as established by this
Code to equitably allocate administrative costs to those generating the demand or utilizing the service. (Prior Code § 2-4-1)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-07 - SMALL CELL WIRELESS FACILITIES . Go to new ordinance.
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-08 - PLAY FIELD USE FEES. Go to new ordinance.
3-1-2: SCHEDULE OF FEES:
The City Council hereby establishes the following schedule of fees:
A.
Licenses:
Liquor: Subsection
4-1-8A3
On-sale 3.2 liquor $ 100.00
Off-sale 3.2 liquor 100.00
Club 75.00
On-sale intoxicating liquor 4,500.00
Off-sale intoxicating liquor 150.00
Intoxicating liquor (Sunday) 200.00
Investigation fee (single or
corporation)
500.00
Set-ups No cost
Wine 150.00
Temporary liquor 200.00 per day
Premises extension permit
(on-sale)
75.00
Small-brewer (off-sale) 150.00
Item
City Code
Reference 2019 Fee
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 36/497
Brewpub license 200.00
Taproom license 200.00
Garbage hauler Subsection
5-3-4B
100.00
Dynamic display signs Subsection
4-11-4B
No cost
Peddlers, solicitors, transient
merchant license
Subsection
4-5-2C
$100.00/applicant
Rental housing license: Title 4,
chapter 6
License (initial/renewal) 100.00/du
Inspections:
Single family, two-family,
townhouse, or
condominium apartment
$65.00, plus $65.00/hour (minimum 1 hour) after 2 inspections for initial license or renewal
Multiple family building
under single ownership
$65.00/hour (minimum 1 hour)
Pawnbrokers, precious metals
dealers and/or secondhand good
dealers:
Section 4-4-
10
Annual license $500.00
Investigation fee $200.00 + cost incurred
Reportable transaction fee $50.00/transaction
Daily reporting penalty 50.00/day
Massage services: Subsection
4-8-4E
Business license 500.00
Personal license 100.00
Application investigation
business license
100.00/operator
Application investigation
personal license
100.00
Compost facility license Subsection
5-3-8C
200.00
B.
Permits:
Building permits: Subsection
9-1-1B
Building permit fees. Total
valuation:
$1.00 to $1,200.00 50.00
$1,201.00 to $2,000.00 $50.00 for the first $1,200.00 plus $3.27 for each additional $100.00, or fraction thereof, to
and including $2,000.00
$2,001.00 to $25,000.00 $76.18 for the first $2,000.00 plus $15.40 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to
and including $25,000.00
$25,001.00 to $50,000.00 $430.38 for the first $25,000.00 plus $11.11 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof,
to and including $50,000.00
$50,001.00 to $100,000.00
$708.13 for the first $50,000.00 plus $7.70 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof,
to and including $100,000.00
$100,001.00 to
$500,000.00
$1,093.13 for the first $100,000.00 plus $6.16 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction
thereof, to and including $500,000.00
$500,001.00 to
$1,000,000.00
$3,557.13 for the first $500,000.00 plus $5.23 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction
thereof, to and including $1,000,000.00
Item
City Code
Reference 2019 Fee
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 37/497
$1,000,001.00 and up $6,169.63 for the first $1,000,000.00 plus $4.02 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction
thereof
Plan review A plan review fee shall be collected on all permits issued for work governed by title 9, chapter
1 of this Code in accordance with Minnesota Statutes section 326B.153. This fee is based on
65 percent of the building permit fee. Basement finish and deck permit plan review fees are
10 percent of the building permit fee
State of Minnesota surcharge
A surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits issued for work governed by title 9, chapter 1
of this Code in accordance with Minnesota Statutes section 326B.148
Special investigation fee The fee for a special investigation shall be equal to (but in addition to) the building permit fee
Electrical permits and
inspections
Subsection
9-3-5C
The fee schedule set forth in Minnesota Statutes section 326B.37 is adopted by reference
and incorporated herein
Water connection charge Subsection
8-1-5C
$1,781.00/REC
Sewer connection charge Subsection
8-1-6C
7,656.00/REC
Water meter assembly: Subsection
8-2-2D
5/8 inch 354.00/each
1 inch 551.00/each
11/2 inch 700.00/each
2 inch 915.00/each
Over 2 inch Quote
Other permit fees (flat fee) (subsection 9-1-1B):
Item Fee Surcharge Total
Air
conditioner
$ 50.00 $1.00 $ 51.00
Fireplace 50.00 1.00 51.00
Furnace 50.00 1.00 51.00
Furnace
and air
conditioner
(same
house)
75.00 1.00 76.00
Roof 150.00 1.00 151.00
Septic
install/repair
150.00 0.00 150.00
Siding 150.00 1.00 151.00
Windows 50.00 1.00 51.00
Construction escrows: Subsection
11-16-5B
Landscape/as-built grading $3,000.00/lot (minimum)
Driveway/sidewalk $2,000.00/lot (minimum)
Burning permit Section 5-4-
4
No cost
Fence permit: Subsection
11-19-4A
Basic permit $ 50.00
Easement encroachment 100.00
Home occupation permit Subsection
11-28-3A
50.00
Item
City Code
Reference 2019 Fee
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 38/497
Sign permit Subsection
11-37-7A3
50.00
Natural landscaping permit Subsection
5-2-3F1
100.00
Sewer and water hook-up: Subsection
8-1-4A
Permit Included with building permit
Inspection $ 50.00/hour
New construction assessor's
valuation:
Estimated construction value
<$499,999.00
50.00
Estimated construction value
>$500,000.00
150.00
Swimming pool administrative
permit
Subsection
11-18-5B
50.00
Lawful gambling permits: Subsection
4-7-6D
State permit 100.00
Local permit 100.00
Archery permit Subsection
6-3-3L
No cost
Play field use: Resolution
2013-65
City sponsored users No charge
Recognized youth
associations:
Ballfield $75.00/seasonal field assignment
Soccer 4v4 non-irrigated $50.00/seasonal field assignment
Soccer 4v4 irrigated $70.00/seasonal field assignment
Soccer (full size field) $100.00/seasonal field assignment
All other users:
Monday - Thursday;
baseball
$ 50.00/field/day
Monday - Thursday; field
game
50.00/field/day
Saturday/Sunday; baseball
100.00/field/day
Saturday/Sunday; field
game
100.00/field/day
Other charges:
Public works
staff/equipment
Per subsection 3-1-2E
Portable toilets/trash
containers
Cost incurred
Clean up of site and/or
equipment replacement
A deposit may be required in an amount approved by the Parks and Recreation Commission
Park living memorials Resolution
2012-08
Cost incurred
Prairie Park veterans memorial
paver
Resolution
2018-43
$30.00
Prairie Park shelter: Resolution
2013-13
Item
City Code
Reference 2019 Fee
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 39/497
Residents $10.00/per reservation
Non-residents $15.00/per reservation
Prairie Center: Resolution
2014-21
Assembly room:
Entire room resident $35.00/hour + Sales Tax
Entire room non-resident $50.00/hour + Sales Tax
Carpet side only:
Resident $20.00/hour + Sales Tax
Non-resident $30.00/hour + Sales Tax
Tile side only:
Resident $20.00/hour + Sales Tax
Non-resident $30.00/hour + Sales Tax
Conference room 1
(fireplace):
Resident $20.00/hour + Sales Tax
Non-resident $30.00/hour + Sales Tax
Conference room 2
(northeast):
Resident $15.00/hour + Sales Tax
Non-resident $20.00/hour + Sales Tax
Conference room 3 (small):
Resident $10.00/hour + Sales Tax
Non-resident $15.00/hour + Sales Tax
Conference room 4
(southwest):
Resident $20.00/hour + Sales Tax
Non-resident $30.00/hour + Sales Tax
Kitchen:
Resident $10.00/hour + Sales Tax
Non-resident $15.00/hour + Sales Tax
There shall be a $15.00/hour surcharge for room rentals after 5:00 P.M. Monday through Thursday, after 12:00 noon on Friday or on
Saturday or Sunday.
The City may charge additional fees (and Sales Tax when required) for a security officer to be present or unusual or extra-ordinary services
or facilities as determined by the Parks and Recreation Manager.
Nonprofits serving the Otsego area will have the opportunity to rent space at Prairie Center once per month for a fee of 50 percent of the
regular residential fee rate for that space.
Special event permit Section 4-2-
4
Costs incurred
Outdoor entertainment permit: Section 4-3-
4
Single event $ 50.00
Reoccurring event on the
same day(s) of week each
calendar year
50.00
C.
Development applications: Sections
10-3-6 and
11-1-8
Zoning amendment (map or
text):
Subsection
11-3-2A1
Item
City Code
Reference 2019 Fee
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 40/497
Base fee 500.00
Escrow 1,000.00
Total 1,500.00
Variance: Subsection
11-6-4C1
Base fee 500.00
Escrow 1,000.00
Total 1,500.00
Conditional use permit: Subsection
11-4-2A1
Base fee 500.00
Escrow 1,000.00
Total 1,500.00
Interim use permit: Subsection
11-5-2A1
Base fee 500.00
Escrow 1,000.00
Total 1,500.00
Administrative permit and
appeals:
Subsections
11-8-2A1
and 11-7-3D
Base fee 200.00
Escrow 400.00
Total 600.00
Site plan review: Subsection
11-9-3A1
Base fee 200.00
Escrow 1,000.00
Total 1,200.00
Concept plan/PUD concept plan:
Subsection
11-3-2A1
Base fee 500.00
Escrow 1,000.00
Total 1,500.00
CUP/IUP approval extension: Subsections
11-4-5B3
and 11-5-
6B3
Base fee 200.00
Escrow 400.00
Total 600.00
Sketch plan/preliminary plat: Subsection
10-5-2A2
Base fee 500.00
Escrow 3,000.00
Total 3,500.00
Final plat: Subsection
10-5-3A4
Base fee 500.00
Item
City Code
Reference 2019 Fee
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 41/497
Escrow 3,000.00
Total 3,500.00
Administrative subdivision: Subsection
10-4-2C
Base fee 200.00
Escrow 300.00
Total 500.00
D.
Development fees:
Water availability charge Subsection
8-1-5B
1,781.00/REC
Sewer availability charge Subsection
8-1-6B
2,552.00/REC
Stormwater impact: Section 8-4-
1
Lefebvre Creek 2,476.00/gross acre
Otsego Creek 3,526.00/net acre
North Mississippi Watershed 11,453.00/gross acre
Park land fee in lieu of land
dedication:
Section 10-
8-15
Residential development 1,968.00/du
Commercial development 7,000.00/gross acre
CSAH 39/TH 101 AUAR n/a 280.00/gross acre
E.
General government services:
General labor (minimum 15
minutes)
30.00/hour
Copies:
Letter, legal, or ledger 0.25/per sheet
Larger scale prints 10.00/per sheet
Zoning confirmation letter 60.00/parcel
Special assessment search 35.00/parcel
Returned check fee 30.00
Assessment administration fee 100.00/parcel
Assessment roll copy 100.00
Special meeting $500.00 plus cost incurred
Inspection fee: Section 9-4-
3
Fire sprinkler inspections
residential (townhomes)
$1.50/per square foot
Fire sprinkler inspections
commercial
Based on valuation
Other (non-permit) building
safety inspections
$150.00 + $75.00 for each re-inspection
Biannual fire inspection
(commercial, industrial, and
institutional uses)
No charge for the first 2 inspections/costs incurred for any other inspection
FOG interceptor/separator
inspection
Subsection
8-3-11E
No charge
Public works (not otherwise
specified):
Item
City Code
Reference 2019 Fee
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 42/497
Labor per employee $50.00/hour + overtime per City Policy
Equipment:
Tandem axle truck $ 30.00/hour
Single axle truck 25.00/hour
Loader 50.00/hour
Grader 50.00/hour
Cat 305 excavator 30.00/hour
JD 320D skid loader 25.00/hour
Skid loader with
attachment
30.00/hour
Tractor with 3-point 20.00/hour
Tractor with attachment 25.00/hour
Power tools:
Weed whip 5.00/hour
Chain saw 5.00/hour
Blower 5.00/hour
Jet-vac 110.00/hour
Snowblower 25.00/hour
Street sweeper 50.00/hour
Sandbags/sand $10.00/bundle of 30 sandbags
Items not listed:
City equipment FEMA schedule of equipment rates
Rental Costs incurred
Minimum charge 1 hour
Expenses, services,
supplies
Actual cost + 15 percent
F.
Documents:
City Map $ 5.00
Zoning Map - large scale 10.00
Zoning Map - small scale 5.00
Floodplain Map No cost
Other documents Costs incurred + 15 percent
G.
Animals:
Impound/release permit Subsection
6-2-11C
All costs incurred
Fowl keeping license Subsection
11-26-4G9
$ 20.00
H.
Public safety:
Administrative enforcement civil
penalties:
Subsection
1-5-3B
Class A (animal violations) 50.00
Class B (zoning violations -
except signs)
200.00
Item
City Code
Reference 2019 Fee
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 43/497
Class C (nuisance, sign
ordinance, business license,
and building regulation
violations)
200.00
Nuisance abatement fee $200.00 + costs incurred
False alarm charge: Section 3-2-
4
Fire No charge for first 3 alarms, $200.00 for fourth alarm, $200.00 + $50.00 for each successive
alarm per calendar year
Other No charge for first 3 alarms, $50.00 for fourth alarm, $100.00 for each successive alarm per
calendar year
Fire services charges: Section 3-2-
3
Mutual aid:
Agriculture, residential
building, vacant parcel
Cost incurred
Commercial, industrial,
institutional building
Cost incurred
I.
Engineering:
Mineral extraction Section 4-9-
10
$0.10 per cubic yard mined per calendar year
Wetland delineation review Subsection
11-16-5B
$2,000.00 escrow
Water tower/antenna review 3,500.00 escrow
Street sign (sign + installation of
new sign)
Engineering
Manual
250.00/sign
Certification of grading: Subsection
11-16-5G
Initial survey review 150.00/lot
Each re-inspection 125.00/lot
Petition for ROW or easement
vacation:
Section 8-6-
19
Base fee 500.00
Escrow 1,000.00
Total 1,500.00
ROW permit: Subsection
8-6-7A
Excavation fee $200.00 + cost incurred
Obstruction fee $ 2.50/linear foot
Site development (grading)
permit:
Subsection
9-6-3D
Under 1 acre 200.00 escrow
1 acre up to 5 acres 500.00 escrow
More than 5 acres 1,000.00 escrow
GIS data entry: Engineering
Manual
Residential 100.00/acre
Commercial, industrial, other 250.00/lot
J.
Public utilities:
Item
City Code
Reference 2019 Fee
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 44/497
Municipal water and sewage
usage rate
Subsections
8-1-5A and
8-1-6A
Water and sewer usage rates are established by the City Council with passage of a separate
resolution on an annual basis. Any usage rate increases will be effective with the March
billing
Watering ban violation fee Subsection
8-2-6E
$ 50.00
Delinquent account
administration fee
Section 8-1-
9
100.00
Water disconnect/reconnect at
service valve fees
Section 8-1-
4A
A minimum of $75.00 will be charged, which included 1 hour of labor. Additional labor will be
charged in 15 minute increments at the public works labor rate. Equipment and material
charges will apply as necessary
Annual Stormwater District utility
fee for lots of final platted after
November 15, 1990:
Section 8-4-
2
Agricultural Districts:
A-2 District $ 35.71/parcel
Residential Districts:
R-C, R-1, R-2, R-3 Districts
38.29/lot
R-4A, R-4 Districts 18.50/lot
R-5 District 14.66/unit
R-MH District 9.88/unit
R-6 District 7.65/unit
R-7 District 3.51/unit
Business Districts 79.08/gross acre
Industrial Districts 79.08/gross acre
Storm sewer surcharge (sump
pump)
Subsection
8-3-7D4b
50.00/month
Standard street light (new
installation):
Section 10-
9-11
City installed 2,000.00/light
Developer installed 500.00/light
K.
Franchise fees:
Cable franchise application Section 4-
10-9
5,000.00
(Ord. 2018-13, 12-10-2018, eff. 1-1-2019; amd. Ord. 2019-04, 2-11-2019)
Chapter 2
EMERGENCY RESPONSE SERVICE CHARGES
3-2-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted for the purpose of authorizing the City to establish and charge user service fees for emergency response services as described in
this chapter. (Prior Code § 5-6-1)
3-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms are hereby defined for the purposes of this chapter:
BUILDING, COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL OR INSTITUTIONAL: Any structures that are used or intended either by the nature of their construction or by
allowed zoning and any conditional use permits, interim use permits or business licenses issued to be used for commercial, industrial or institutional
purposes; rental housing of any type is considered to be commercial for the purposes of this chapter.
BUILDING, RESIDENTIAL: Any structure that is used or intended by the nature of its construction to be used by persons for living and sleeping quarters
Item
City Code
Reference 2019 Fee
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 45/497
and also outbuildings, barns and other structures which are not defined as commercial, industrial or institutional buildings by this chapter, but shall not
include hotels, motels, or other buildings intended primarily for transient lodging.
FALSE ALARM: The unintended activation of an alarm system through mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the
negligence of the alarm user, his employees or agents. An alarm is a false alarm within the meaning of this definition when, upon inspection by the Wright
County Sheriff's Office or Fire Department, evidence indicates that no unauthorized entry, robbery, or other such crime was committed or attempted in or
on the premises which would have activated a properly functioning alarm system.
FIRE DEPARTMENT: The Fire Department(s) established by the City or contracted to provide service within the City of Otsego including departments that
provide services pursuant to mutual aid agreements.
FIRE SERVICE: Any deployment of firefighting personnel and/or equipment to extinguish a fire or perform any preventative measure in an effort to protect
equipment, life, or property in an area threatened by fire and also including the deployment of firefighting personnel and/or equipment to provide fire
suppression, rescue, extrication, or any other services related to fire and rescue as may occasionally occur. Deployment, as used herein, constitutes fire
service regardless of whether these services are actually performed.
FIRE SERVICE CHARGE: The charge imposed by the City for receiving fire service.
VACANT PARCEL: Any property parcel that does not include any building improvements. (Prior Code § 5-6-2; amd. 2018 Code)
3-2-3: FIRE SERVICE CHARGES:
A. Statute Authority: The collection of fire service charges for fire service shall be pursuant to Minnesota Statutes sections 366.011 and 415.01 and any
other applicable statute.
B. Types Of Charges:
1. Said fees shall be established at a fixed rate for certain types of incidents or for actual costs incurred by the Fire Department for mutual aid in
providing the fire service as set forth in section 3-1-2 of this title.
2. For fire services for which the actual costs incurred by the Fire Department in responding to the incident is charged, the fees shall include, but shall
not be limited to, actual manpower costs for all personnel that respond to the incident (minimum of 1 hour) and the cost on a per hour basis for each
fire apparatus or other City mechanical equipment that responds to the incident (minimum of 1 hour per unit).
C. Liability For Charges: When a particular service rendered by the Fire Department directly benefits more than one person or property, the owner of each
property so benefited and each person so benefited (where the property protection only is not involved) shall be liable for the payment of the full charge
for such service to their respective property as hereinbefore outlined.
D. Payment Of Charges; Delinquencies:
1. The fire service charge shall be paid within thirty (30) days of billing by the City. If the service charge is not paid by that time, it will be considered
delinquent, and the City Clerk will send notice of delinquency.
2. If the fire service charge remains unpaid for thirty (30) days after the notice of delinquency is sent, the City will use all practical and reasonable legal
means to collect the service charge including the provisions of Minnesota Statutes section 366.012. The party receiving the service shall be liable for
all collection costs incurred by the City including, but not limited to, administrative costs, attorney fees, recording fees and court costs. (Prior Code
§ 5-6-3)
3-2-4: FALSE ALARMS CHARGES:
A. Notice Of Provisions: Any false alarm call to an individual or business that, in the opinion of the Fire Chief having jurisdiction over the area, the County
Sheriff or the City Administrator, was the result of a defective or malfunctioning alarm system will receive a notice outlining the terms and conditions of
this chapter.
B. Excessive Number Of Fire Alarms: More than three (3) alarms at the same property within a calendar year that are found to be false alarms is
excessive, constitutes a public nuisance, and shall be a violation of this Code.
C. Charges Established: Charges imposed upon the property owner for response to a false alarm violating this chapter shall be established in section 3-1-
2 of this title.
D. Delinquent Payments: Any unpaid service charge against a property or individual for a false alarm not paid in full within thirty (30) days of the date of
billing shall be placed as a special assessment against the property pursuant to Minnesota Statutes section 429.101, after proper notice and hearing.
(Prior Code § 5-6-4)
3-2-5: APPEAL OF CHARGES:
Any party aggrieved by a charge authorized in this chapter may appeal the charge to the City Council as follows:
A. Within the time period for which a bill is payable, the party shall file a written request with the City Clerk setting forth specific reasons why the charge is
improper.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 46/497
B. The City Clerk shall notify the aggrieved party, in writing, of the time, place and date the City Council will hold a hearing on the issue.
C. The City Council may grant relief on appeal if it finds good cause and sufficient proof including, but not limited to, any unique circumstances that may
exist in a particular case and history of alarms coming from a particular property, and whether the property is a residential, commercial, industrial or
institutional building and the scope of services provided.
D. The City Council may extend the time for payment for a period it deems reasonable. (Prior Code § 5-6-5)
Chapter 3
IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM
3-3-1: PURPOSE:
A. The City has developed this Identity Theft Prevention Program ("program") pursuant to the Federal Trade Commission's Red Flags Rule ("rule"), which
implements section 114 of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003 by implementing reasonable procedures to:
1. Identify relevant red flags for new and existing covered accounts and incorporate those red flags into the program;
2. Detect red flags that have been incorporated into the program;
3. Respond appropriately to any red flags that are detected to prevent and mitigate identity theft; and
4. Ensure the program is updated periodically to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the creditor from identity theft.
B. A degree of confidentiality regarding the City's specific practices relating to identity theft detection, prevention and mitigation is required to ensure the
effectiveness of the Identity Theft Prevention Program. Therefore, only the City's general practices related to implementation of red flag detection,
prevention and mitigation are listed in this chapter. Any documents that may have been produced or are produced in order to develop or implement the
Identity Theft Prevention Program established by this chapter that list or describe such specific practices and the information those documents contain
are considered "security information" as defined in Minnesota Statutes section 13.37 and are unavailable to the public because disclosure of them
would be likely to substantially jeopardize the security of information against improper use, that use being to circumvent the City's identity theft
prevention efforts in order to facilitate the commission of identity theft. (Prior Code § 2-6-1)
3-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms shall be defined as follows for the purposes of this chapter:
ACCOUNT OWNER: The individual or business that has applied for an account with the City of Otsego and is responsible for transactions made in
connection with said account.
COVERED ACCOUNT: A continuing relationship established by a person or business that involves or is designated to permit multiple financial payments
or transactions for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the City from identity theft.
FACT OFFICER: The individual designated by the City Council as the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Officer responsible for administering the
Identity Theft Prevention Program.
IDENTITY THEFT: A fraud attempted or committed using identifying information of another person without authority.
RED FLAG: A pattern, practice or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft.
SERVICE PROVIDER: A third party that provides a service directly to or on behalf of the City of Otsego. (Prior Code § 2-6-2)
3-3-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The following accounts established with the City shall be deemed to be covered accounts subject to the provisions of this chapter: Utility accounts
established in accordance with section 8-1-7 of this Code. (Prior Code § 2-6-3)
3-3-4: RED FLAGS:
A. Identification: The City will consider the following risk factors in identifying red flags for covered accounts as appropriate:
1. The types of covered accounts it offers or maintains.
2. The methods it provides to open covered accounts.
3. The methods it provides to access covered accounts.
4. Previous experience with identity theft including, but not limited to:
a. Prior instances of identity theft.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 47/497
b. Methods of identity theft that reflect changes in risk.
c. Applicable supervisory guidance.
B. Categories: Red flags shall include, but are not limited to:
1. The presentation of suspicious documents:
a. Documents provided for identification that appear to have been altered or forged.
b. Information in the document is inconsistent with information previously provided by the person when opening a new account.
c. An application appears to have been altered or forged, or gives the appearance of having been destroyed and reassembled.
2. The presentation of suspicious personal information:
a. Presentation of personal identifying information that is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the individual.
b. Presentation of personal identifying information is associated with known fraudulent activity as indicated by internal or third party sources used by
the City.
3. The unusual use of, or other suspicious activity related to, a covered account:
a. Mail sent to the account owner is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the
covered account.
b. The City is notified that the account owner is not receiving account statements mailed by the City.
c. The City is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a covered account.
4. Notification from account holders, victims of identity theft, law enforcement agencies or other persons regarding possible identity theft in connection
with covered accounts.
C. Detection: The City will incorporate procedures for the detection of red flags in connection with covered accounts by:
1. Obtaining identifying information of a person prior to establishing a new account.
2. Monitoring transactions in connection with covered accounts for suspicious activities.
D. Response: The City will document a response to all red flags detected, commensurate with the degree of risk posed.
1. The City will consider factors that may heighten the risk of identity theft in determining an appropriate response to detection of a red flag including,
but not limited to, the categories outlined in subsection B of this section.
2. Appropriate responses by the City when a red flag is detected include, but are not limited to:
a. Monitoring a covered account for evidence of identity theft.
b. Contacting the account owner.
c. Changing any passwords, security codes or other security devices that permit access to a covered account.
d. Reopening a covered account with a new account number.
e. Closing an existing covered account.
f. Not opening a new covered account.
g. Not attempting to collect on a billing connected with a covered account or not selling a covered account to a debt collector.
h. Notifying the Wright County Sheriff, Attorney General of the State of Minnesota, or other law enforcement agencies.
i. Determining that no response is required based on the specific circumstances related to the red flag.
3. The FACT Officer shall advise the City Council of the red flag and the City's response. (Prior Code § 2-6-4)
3-3-5: ADMINISTRATION OF PROVISIONS:
The FACT Officer shall be responsible for administration of the Identity Theft Prevention Program and is expected to:
A. Assign specific responsibilities for implementation of the Identity Theft Prevention Program.
B. Train appropriate City staff in the detection of red flags and the responsive steps to be taken when a red flag is detected.
C. Whenever the City engages a service provider to perform an activity subject to the provisions of this chapter, the FACT Officer will ensure that the
activity of the service provider is conducted in accordance with reasonable policies and procedures designed to detect, prevent and mitigate identity
theft.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 48/497
D. Review, prepare and provide, at least annually, reports to the City Council on the City's compliance with the Identity Theft Prevention Program, the
effectiveness of the procedures, significant incidents involving identity theft and the City's response and recommendations for amendments to the
Identity Theft Prevention Program as may be appropriate.
E. Recommendations by the FACT Officer for amendment of the Identity Theft Prevention Program shall reflect changes in risks to account owners or to
the safety of the City from identity theft based on factors such as:
1. The experiences of the City with identity theft.
2. Changes in methods of identity theft.
3. Changes in methods to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft.
4. Changes in the types of accounts the City offers or maintains.
5. Changes in the business arrangements of the City, including establishment of joint powers agreements or contracts with service providers. (Prior
Code § 2-6-5)
Title 4
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
4-1-1: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The provisions of Minnesota Statutes 340A, with reference to the definition of terms and all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and
consumption of intoxicating liquor are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out herein, except as hereinafter modified. (Ord. 2017-
11, 9-25-2017)
4-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings given them herein:
INTEREST: Includes any pecuniary interest in the ownership, operation, management or profits of a retail liquor establishment, but does not include: bona
fide loans; bona fide fixed sum rental agreements; bona fide open accounts or other obligations held with or without security arising out of the ordinary and
regular course of business of selling or leasing merchandise, fixtures or supplies to such establishment; or an interest of five percent (5%) or less in any
corporation holding a City liquor license; a person who receives monies from time to time directly or indirectly from a licensee in the absence of a bona fide
consideration therefor and excluding bona fide gifts or donations, shall be deemed to have a pecuniary interest in such license. In determining "bona fide",
the reasonable value of the goods or things received as consideration for the payment by the licensee and all other facts reasonably tending to prove or
disprove the existence of any purposeful scheme or arrangement to evade the prohibitions of this chapter shall be considered.
OUTDOOR ENTERTAINMENT: Entertainment outside an enclosed building including shows, plays, skits, musical revues, children's theater, dance
productions, musical concerts, opera and the production or provision of sights or sounds or visual or auditory sensations which are designed to or may
entertain, and including dancing by patrons related to said entertainment.
PATIO: A patio is any outdoor area located on the premises used for serving food or alcohol.
RESTAURANT: A business under the control of a single proprietor or manager having a full service kitchen, in consideration of payment, meals are
regularly served at tables to the general public and which employs an adequate staff to provide the usual and suitable service to its guests, and part of the
business of which is the serving of foods. Such establishment shall have facilities for seating not less than fifty (50) guests at one time. (Ord. 2017-11, 9-
25-2017)
4-1-3: LICENSE REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS:
A. No person, except as provided in Minnesota Statutes sections 340A.301, subdivisions 1 and 8, and 340A.510, and manufacturers and wholesalers to
the extent authorized by law, shall directly or indirectly deal in, sell, keep for sale or deliver any intoxicating liquor without first having received a license
to do so as provided in this chapter; nor shall any private club or public place, directly or indirectly or upon any pretense or by any device, allow the
consumption or display of intoxicating liquor or serve any liquid for the purpose of mixing with intoxicating liquor without first having obtained a license
therefor from the City as provided in this chapter.
B. Holders of an on-sale intoxicating liquor license are exempt from the requirement that an on-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor license be obtained, and offsale
intoxicating liquor licensees are exempt from the requirement that an off-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor license be obtained before selling 3.2 percent
malt liquor. (Ord. 2017-11, 9-25-2017)
4-1-4: TYPES OF LICENSES:
A. Brewpub, Off-Sale License: An off-sale brewpub license may be issued only in accordance with Minnesota Statutes 340A.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 49/497
B. Brewpub, On-Sale License: An on-sale brewpub license may be issued only in accordance with Minnesota Statutes 340A.
C. Cocktail Room License: A cocktail room license may be issued only in accordance with Minnesota Statutes 340A.
D. Consumption And Display License: A consumption and display license may be issued in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Statutes section
340A.414 for the consumption and display of intoxicating liquor or the serving of any liquid for the purpose of mixing with intoxicating liquor. This
subsection shall not apply to any person or premises otherwise licensed by the City for the sale of intoxicating liquor.
E. Farm Winery License: A farm winery liquor license may permit the sale, on the farm winery premises, of table, sparkling, or fortified wines produced by
that farm winery at on-sale or off-sale, in retail or wholesale lots in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Statutes section 340A.315.
F. Off-Sale 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor License: An off-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor license may permit the sale of beer at retail, in the original package, for
consumption off the premises only.
G. On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor License: An on-sale intoxicating liquor license may be issued only to restaurants whose gross food and beverage receipts
of the restaurant are at least fifty percent (50%) attributable to the sale of food, and shall be regulated as follows:
1. Each on-sale intoxicating liquor licensee shall have the continuing obligation to have at least fifty percent (50%) of gross food and beverage receipts
from the restaurant during the preceding business year attributable to the sale of food.
2. For the purpose of this subsection G, "sale of food" shall include gross receipts attributable to the sale of food items, soft drinks, and nonalcoholic
beverages. The term shall not include any portion of gross receipts attributable to the nonalcoholic components of plain or mixed alcoholic
beverages, such as ice, soft drink mixes or other mixes.
3. The restaurant shall submit to the City a copy of the verified State of Minnesota, Department of Revenue Sales and Use Tax return on an annual
basis or as requested. The City may obtain its own audit or review of such documents or information, and all licensees shall cooperate with such a
review, including prompt production of requested records.
4. The City may place the license of any on-sale intoxicating liquor licensee on probationary status for up to one year when the sale of food is reported,
or found to be, less than fifty percent (50%) of gross food and beverage receipts for any business year.
5. If, after the probationary period, food sales are still less than fifty percent (50%), the establishment shall not be eligible for the renewal of an
intoxicating liquor license.
H. On-Sale Sunday Liquor Sale License: An on-sale Sunday liquor sale license may be issued to establishments holding an on-sale liquor license
hereunder. Such license shall permit the sale of liquor to be consumed on the premises in conjunction with the serving of food. A separate application
for such license shall be made to the City in the same manner as applications for other licenses to sell intoxicating liquor are made hereunder.
I. On-Sale Wine License: An on-sale wine license may be issued for the sale of wine not exceeding twenty four percent (24%) alcohol by volume for
consumption on the licensed premises only, in conjunction with the sale of food. An on-sale wine license may be issued only to a restaurant having
facilities for seating at least twenty five (25) guests at one time. An on-sale wine licensee who is also licensed to sell 3.2 percent malt liquors at on-sale,
and whose gross receipts are at least sixty percent (60%) attributable to the sale of food, is authorized to sell intoxicating malt liquors at on-sale without
an additional license.
J. On-Sale 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor License: An on-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor license may be granted only to bona fide clubs, beer stores, restaurants,
and hotels where food is prepared and served for consumption on the premises. On-sale 3.2 percent liquor licenses shall permit the sale of beer for
consumption on the premises only.
K. Small Brewer Off-Sale Malt Liquor License: A small brewer off-sale malt liquor license may be issued only in accordance with Minnesota Statutes 340A.
L. Special Club License: A special club on-sale license shall be issued only to clubs in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Statutes section
340A.404, subdivision 1.
M. Taproom License: A taproom license may be issued only in accordance with Minnesota Statutes section 340A.301.
N. Temporary 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor License: The City Council may issue a temporary on-sale license for the sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor to a club,
charitable religious or nonprofit organization. Except where specifically excluded, applicants for temporary licenses shall be subject to the provisions of
this chapter. The temporary license shall be subject to such terms and conditions as the City Council shall subscribe.
O. Temporary On-Sale License: The City Council may issue to a club or charitable religious or nonprofit organization in existence for at least three (3)
years or to a political committee registered under Minnesota Statutes section 10A.14 a temporary license for the on-sale of intoxicating liquor in
connection with a social event within the City sponsored by the licensee.
1. The license may authorize the on-sale of intoxicating liquor for:
a. Not more than four (4) consecutive days and no more than three (3) 4-day, four (4) 3-day, or six (6) 2-day temporary licenses, in any combination
not to exceed twelve (12) days per year to any one organization or registered political committee, or for any one location, within a twelve (12)
month period.
b. Location(s) other than the premises the licensee owns or permanently occupies.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 50/497
2. The license may provide that the licensee may contract for intoxicating liquor catering services with the holder of a full year on-sale liquor license
issued by the City.
3. The licenses are subject to the terms, including license fee, imposed by the City.
4. The licenses issued under this subsection O are subject to all laws and ordinances governing the sale of intoxicating liquor except Minnesota
Statutes sections 340A.409 and 340A.504, subdivision 3, paragraph (d), and the laws and ordinances which by their nature are not applicable.
5. Temporary licenses must first be approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety before they become valid. Not more than one temporary license
may be issued to any one organization or registered political committee, or for any one location, within any thirty (30) day period. (Ord. 2017-11, 9-
25-2017)
4-1-5: TERM OF LICENSE:
A. License Term: All liquor licenses shall be issued for a term not greater than one year and shall expire on June 30 each year.
B. Continued Validity Of License:
1. Premises: The licensed premises must be operated and managed by the licensee. The licensee may not allow a prospective or actual buyer to
manage or operate the premises until that person is licensed.
2. Corporations: Licenses issued to corporations shall be valid only so long as there is no change in the officers or ownership interest of the
corporation, unless such change is approved by the City Council, in which event, said license shall continue in force until the end of the then current
license year.
a. Corporations holding licenses shall submit written notice to the City Clerk of any change in operating officers at least thirty (30) days prior to the
effective date of such change. The written notice shall designate the new operating officer and shall contain all of the information about said
person as is required of a single applicant. The new operating officers shall be subject to the investigation required by this chapter and payment of
investigation fees.
b. The designation of a new operating officer shall not cause the corporation's license to become invalid before a decision is rendered by the City
Council, provided proper notice and application are made pursuant to this chapter. A proposed new operating officer shall be referred to as the
interim operating officer. In the event an interim operating officer is rejected by the City Council, the corporation shall designate another interim
operating officer and make the required application within fifteen (15) calendar days of the City Council's decision. In that event, a corporation shall
be limited to two (2) successive interim operating officers.
3. Associations And Partnerships: Licenses issued to associations or partnerships shall be valid only so long as there is no change in the partnership or
association agreement or in the ownership of said partnership or association unless such change is approved by the City Council, in which event,
said license shall continue in force until the end of the then current license year.
4. Changes To Corporations, Associations, Partnerships: Licensees shall submit written notice to the City Clerk of any such changes described herein
on or before thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of any such change. Notwithstanding the definition of "interest" as given in this chapter in the
case of a corporation, the licensee shall notify the Clerk when a person not listed in the application acquires an interest which, together with that of a
spouse, parent, brother, sister or child, exceeds five percent (5%) and shall give all information about said person as is required of a person pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-11, 9-25-2017)
4-1-6: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
Each license issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and each licensee shall be approved subject to the following conditions:
A. Compliance With Laws:
1. City And State Laws: Every license shall be granted subject to the conditions of this chapter and of any other applicable ordinance of the City and/or
laws of the State.
2. Consumption And Display: No person shall mix or prepare intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor for consumption in any public place not
licensed in accordance with the ordinances of the City and the laws of the State.
3. Area Of License: No license shall be effective beyond the areas approved in the license for which it was granted.
4. Transfer Of License: No license may be transferred to another person or to another place without the approval of the City Council, and without a new
application having been approved in accordance with this chapter.
B. Posting License: The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the licensed establishment at all times.
C. Conduct Of Business: Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of his/her place of business including conduct and activity of the premises
attributable to the business.
1. Hours Of Operation:
a. The provisions of Minnesota Statutes section 340A.504 with reference to the hours of sale are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as
if fully set out herein.
b. Malt liquor in growlers may also be sold at off-sale on Sunday after eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 51/497
c. Persons other than employees of the licensee may not be in the premises from thirty (30) minutes after the sale of malt liquor or intoxicating liquor
is prohibited until thirty (30) minutes before the sale is permitted.
2. Beverage Restrictions:
a. Sales To Certain Persons Prohibited: No intoxicating liquor shall be sold, furnished, or delivered to any obviously intoxicated person, to any known
habitual drunkard, to any minor, or to any person to whom sale is prohibited by State law.
b. Sales, Providing To Persons Where Prohibited: No person shall give, sell, procure, or purchase intoxicating liquor to or for any person to whom the
sale of intoxicating liquor is forbidden by law.
c. Persons Under Legal Drinking Age:
(1) Providing To: No licensee, his/her agent or employee, shall serve or dispense upon the licensed premises any intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent
malt liquors to a person under the legal drinking age; nor shall such licensee, or his/her agent or employee, permit any such person to be
furnished or consume any such liquors on the licensed premises; nor shall such licensee, his/her agent or employee, permit any such person to
be delivered any such liquors.
(2) Receipt Of: No persons under the legal drinking age shall receive delivery of intoxicating liquor.
(3) Identification Requirements And Restrictions:
(A) Any person shall, upon demand of the licensee, his/her employee or agent, produce and permit to be examined a current driver's license or
nonqualification certificate issued by the State Department of Public Safety. In the case of a foreign national, a valid passport may be used as an
alternative to the foregoing methods of identification.
(B) No person under the legal drinking age shall misrepresent his/her age for the purpose of obtaining intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt
liquor, nor shall he/she enter any premises licensed for the retail sale of intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor for the purpose of
purchasing or having served or delivered to him/her for consuming any such intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor, nor shall any such
person purchase, attempt to purchase, consume or have another person purchase for him/her any intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor.
(C) In every prosecution for a violation of the provisions of this chapter relating to the sale or furnishing of intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt
beverages to persons under the legal drinking age, and in every proceeding before the City Council with respect thereto, the fact that the person
involved has obtained and presented to the licensee, his/her agent or employee, a driver's license, passport, or nonqualification certificate
issued by the Department of Public Safety, from which it appears that said person was not under the legal drinking age and was regularly issued
such identification card, shall be prima facie evidence that the licensee, his/her agent or employee is not guilty of a violation of such a provision
and shall be conclusive evidence that a violation, if one has occurred, was not wilful or intentional.
d. Hotels: No sales of intoxicating liquor shall be made to or in guestrooms of hotels unless the rules of such hotel provide for the service of meals in
guestrooms; nor unless the sale of such intoxicating liquor is made in the manner "on-sales" are required to be made; nor unless such sale
accompanies and is incidental to the regular service of meals to guests therein; nor unless the rules of such hotel and the description, location and
number of such guestrooms are fully set out in the application for a license.
e. Display: No on-sale liquor licensee shall display liquor to the public during the hours when the sale of liquor is prohibited.
3. Patios:
a. Approval Required: The issuance of a license pursuant to this chapter shall be limited to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages inside of
a structure on the licensed premises, unless the licensee applies for and receives approval from the City Council for a patio to allow the sale and
consumption outside of a structure on the licensed premises.
b. Performance Standards:
(1) The patio shall not be enclosed in such a manner that the space becomes an indoor area as defined by Minnesota Statute.
(2) The patio shall be attached to the licensed premises and share at least one common wall with the licensed premises building in accordance
with Minnesota Statute; the patio shall not be part of a public street, sidewalk, or other public grounds.
(3) The patio shall be clearly delineated by an approved fence at least forty two inches (42") in height or some other approved structure or barrier
that is compact and contiguous to prevent the ingress or egress of persons to and from the patio.
(4) Screening may be required if the premises is adjacent to a residential district established by the zoning ordinance, consistent with the
fencing/screening/landscaping provisions of the zoning ordinance.
(5) Liquor and food may be served, dispensed, possessed, displayed, or furnished on a patio located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a
residential district between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. Sunday through Thursday, and between the hours
of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Friday and Saturday.
(6) The patio shall be in compliance with the noise amplification and outdoor entertainment provisions of this Code.
(7) The premises shall be in compliance with the following provisions of the zoning ordinance:
(A) Exterior lighting.
(B) Off street parking.
(C) Signs.
4. Outdoor Entertainment:
a. Outdoor entertainment, including dancing, shall be allowed on premises only when a license issued under this chapter specifically authorizes
outdoor entertainment and/or dancing.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 52/497
b. The City Council may impose conditions on allowance of outdoor entertainment to ensure the quietude, safety, and welfare of the premises'
surrounding neighborhood and community.
c. Outdoor entertainment shall require issuance of an annual permit as required and regulated by chapter 3 of this title.
5. Prohibited Activities:
a. Gambling is prohibited unless licensed in accordance with this Code.
b. No licensee shall knowingly permit the licensed premises or any room in those premises or any adjoining building directly under his control to be
used by prostitutes.
c. No licensee shall knowingly permit the sale, possession or consumption of controlled substances on the licensed premises in violation of
Minnesota Statutes 152.
6. Right Of Inspection:
a. Any Sheriff's Deputy, building inspector, or any properly designated officer or employee of the City shall have the unqualified right to enter, inspect,
and search the premises of any licensee hereunder at any time without a warrant.
b. The business records of the licensee, including Federal and State Tax returns, shall be available for inspection by the City at all reasonable times
upon written request. (Ord. 2017-11, 9-25-2017)
4-1-7: SECURITIES:
A. All applicants for any type of intoxicating liquor, 3.2 percent malt liquor, or wine license must, as a condition to the issuance of the license, maintenance
of the license and renewal of the license, demonstrate to the City proof of financial responsibility with regard to liability imposed by Minnesota Statutes
section 340A.801. The minimum requirements for proof of financial responsibility shall be as set forth in Minnesota Statutes section 340A.409.
B. Certificates of insurance required by this chapter shall provide that the City shall be given ten (10) days' advance written notice of the cancellation of
any insurance described in the certificate. (Ord. 2017-11, 9-25-2017)
4-1-8: ADMINISTRATION OF LICENSES:
A. Application:
1. Generally:
a. Applications shall be filed with the City Clerk.
b. In addition to the information which may be required by the forms of the Commissioner of Public Safety, the applicant shall complete the
application forms furnished by the City.
c. If the application is by a natural person, it shall be signed and sworn to by such person; if by a corporation, by an officer thereof; if by a
partnership, by one of the partners; if by an unincorporated association, by the operating officer or managing officer thereof. If the applicant is a
partnership, the application, license and bond or insurance policy shall be made and issued in the name of all partners.
d. It shall be unlawful to make any false statement in an application.
2. Patios:
a. The application shall contain a detailed description of the patio and site plan of the entire premises including the following:
(1) Distance of the proposed patio from all property lines.
(2) Area and seating capacity of the licensed building.
(3) Area and seating capacity including table, chair, and aisle arrangements of the proposed patio.
(4) Current off street parking stalls provided on site and number of parking stalls required in accordance with the zoning ordinance.
(5) Additional number of residential equivalent connection units (RECs) as determined by the City.
(6) Detailed construction plans for fence and/or landscape barrier type and height, with emergency exit gate hardware and locations.
b. The complete patio application and site plan must be submitted to the City Clerk for review of the City Clerk, Zoning Administrator, Building
Official, and Wright County Sheriff's Office before submission to the City Council for consideration of approval. City staff will review the patio
application within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete application for compliance with applicable City codes and the zoning ordinance.
c. City Council consideration of the patio shall be based upon, but not limited to, past performance of the licensee in maintaining order and obeying
applicable laws in the principal licensed premises; the adequacy of the proposal to provide for the safety of persons on the proposed premises;
impacts on the surrounding properties including lighting and noise levels; and suitability of ingress and egress arrangements, including control of
persons entering and leaving for purposes of preventing consumption by minors.
3. Fees:
a. License Fees Generally:
(1) Fees for application, investigation, and issuance of a license as provided for under this chapter shall be as set forth in section 3-1-2 of this
Code.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 53/497
(2) When a license is issued between July 1 and December 31, inclusive, the license fee shall be the annual license fee; when a license is issued
between January 1 and May 31, inclusive, the license fee shall be one-half (1/2) the annual license fee; when a license is issued between June 1
and June 30, inclusive, the license fee shall be one-twelfth (1/12) the annual license fee.
b. Investigation Fees:
(1) At the time of each original application for a license, the applicant shall pay the applicable investigation fees. For investigations conducted
outside the State, the City may recover the actual investigation costs if the costs exceed the applicable fees. Any fees due in excess of the in-
State investigation fee must be paid prior to the license hearing and before the City Council considers the application.
(2) At any time an additional investigation is required because of a change in the ownership of any license or control of a corporate license, or
because of a transfer from place to place, the licensee shall pay an additional investigation fee equal to a fee for a new license.
(3) At any time that an additional investigation is required because of an enlargement, substantial alteration which, in the City's opinion, changes
the character of the establishment, or extension of premises previously licensed, the licensee shall pay an additional investigation fee equal to a
fee for a new license.
(4) Where a new application is filed as a result of incorporation by an existing licensee and the ownership control and interest in the license are
unchanged as determined by the City, no additional investigation fee will be required.
c. Renewals: The license fee or fee for renewal of an existing license shall be paid in full before the application for the license is accepted.
d. Refunds: No part of the fee paid for any license shall be refunded, except as authorized under Minnesota Statutes section 340A.408, or upon
rejection of any application of a license, or upon withdrawal of an application before approval of the issuance of a license by the City Council. The
license fee shall be refunded to the applicant, except where rejection is for a wilful misstatement in the license application. The investigation fee
shall not be refunded.
B. Persons Ineligible For License:
1. State Law: No license shall be granted to or held by any person made ineligible for such a license by State law.
2. Multiple Interest: No person shall have an interest in more than two (2) on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses in the City.
3. Operating Officer: No license shall be granted to a corporation that does not have an operating officer who is eligible pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.
4. Real Party In Interest: No license shall be granted to a person who is the spouse of a person ineligible for a license pursuant to the provisions of
subsections B1 and B2 of this section or who, in the judgment of the Council, is not the real party in interest or beneficial owner of the business
operated, or to be operated, under the license.
5. Outstanding Debts:
a. No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any premises on which Real Estate Taxes, assessments, or other financial claims of the
City or of the State are due, delinquent, or unpaid.
b. If an action has been commenced pursuant to the provisions of Minnesota Statutes 278, questioning the amount or validity of taxes, the City
Council may, on application by the licensee, waive strict compliance with this provision. No waiver may be granted, however, for taxes, or any
portion thereof, which remain unpaid for a period exceeding one year after becoming due unless such one year period is extended through no fault
of the licensee.
6. Criminal History: The City Council shall have the right to deny a license to any applicant who has any of the following criminal history:
a. Convicted felon.
b. Driver's license that was cancelled as inimical to public safety.
c. Pattern of alcohol related offenses.
C. Renewal Applications: Applications for the renewal of an existing license shall be made at least sixty (60) days prior to the date of the expiration of the
license, and shall state that everything in the prior applications remains true and correct except as otherwise indicated. If, in the judgment of the City
Council, good and sufficient cause is shown by any applicant for his failure to file for a renewal within the time period provided, the City Council may, if
the other provisions of this chapter are complied with, grant the application.
D. Investigations:
1. Authorization: At the time of making an initial application, renewal application, or request for a new operating officer, the applicant shall, in writing,
authorize the City Clerk to investigate all facts set out in the application and do a personal background and felony criminal record check on the
applicant. The applicant shall further authorize the City Clerk to release information received from such investigation to the City Council.
2. Notice Of Denial: Should the City Council deny the applicant's request for a license due, partially or solely, to the applicant's prior conviction of a
crime, the City Council shall notify the applicant in writing of the following information:
a. The grounds and reasons for the denial;
b. The applicable complaint and grievance procedure as set forth in Minnesota Statutes section 364.06;
c. The earliest date the applicant may reapply for a license; and
d. That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon reapplication.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 54/497
E. Hearing:
1. Notice Of Hearing: Upon completion of an investigation for license under this chapter, the City Clerk shall cause to be published in the official
newspaper ten (10) days in advance, a notice of hearing to be held by the City Council, setting forth the date, time, and place when the hearing will
be held, the name of the applicant, the premises where the business is to be conducted, the nature of the business and such other information as the
Council may direct.
2. Conduct Of Hearing: At the hearing, the City Council shall give opportunity to any person to be heard for or against the granting of the license.
3. Hearing Not Required: No hearing shall be required to be held for the following applications:
a. Renewal applications.
b. Temporary licenses.
F. Grant Or Denial Of License: After such investigation and hearing, the City Council shall grant or refuse the application in its discretion. A three-fifths (3/5)
vote of the City Council shall be required for the granting of a license.
G. Issuance Of License:
1. Issuance: Each license shall be issued to the applicant only.
2. Exact Location And Area:
a. Except in the case of a golf course, licenses shall only be issued to a space that is compact and contiguous. Each license shall be issued only for
the exact rooms and square footage described in the application.
b. Proposed enlargement, substantial alteration which, in the City's opinion, changes the character of the establishment or extension of premises
previously licensed shall be reported to the Clerk at or before the time application is made for a building permit for any such change. The
enlargement, substantial alteration or extension shall not be allowed unless the Council approves an amendment to the liquor license.
3. Premises Under Construction: When a license is granted for premises where the building is under construction or otherwise not ready for occupancy,
the City Clerk shall not issue the license until notified by the building official that the building is ready for occupancy.
H. Report To State: The City Clerk shall, within ten (10) days after the issuance of any license under this chapter, submit to the Commissioner of Public
Safety the full name and address of each person granted a license, the true name, the effective license date, and the date of expiration of the license.
The City Clerk shall also submit to the Commissioner of Public Safety any change of address, transfer, cancellation, or revocation of any license by the
City Council during the license period. (Ord. 2017-11, 9-25-2017)
4-1-9: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES; SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. Basis For Suspension Or Revocation: The City Council may suspend or revoke any license issued under this chapter for any of the following reasons:
1. False or misleading statements made on a license application or renewal, or failure to abide by the commitments, promises, or representations made
to the City Council.
2. Violation of any special conditions under which the license was granted, including, but not limited to, the timely payment of Real Estate Taxes, and all
other charges.
3. Violation of any State or Federal law regulating the sale of intoxicating liquor, 3.2 percent malt liquor, or controlled substance.
4. Creation of a nuisance on the premises or in the surrounding area.
5. That the licensee suffered or permitted illegal acts upon the licensed premises or on property owned or controlled by the licensee adjacent to the
licensed premises, unrelated to the sale of intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor.
6. That the licensee had knowledge of illegal acts upon or attributable to the licensed premises, but failed to report the same to the police.
7. Expiration or cancellation of any required insurance, or failure to notify the City within a reasonable time of changes in the term of the insurance or
the carriers.
B. Inactive License: The City Council may revoke a license issued under this chapter of any establishment granted a license that is not under construction
and exhibiting satisfactory progress toward completion within six (6) months from its issuance, or any establishment that ceases operation for a period
of six (6) months.
C. Presumptive Penalties: This chapter shall establish a standard by which the City Council determines penalties that are presumed to be appropriate for
violation(s) of this chapter. The City Council may deviate from the presumptive penalty where the City Council finds that there exist substantial reasons
making it appropriate to deviate.
1. Civil Penalty And/Or Suspension: The civil penalty and/or suspension imposed may, at the City Council's discretion, be based upon the following
guidelines related to the licensee's total number of violations within the preceding two (2) year period, as follows:
Violation Civil Fine Suspension
First $1,000.00 None
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 55/497
Second 2,000.00 1 day
Third 2,000.00 3 days
Fourth 2,000.00 5 days
Fifth or more 2,000.00 7 days
2. Best Practices Training: In addition to the civil penalty and suspension that may be imposed by the City Council, the licensee, his/her agents and
employees, shall complete best practices training within sixty (60) days of the City Council's decision to impose penalties or the license shall be
suspended for seven (7) days in addition to other penalties, including required completion of best practices training.
3. Dates Of Suspension: Suspension of the license as may be imposed by the City Council under this chapter shall be for those dates as determined
by the City Council.
4. Multiple Violations:
a. The City Council shall act upon all of the violations that have been alleged in the notice sent to the licensee.
b. The City Council, in such cases, shall consider the presumptive penalty for each violation.
c. The occurrence of multiple violations is grounds for deviation from the presumed penalties in the City Council's discretion.
5. Subsequent Violations:
a. Violations occurring after the notice of a violation has been mailed, but prior to the hearing, shall be treated as a separate violation and dealt with
as a second violation. The same procedure applies to the second, third, or fourth violation.
b. Upon a second or subsequent violation by the same licensee, the City Council shall impose the presumptive penalty for the violation or violations
giving rise to the subsequent notice without regard to the particular violation or violations that were the subject of the prior violation; however, the
City Council may consider the amount of time elapsed between appearances as a basis for deviating from the presumptive penalty imposed by
this chapter.
6. Other Penalties: Nothing in this chapter shall restrict or limit the authority of the City Council to deviate from the presumptive penalties outlined
herein, including, but not limited to, suspending the license for up to sixty (60) days, revoke the license, impose a civil fee not to exceed two
thousand dollars ($2,000.00), to impose a combination of penalties and/or conditions, or take any other action in accordance with law; provided, that
the license holder has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing.
7. Findings: The City Council shall, by resolution, provide written findings that support the penalty imposed.
D. Hearing:
1. A licensee shall be given ten (10) days' written notice sent via first class U.S. mail of a penalty, suspension, or revocation action stating the charges
against the licensee, the right to request a hearing as well as a proposed date, time, and place of the hearing if required:
a. In the case of a civil penalty only, there shall be no right to a hearing.
b. In the case of a proposed suspension or revocation of the license, the notice shall state that the licensee has a right to a hearing only if he/she
affirmatively requests the hearing within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice and that the hearing is otherwise waived.
2. Notice of cancellation or lapse of a current liquor liability insurance policy shall also constitute notice to the licensee of the impending suspension of
the license. The holder of a license suspended under these circumstances may request in writing to the City Clerk a hearing to be held by the City
Council not less than ten (10) days or more than sixty (60) days from the date the request is received by the City Clerk.
3. A hearing to consider suspension or revocation of a license shall be conducted by the City Council in accordance with Minnesota Statutes sections
14.57 to 14.70. (Ord. 2017-11, 9-25-2017)
Chapter 2
SPECIAL EVENTS
4-2-1: PURPOSE AND FINDINGS:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Otsego by regulating the time, place and manner of conduct of
special events and by establishing permit requirements for conducting special events as such are herein defined. The City Council finds that special
events often exceed the City's capacity to provide usual City services. Such City services include, but are not limited to, sanitary, fire, police, and utility
service. The City Council also finds these regulations necessary to ensure that such events are conducted with sufficient consideration given to public
safety issues, including, among other things, the impact of such events on parking and vehicular traffic within the City. (Prior Code § 7-5-1)
4-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings given to them in this section:
PERSON: A natural person, association, organization, club, group formed for a common purpose, partnership of any kind, limited liability company,
corporation or any other legal entity.
SPECIAL EVENT: An outdoor gathering of at least fifty (50) individuals, whether on public or private property, assembled with a common purpose for a
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 56/497
period of one hour or longer. Special events include, but are not limited to, concerts, fairs, carnivals, circuses, parades, flea markets, marathons,
walkathons, festivals, races, bicycle events, celebrations or any other gathering or event of similar nature. Special events do not include noncommercial
events held on private property such as graduation parties or social parties. (Prior Code § 7-5-2)
4-2-3: PERMIT REQUIRED; NUMBER RESTRICTED:
No person shall hold, conduct or participate in a special event within the City unless a special event permit has been issued for such event upon timely
written application made to the City. Not more than one special event permit shall be issued for a single property within a calendar year. (Prior Code § 7-5-
3)
4-2-4: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEE REQUIRED:
Written application for special event permits must be made at least ninety (90) days in advance of the event's proposed date in a form prescribed by the
City Council. This application period shall not begin to run until a complete application has been filed with the City. Application forms shall be made
available in the Office of the City Clerk. A fee, in the amount set by section 3-1-2 of this Code, shall be paid to the City along with the completed
application form. Failure to provide a complete application or to pay the fee, as herein required, is sufficient reason to deny the special event permit. (Prior
Code § 7-5-4)
4-2-5: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS:
A. Special event permits will be issued upon approval of the City Council by a majority vote. Upon City Council approval, the City Clerk shall issue a permit
to the person(s) named in the permit application.
B. The City Council may attach such reasonable conditions to the permit as are deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Such
conditions may pertain to any of the following:
1. Location and hours during which the event may be held.
2. Sanitation/availability of potable water.
3. Security/crowd management.
4. Parking and traffic issues.
5. Emergency and medical services.
6. Cleanup of premises and surrounding area/trash disposal.
7. Insurance.
8. Lighting.
9. Fire service/safety.
10. Temporary construction, barricades/fencing.
11. Advertising/promotional materials and signs.
12. Noise levels.
13. Alcohol consumption.
14. Any other condition which the Council deems necessary. (Prior Code § 7-5-5)
4-2-6: CONTENTS OF PERMIT:
The permit shall clearly state the name of a responsible individual and contact information during the event and the conditions, if any, imposed by the City
Council. (Prior Code § 7-5-5)
4-2-7: NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNERS:
The property owner shall provide for a copy of the permit to be mailed not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the special event to all property owners as
follows unless modified by the City Council:
A. Events occurring between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.: Three hundred fifty feet (350').
B. Events occurring before seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. or after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.: Two thousand five hundred feet (2,500'). (Prior Code § 7-5-5)
4-2-8: POSTING PERMIT:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 57/497
Copies of the permit shall be posted in three (3) prominent locations upon the premises during the special event. (Prior Code § 7-5-5)
4-2-9: EXEMPTIONS FROM PERMIT REQUIREMENT:
The permit requirement contained in this chapter does not apply to the following:
A. Special events sponsored and managed by the City.
B. Funerals and funeral processions.
C. The grounds of any school, playground, place of worship, hotel, conference center, stadium, athletic fields, arena, auditorium, or similar permanent
place of assembly when used for regularly established assembly purposes. (Prior Code § 7-5-6)
4-2-10: VIOLATION, PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT:
Any person who violates any condition of a special event permit or any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as prescribed
by State law. Enforcement of this chapter may, at the Council's discretion, take any of the following forms:
A. Citation/criminal prosecution.
B. Injunctions, declaratory judgments, or other civic remedies.
C. Permit revocation.
D. Disbursement of persons gathered. (Prior Code § 7-5-7)
Chapter 3
OUTDOOR ENTERTAINMENT
4-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations and administrative procedures for regulation of outdoor entertainment occurring at business
locations within the City accessory to allowed principal uses to protect public health, safety and welfare, maintain compatibility with surrounding land uses
and minimize public nuisance concerns. (Prior Code § 7-14-1)
4-3-2: DEFINITION:
When used in this chapter, the term "outdoor entertainment" shall mean entertainment outside an enclosed building to which more than twenty (20)
persons may be admitted and for which a fee may be charged or accepted, including, dances, shows, plays, skits, musical revues, dance productions,
musical concerts, theater, opera and the production or provision of sights or sounds or visual or auditory sensations that are intended to or may entertain.
(Prior Code § 7-14-2)
4-3-3: PERMITS REQUIRED:
A. Outdoor entertainment conducted upon premises zoned B-2 District, B-3 District or PUD District allowing commercial uses as established in accordance
with title 11 of this Code shall require an outdoor entertainment permit issued in accordance with this chapter.
B. All other outdoor entertainment events shall require a special event permit as regulated by chapter 2 of this title. (Prior Code § 7-14-3)
4-3-4: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEE REQUIRED:
A. Application for an outdoor entertainment permit shall be filed with the City Clerk on an official application form signed by the applicant and property
owner and shall be accompanied by a fee as provided for by section 3-1-2 of this Code.
B. For single, nonrecurring outdoor entertainment events, an application for a permit shall be filed with the City Clerk at least ten (10) and not more than
one hundred eighty (180) days before the outdoor entertainment is proposed to commence.
C. For outdoor entertainment to be held on a regular or recurring basis at the same location, an application for a permit covering all such outdoor
entertainment during that calendar year must be filed with the City Clerk at least thirty (30) days and not more than one hundred eighty (180) days
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 58/497
before the date and time at which the first outdoor entertainment is proposed to commence.
D. The application shall include the following information:
1. Names and addresses of the event sponsor and property owner.
2. The address at which the outdoor entertainment is to occur.
3. A site plan indicating existing site improvements, the location of the outdoor entertainment and any other related facilities.
4. Identify the days and hours during which the outdoor entertainment is to be held.
5. Detail provisions made for availability of potable water and restroom facilities and trash containers.
6. State measures for security and crowd management.
7. State whether alcohol is to be served or sold at the event, provide documentation of required licenses and describe measures to ensure no sale or
consumption occurs by people under twenty one (21) years of age.
8. Identify use of any signs, banners or other advertising or promotional materials, which may require a separate permit under title 11 of this Code.
9. Identify use of any additional or temporary outdoor lighting sources.
10. Identify any sources of outdoor noise and use of equipment to amplify sound.
11. Describe any temporary structures including, but not limited to, stages, shelters, fences, stairs, and/or ramps.
12. Provide any additional information requested by the Zoning Administrator deemed necessary to consider the outdoor entertainment permit
application. (Prior Code § 7-14-4)
4-3-5: REVIEW OF APPLICATION; ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
A. The Zoning Administrator shall approve or deny an application for a permit within ten (10) days of a complete application being submitted with written
notice to be provided to the applicant. (Prior Code § 7-14-4; amd. 2018 Code)
B. The Zoning Administrator may impose additional conditions deemed necessary to mitigate nuisance concerns, ensure compatibility with surrounding
uses and ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
C. Upon approval, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a permit to the person(s) named in the permit application. (Prior Code § 7-14-4)
D. The Zoning Administrator shall state in writing the reasons for an application for a permit having been denied. The applicant may resubmit an
application for a permit in accordance with the procedures or submit a request for appeal to the City Council as provided in section 4-3-11 of this
chapter. (Prior Code § 7-14-4; amd. 2018 Code)
4-3-6: CONTENTS OF PERMIT:
The permit shall clearly state the name of a responsible individual and contact information during the event and the conditions, if any, imposed by the City.
(Prior Code § 7-14-4)
4-3-7: POSTING PERMIT:
Copies of the permit shall be posted in three (3) prominent locations upon the premises during the outdoor entertainment. (Prior Code § 7-14-4)
4-3-8: TERM AND EXPIRATION OF PERMIT; RENEWALS:
The permit shall be issued annually for a calendar year, and all permits shall expire on December 31 of each year. A permit may be renewed only by
making application as provided in section 4-3-4 of this chapter. (Prior Code § 7-14-5)
4-3-9: REGULATIONS:
A. Schedule Of Event; Number Of Events: The permit applicant shall provide a calendar that identifies the days in the week when the outdoor
entertainment will be scheduled to occur:
1. Outdoor entertainment shall be limited to not more than:
a. Two (2) events occurring Monday through Thursday.
b. Two (2) events occurring on Friday or Saturday of each week.
2. Outdoor entertainment occurring outside the approved calendar shall be prohibited unless an amended calendar is approved.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 59/497
B. Setbacks:
1. Outdoor entertainment allowed under this chapter shall not occur upon any property within three hundred fifty feet (350') of a residential zoning
district as established by title 11 of this Code.
2. The location of the outdoor entertainment shall comply with all setback requirements applicable to the principal use of the zoning district in which the
property is located as established by title 11 of this Code.
C. Hours For Music Events: Outdoor music events shall be allowed only during the following hours:
1. Sunday to Thursday: Seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.
2. Friday and Saturday: Seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight. (Prior Code § 7-14-6)
D. Noise:
1. The volume of the outdoor entertainment must be reasonable so as not to be plainly audible at the property line of a residentially zoned property and
shall comply with section 5-1-8 of this Code.
2. Standards to be considered in determining if noise generated by an outdoor entertainment event is a violation of this section and section 5-1-8 of this
Code include, but are not limited to, the following: (Prior Code § 7-14-6; amd. 2018 Code)
a. The volume of the noise.
b. The intensity of the noise.
c. The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any.
d. The proximity of the noise to a residential property.
e. The duration of the noise.
f. Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant.
E. Signs: All signs related to the outdoor entertainment shall comply with title 11, chapter 37 of this Code.
F. Exterior Lighting: All exterior light sources shall be arranged as to deflect light away from any adjoining residential zone or from the public streets.
G. Water And Sewer Facilities: The principal use shall have adequate water and sanitary sewer facilities as required by this Code to accommodate the
allowed capacity of the venue at which the outdoor entertainment is to occur.
H. Off Street Parking: There shall be adequate off street parking as required by title 11, chapter 21 of this Code for the allowed capacity of the venue at
which the outdoor entertainment is to occur. (Prior Code § 7-14-6)
4-3-10: INSPECTIONS:
A. Any permit holder shall, at all times during the term of the permit, allow the Zoning Administrator and/or deputies of the Wright County Sheriff's Office to
enter the premises for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
B. The permit holder shall immediately comply with all requests of City staff and/or the Wright County Sheriff's Office to mitigate nuisance noise
complaints. (Prior Code § 7-14-7)
4-3-11: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
A. Suspension:
1. The Zoning Administrator and/or deputies of the Wright County Sheriff's Office may immediately suspend a permit for activity they determine
constitutes a threat to public health, safety and welfare.
2. The Zoning Administrator may suspend a permit for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days following written notice and an opportunity to be heard as
provided under subsection C of this section if the Zoning Administrator determines that a permit holder has violated or is not in compliance with this
chapter.
B. Revocation: The Zoning Administrator shall issue a written statement of intent to revoke permit for a cause of suspension if the following occurs:
1. The permit has been suspended two (2) times within the preceding twelve (12) months.
2. A permit holder has knowingly provided outdoor entertainment during a period of time when the permit was suspended.
3. Failure of a permit holder to comply with any requests of City staff and/or the Wright County Sheriff's Office to mitigate nuisance noise complaints.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 60/497
C. Appeal Process: The process for a permit holder to appeal a suspension or contest revocation of a permit shall be as follows:
1. Statement Of Reasons: Within ten (10) days of receipt of such notice of suspension or intent to revoke, the permit holder may provide to the Zoning
Administrator, in writing, a response that shall include a statement of reasons why the permit should not be suspended or revoked.
2. Notice Of Meeting Date: Within ten (10) days of the receipt of permit holder's written response, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the respondent
in writing of the date of the meeting at which the City Council will consider the suspension appeal or revocation proceeding.
3. City Council Review:
a. Within sixty (60) days of the notice issued by the Zoning Administrator to deny, suspend or consider revocation of a permit, the City Council shall
consider the issue.
b. The applicant or permit holder shall have the right to appear and offer evidence on its behalf.
c. The City Council shall, by majority vote, make the final decision as to an appeal to deny or suspend a permit or to revoke a permit for violation of
this chapter.
d. The City Clerk shall mail written notice of the City Council's decision to the applicant or permit holder including a statement advising the applicant
or permit holder of the right to appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. (Prior Code § 7-14-7)
4-3-12: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
Events sponsored and managed by the City shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter. (Prior Code § 7-14-3)
Chapter 4
PAWNBROKERS, PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
4-4-1: STATUTE AUTHORITY:
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authorization provided by Minnesota Statutes section 325J.02. (Prior Code § 7-13-3)
4-4-2: FINDINGS AND PURPOSE:
A. Findings: The City Council finds that use of services provided by pawnbrokers provides an opportunity for the commission of crimes and their
concealment because pawn businesses have the ability to receive and transfer property stolen by others easily and quickly. The City Council also finds
that consumer protection regulation is warranted in transactions involving pawnbrokers. The City Council further finds that the pawn industry has
outgrown the City's current ability to effectively or efficiently identify criminal activity related to pawnshops.
B. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to prevent pawn businesses from being used as facilities for the commission of crimes, and to assure that such
businesses comply with basic consumer protection standards, thereby protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the
City. This chapter also establishes the required use of the automated pawn system (APS) to allow the Sheriff's Department to better regulate current
and future pawn businesses, decrease and stabilize costs associated with the regulation of the pawn industry, and increase identification of criminal
activities in the pawn industry through the timely collection and sharing of pawn transaction information. (Prior Code § 7-13-1)
4-4-3: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:
BILLABLE TRANSACTION: Every reportable transaction conducted by a pawnbroker except renewals, redemptions or extensions of existing pawns on
items previously reported and continuously in the licensee's possession.
LICENSEE: The person, partnership, association or corporation to whom a license is issued under this chapter, including any agents or employees of the
person, partnership, association or corporation.
LICENSING AUTHORITY: The City of Otsego.
MINOR: Any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
PAWNBROKER: Any natural person, partnership or corporation, either as principal, or agent or employee thereof, who loans money on deposit or pledge
of personal property, or other valuable thing, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property, or other valuable thing on condition of selling the same
back again at a stipulated price, or who loans money secured by chattel mortgage on personal property, taking possession of the property or any part
thereof so mortgaged. To the extent that a pawnbroker's business includes buying personal property previously used, rented or leased, or selling it on
consignment, the provisions of this chapter shall be applicable.
PAWNSHOP: The location at which or premises in which a pawnbroker regularly conducts business.
PERSON: An individual; a partnership, including a limited partnership; a corporation, including a foreign, domestic or nonprofit corporation; a trust; a
political subdivision of the State; or any other business organization.
PRECIOUS METAL DEALER: Any person engaged in the business of buying coins or secondhand items containing precious metal including, but not
limited to, jewelry, watches, eating utensils, candlesticks, and religious and decorative objects.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 61/497
REPORTABLE TRANSACTION: Every transaction conducted by a pawnbroker in which merchandise is received through a pawn, purchase, consignment
or trade, or in which a pawn is renewed, extended or redeemed, or for which a unique transaction number or identifier is generated by their point of sale
software, is reportable except:
A. The bulk purchase or consignment of new or used merchandise from a merchant, manufacturer or wholesaler having an established permanent
place of business, and the retail sale of said merchandise, provided the pawnbroker must maintain a record of such purchase or consignment which
describes each item, and must mark each item in a manner which relates it to that transaction record.
B. Retail and wholesale sales of merchandise originally received by pawn or purchase, and for which all applicable hold and/or redemption periods
have expired.
SECONDHAND DEALER: A person, partnership, firm or corporation whose regular business includes selling or receiving tangible personal property
(excluding motor vehicles) previously used, rented, owned, or leased. The term secondhand dealer shall include pawnbrokers and antique shops.
SHERIFF'S DEPARTMENT: The Wright County Sheriff's Department. (Prior Code § 7-13-2)
4-4-4: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
A. No person shall engage in the business of pawnbroker at any location without a pawnbroker license for that location. No pawnbroker license may be
transferred to a different location or a different person. Any change, directly or beneficially, in the ownership of any licensed pawnshop shall require the
application for a new license, and the new owner must satisfy all current eligibility requirements. Issuance of a license under this chapter shall not
relieve the licensee from obtaining any other licenses required to conduct business at the same or any other location.
B. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be effective from the date of approval by the City Council and shall expire on December 31 of each year.
C. A license issued under this chapter shall be posted in a conspicuous place within the licensed premises.
D. A licensee under this chapter shall be responsible for the conduct of the business being operated and shall maintain conditions of order. The conduct of
agents or employees of a licensee engaged in the performance of duties for the licensee shall be deemed the conduct of the licensee.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or controls real property to knowingly permit it to be used for pawn brokering without a license required by
this chapter. (Prior Code § 7-13-4)
4-4-5: EXEMPTIONS FROM LICENSE:
A. The following transactions involving precious metal shall not require a license under this chapter:
1. Transactions at occasional "garage sales" or "yard sales", or estate sales or auctions held at the decedent's residence; except, that precious metal
dealers must comply with the requirements of Minnesota Statutes sections 325F.73 to 325F.744 for these transactions.
2. Transactions regulated by Minnesota Statutes chapter 80A.
3. Transactions regulated by the Federal Commodity Futures Commission Act.
4. Transactions involving the purchase of precious metal grindings, filings, slag, sweeps, scraps or dust from an industrial manufacturer, dental lab,
dentist or agent thereof.
5. Transactions involving the purchase of photographic film such as lithographic and X-ray film or silver residue or flake covered in lithographic and Xray
film processing.
6. Transactions involving coins or bullion in ingots.
7. Transactions in which the secondhand item containing precious metal is exchanged for a new item containing precious metal and the value of the
new item exceeds the value of the secondhand item.
8. Transactions between precious metal dealers if both dealers are licensed under Minnesota Statutes section 325F.733, or if the seller's business is
located outside of the State and the item is shipped from outside the State to a dealer licensed under Minnesota Statutes section 325F.733.
9. Resale transactions by an antique dealer of secondhand items containing precious metal if the items are resold at retail in an unaltered condition
except for repair, and the antique dealer paid less than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for all secondhand items containing precious
metal purchased by said antique dealer within any twelve (12) consecutive month period.
B. The following transactions involving secondhand goods shall not require a license under this section:
1. The sale of secondhand goods where all of the following are present:
a. The sale is held on property occupied as a residential dwelling by the seller or owned, rented or leased by a charitable or political organization.
b. The items offered for sale are owned by the occupant.
c. That no sale exceeds a period of seventy two (72) consecutive hours.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 62/497
d. That no more than two (2) sales are held in any twelve (12) consecutive month period at any residential dwelling.
e. That none of the items offered for sale have been purchased for resale or received on consignment for purpose of resale.
2. The sale of goods at an auction held by a licensed auctioneer.
3. The sale of recyclable material including, but not limited to, motor oil, aluminum, iron, glass, plastic and paper.
4. Private occasional sales of secondhand goods.
5. The sale of used motor vehicles.
6. The sale of any item for less than fifteen dollars ($15.00) in cash, merchandise or services for merchandise received, provided:
a. The total amount paid any single person for resold merchandise does not exceed forty five dollars ($45.00) within any sixty (60) day period; or
b. Merchandise has not been received for resale from any single person more than three (3) times within any sixty (60) day period regardless of the
total value of said transactions.
7. The business of buying or selling only those secondhand goods taken as part of full payment for new goods of greater value and where such
business is incidental to and not the primary business of a person.
8. Goods sold at an exhibition.
9. The business of buying, selling or consigning secondhand goods such as clothing, shoes, housewares, household goods, decor and/or furniture, but
excluding electronic devices or precious metals unless exempt by subsection A of this section, either as incidental to or as the primary business
activity. (Prior Code § 7-13-5)
4-4-6: INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
No license under this chapter will be issued to an applicant who is a natural person, a partnership if such applicant has any general partner or managing
partner, a corporation or other organization if such applicant has any manager, proprietor or agent in charge of the business to be licensed, if the applicant:
A. Is a minor at the time that the application is filed.
B. Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation licensed as prescribed by Minnesota Statutes section 364.03, subdivision 2, and has
not shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of a licensee under this chapter as prescribed by
Minnesota Statutes section 364.03, subdivision 3. (Prior Code § 7-13-6)
4-4-7: BUSINESS AT ONE LOCATION ONLY; OFF SITE STORAGE PERMITTED:
A. A license under this chapter authorizes the licensee to carry on its business only at the permanent place of business designated in the license.
B. Upon written request, the Sheriff's Department may approve an off site locked and secured storage facility; provided, that:
1. The licensee shall permit inspection of the facility in accordance with section 4-4-18 of this chapter.
2. All provisions of this chapter regarding recordkeeping and reporting apply to the facility and its contents.
C. Property shall be stored in compliance with all provisions of this Code.
D. The licensee must either own the building in which the business is conducted, and any approved off site storage facility, or have a lease on the
business premises that extends for more than six (6) months.
E. If a license application is approved for a location where a building is under construction or otherwise not ready for occupancy, the license shall not be
delivered to the licensee until a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the licensed premises. (Prior Code § 7-13-7)
4-4-8: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INVESTIGATION AND HEARING:
A. An application form provided by the City Clerk must be completed by every applicant for a new license or for renewal of an existing license. Every new
applicant must provide all the following information:
1. If the applicant is a natural person:
a. The name, place and date of birth, street residence address, and phone number of the applicant.
b. Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States or resident alien.
c. Whether the applicant has ever used or has been known by a name other than the applicant's name, and if so, the name or names used and
information concerning dates and places used.
d. The name of the business if it is to be conducted under a designation, name, or style other than the name of the applicant and a certified copy of
the certificate as required by Minnesota Statutes section 333.01.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 63/497
e. The street address at which the applicant has lived during the preceding five (5) years.
f. The type, name and location of every business or occupation in which the applicant has been engaged during the preceding five (5) years and the
name(s) and address(es) of the applicant's employer(s) and partner(s), if any, for the preceding five (5) years.
g. Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, crime, or violation of any ordinance other than a traffic ordinance. If so, the applicant
must furnish information as to the time, place, and offense of all such convictions.
h. If the applicant does not manage the business, the name of the manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business and all information
concerning each of them required in subsections A1a through A1g of this section.
2. If the applicant is a partnership:
a. The name(s) and address(es) of all general and limited partners and all information concerning each general partner required in subsection A1 of
this section.
b. The name(s) of the managing partner(s) and the interest of each partner in the licensed business.
c. A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be submitted with the application. If the partnership is required to file a certificate as to a trade
name pursuant to Minnesota Statutes section 333.01, a certified copy of such certificate must be attached to the application.
3. If the applicant is a corporation or other organization:
a. The name of the corporation or business form, and if incorporated, the state of incorporation.
b. A true copy of the certificate of incorporation, articles of incorporation or association agreement and bylaws shall be attached to the application. If
the applicant is a foreign corporation, a certificate of authority as required by Minnesota Statutes section 303.06 must be attached.
c. The name of the manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business and all information concerning each manager, proprietor, or agent
required in subsections A1a through A1g of this section.
4. For all applicants:
a. Whether the applicant holds a current pawnbroker, precious metal dealer or secondhand goods dealer license from any other governmental unit
and whether the applicant is licensed under Minnesota Statutes section 471.924.
b. Whether the applicant has previously been denied, or had revoked or suspended, a pawnbroker, precious metal dealer, or secondhand dealer
license from any other governmental unit.
c. The location of the business premises.
d. The legal description of the premises to be licensed.
e. A true and complete copy of an executed lease for the premises to be licensed if the applicant does not own the property.
f. Certification that all Real Estate and Personal Property Taxes that are due and payable for the premises to be licensed have been paid.
g. Whenever the application is for a premises either planned or under construction or undergoing substantial alteration, the application shall be
accompanied by a set of preliminary plans showing the design of the proposed premises to be licensed.
h. A description of the proposed hours of operation and on site management.
i. A site plan of the premises to be licensed showing the location of off street parking facilities compliant with the requirements of the zoning
ordinance.
j. An executed data practices advisory and consent form authorizing the release of criminal history information.
k. Such other information as the licensing authority may require.
B. All applications for a license under this chapter must be signed and sworn to under oath or affirmation by the applicant. If the application is that of a
natural person, it must be signed and sworn to by such person; if that of a corporation, by an officer thereof; if that of a partnership, by one of the
general partners; and if that of an unincorporated association, by the manager or managing officer thereof. Any falsification on a license application
shall result in the denial of a license.
C. All applications shall be referred to the Sheriff's Department for verification and investigation of the facts set forth in the application. Within sixty (60)
days after receipt of an application, the Sheriff's Department shall make a written report and recommendation to the City Council as to the issuance or
nonissuance of the license. The City Council may order and conduct such additional investigation as it deems necessary. If additional investigation is
necessary, the applicant shall pay the City for all costs incurred in the course of the additional investigation.
D. The City Council shall conduct a public hearing on the license application within thirty (30) days following receipt of the Sheriff's Department's report
and recommendation regarding the application:
1. The City Clerk shall publish notice at least ten (10) days in advance of the public hearing in the official City newspaper setting forth the day, time and
place of the hearing; the name of the applicant; the premises where the business is to be conducted; and the type of license being sought.
2. The public hearing shall also be preceded by ten (10) days' mailed notice to all property owners located within five hundred feet (500') of the
boundaries of the property where the business is to be conducted.
3. The applicant shall be present at the public hearing.
4. Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or against the granting of the license.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 64/497
5. Approval of a license under this chapter shall require a majority vote of the City Council.
E. An application for renewal of an existing license shall be made prior to the expiration date of the license in the form required by and processed in
accordance with subsections A, B, C and D of this section.
F. 1. When a licensee designates a manager in charge of a business, or the named manager(s) in charge of a licensed business changes, the licensee
must complete and submit the appropriate application prior to the effective date of the change. The new manager shall be subject to the investigation
required by this chapter.
2. The designation of a new manager shall not cause an existing license issued under this chapter to become invalid before a decision is rendered;
provided, that proper notice and application are made by the licensee.
3. A proposed new manager shall be referred to as the interim manager.
4. In the event that an interim manager is denied, the licensee shall designate another interim manager and make the required application within fifteen
(15) days of the decision.
5. If a proposed manager is denied, the decision may be appealed to the City Council by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within
fifteen (15) days after being notified of the denial. (Prior Code § 7-13-9)
4-4-9: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
Before a license will be issued, every applicant must submit a five thousand dollar ($5,000.00) bond on the forms provided by the City Clerk. All bonds
must be conditioned that the principal will observe all laws in relation to pawnbrokers, and will conduct business in conformity thereto, and that the
principal will account for and deliver to any person legally entitled any goods which have come into the principal's hand through the principal's business as
a pawnbroker, or in lieu thereof, will pay the reasonable value in money to the person. The bond shall contain a provision that no bond may be canceled
except upon thirty (30) days' written notice to the City. (Prior Code § 7-13-10)
4-4-10: LICENSE FEES:
A. Annual License Fees: The annual fees for licenses issued under this chapter shall be as set forth in section 3-1-2 of this Code.
B. Billable Transaction License Fees: The billable transaction license fee shall reflect the cost of processing transactions and other related regulatory
expenses as set forth in section 3-1-2 of this Code and shall be billed monthly and are due and payable within thirty (30) days. Failure to pay the
billable transaction license fees within thirty (30) days shall be a violation of this chapter. (Prior Code § 7-13-8)
4-4-11: LABELING ITEMS REQUIRED:
The licensee must attach a label to every item at the time it is pawned, purchased or received in inventory from any reportable transaction. Permanently
recorded on this label must be the number or name that identifies the transaction in the shop's records, the transaction date, the name of the item and the
description or the model and serial number of the item as reported to the Sheriff's Department, whichever is applicable, and the date the item is out of
pawn or can be sold, if applicable. Labels shall not be reused. (Prior Code § 7-13-17; amd. 2018 Code)
4-4-12: RECORDS OF TRANSACTIONS:
At the time of any reportable transaction other than renewals, extensions or redemptions, every licensee must immediately record in English the following
information by using ink or other indelible medium on forms or in a computerized record approved by the Sheriff's Department.
A. A complete and accurate description of each item including, but not limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial number, model number,
brand name, or other identifying mark on such an item.
B. The purchase price, amount of money loaned upon, or pledged therefor.
C. The maturity date of the transaction and the amount due, including monthly and annual interest rates and all pawn fees and charges.
D. Date, time and place the item of property was received by the licensee, and the unique alpha and/or numeric transaction identifier that distinguishes it
from all other transactions in the licensee's records.
E. Full name, current residence address, current residence telephone number, date of birth and accurate description of the person from whom the item of
property was received, including: sex, height, weight, race, color of eyes and color of hair.
F. The identification number and state of issue from any of the following forms of identification of the seller:
1. Current valid Minnesota driver's license.
2. Current valid Minnesota identification card.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 65/497
3. Current valid photo identification card issued by another state or a province of Canada.
G. The signature of the person identified in the transaction.
H. Effective sixty (60) days from the date of notification by the Sheriff's Department of acceptable video standards, the licensee must also take a color
photograph or color video recording of:
1. Each customer involved in a billable transaction.
2. Every item pawned or sold that does not have a unique serial or identification number permanently engraved or affixed. If a photograph is taken, it
must be at least two inches (2") in length by two inches (2") in width and must be maintained in such a manner that the photograph can be readily
matched and correlated with all other records of the transaction to which they relate. Such photographs must be available to the Sheriff's Department
upon request. The major portion of the photograph must include an identifiable front facial closeup of the person who pawned or sold the item. Items
photographed must be accurately depicted. The licensee must inform the person that he or she is being photographed by displaying a sign of
sufficient size in a conspicuous place in the premises. If a video photograph is taken, the video camera must zoom in on the person pawning or
selling the item so as to include an identifiable closeup of that person's face. Items photographed by video must be accurately depicted. Video
photographs must be electronically referenced by time and date so they can be readily matched and correlated with all other records of the
transaction to which they relate. The licensee must inform the person orally that he or she is being videotaped and by displaying a sign of sufficient
size in a conspicuous place on the premises. The licensee must keep the exposed videotape for three (3) months.
I. Effective sixty (60) days from the date of notification by the Sheriff's Department, licensees must fulfill the color photograph requirements in subsection H
of this section by submitting them as digital images, in a format specified by the licensing authority, electronically cross referenced to the reportable
transaction they are associated with. Notwithstanding the digital images may be captured from required video recordings, this subsection does not alter
or amend the requirements in subsection H of this section.
J. For renewals, extensions and redemptions, the licensee shall provide the original transaction identifier, the date of the current transaction and the type
of transaction. (Prior Code § 7-13-11)
K. The records must at all reasonable times be open to inspection by the Sheriff's Department. Data entries shall be retained for at least three (3) years
from the date of transaction. Entries of required digital images shall be retained a minimum of ninety (90) days. (Prior Code § 7-13-11; amd. 2018
Code)
4-4-13: DAILY REPORTS TO SHERIFF:
A. Effective no later than sixty (60) days after the Sheriff's Department provides licensees with computerized record standards, licensees must submit
every reportable transaction to the Sheriff's Department daily in the following manner:
1. Licensees must provide to the Sheriff's Department all information required in section 4-4-12 of this chapter and other required information by
transferring it from their computer to the automated pawn system via modem.
2. All required records must be transmitted completely and accurately after the close of business each day in accordance with standards and
procedures established by the licensing authority.
3. If a licensee is unable to successfully transfer the required reports by modem, the licensee must provide the Sheriff's Department printed copies of
all reportable transactions along with the video tape(s) for that date by twelve o'clock (12:00) noon the next business day.
4. If the problem is determined to be in the licensee's system and is not corrected by the close of the first business day following the failure, the
licensee must provide the required reports as detailed in section 4-4-12 of this chapter and shall be charged a daily reporting penalty as set forth by
section 3-1-2 of this Code, daily, until the error is corrected; or
5. If the problem is determined to be outside the licensee's system, the licensee must provide the required reports in section 4-4-12 of this chapter and
resubmit all such transactions via modem when the error is corrected.
6. If a licensee is unable to capture, digitize or transmit the photographs required in subsection 4-4-12I of this chapter, the licensee must immediately
take all required photographs with a still camera, cross reference the photographs to the correct transaction, and make the pictures available to the
Sheriff's Department upon request.
7. Regardless of the cause or origin of the technical problems that prevented the licensee from uploading his reportable transactions, upon correction
of the problem, the licensee shall upload every reportable transaction from every business day the problem had existed.
8. Subsections A1 through A7 of this section notwithstanding, the City Clerk may, upon presentation of extenuating circumstances, delay the
implementation of the daily reporting penalty.
B. The licensee must display a sign of sufficient size, in a conspicuous place in the premises, which informs all patrons that all transactions are reported to
the Sheriff's Department daily.
C. Licensees will be charged for each billable transaction reported to the Sheriff's Department. (Prior Code § 7-13-12)
4-4-14: RECEIPT OF TRANSACTION:
Every licensee must provide a receipt to the party identified in every reportable transaction and must maintain a duplicate of that receipt for three (3) years.
The receipt must include at least the following information:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 66/497
A. The name, address and telephone number of the licensed business.
B. The date and time the item was received by the licensee.
C. Whether the item was pawned or sold or the nature of the transaction.
D. An accurate description of each item received including, but not limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial number, model number, brand
name or other identifying mark on such an item.
E. The signature or unique identifier of the licensee or employee that conducted the transaction.
F. The amount advanced or paid.
G. The monthly and annual interest rates, including all pawn fees and charges.
H. The last regular day of business by which the item must be redeemed by the pledger without risk that the item will be sold, and the amount necessary to
redeem the pawned item on that date.
I. The full name, current residence address, current residence telephone number and date of birth of the pledger or seller.
J. The identification number and state of issue from any of the following forms of identification of the seller:
1. Current valid Minnesota driver's license.
2. Current valid Minnesota identification card.
3. Current valid photo driver's license or identification card issued by another state or a province of Canada.
K. Description of the pledger or seller including sex, approximate height, weight, race, color of eyes and color of hair.
L. The signature of the pledger or seller.
M. All printed statements as required by Minnesota Statutes section 325J.04, subdivision 2, or any other applicable statutes. (Prior Code § 7-13-13)
4-4-15: REDEMPTION PERIOD:
A. Any person pledging, pawning or depositing an item for security must have a minimum of one hundred twenty (120) days from the date of that
transaction to redeem the item before it may be forfeited and sold.
B. During the one hundred twenty (120) day holding period, items may not be removed from the licensed location except as provided in subsection 4-4-7B
of this chapter.
C. Licensees are prohibited from redeeming any item to anyone other than the person to whom the receipt was issued, or to any person identified in a
written and notarized authorization to redeem the property identified in the receipt, or to a person identified in writing by the pledger at the time of the
initial transaction and signed by the pledger, or with approval of the police license inspector. Written authorization for release of property to persons
other than the original pledger must be maintained along with the original transaction record in accordance with section 4-4-12 of this chapter. (Prior
Code § 7-13-13)
4-4-16: HOLDING PERIOD:
Any item purchased or accepted in trade by a licensee must not be sold or otherwise transferred for thirty (30) days from the date of the transaction. An
individual may redeem an item seventy two (72) hours after the item was received on deposit, excluding Sundays and legal holidays. (Prior Code § 7-13-
14)
4-4-17: ORDER TO HOLD PROPERTY:
A. Whenever a law enforcement official from any agency notifies a licensee not to sell an item, the item must not be sold or removed from the premises.
The investigative hold shall be confirmed in writing by the originating agency within seventy two (72) hours and will remain in effect for fifteen (15) days
from the date of initial notification or until the investigative order is canceled, or until an order to hold/confiscate is issued pursuant to subsection B or C
of this section, whichever comes first. (Prior Code § 7-13-15)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 67/497
B. Whenever the Sheriff's Department or other law enforcement official notifies a licensee not to sell an item, the item must not be sold or removed from
the licensed premises until authorized to be released by the Sheriff's Department or other law enforcement official. The order to hold shall expire ninety
(90) days from the date it is placed unless the Sheriff's Department or other law enforcement official determines the hold is still necessary and notifies
the licensee in writing. (Prior Code § 7-13-15; amd. 2018 Code)
C. If an item is identified as stolen or evidence in a criminal case, the Sheriff's Department or other law enforcement official may:
1. Physically confiscate and remove it from the shop, pursuant to written order from the Sheriff's Department; or
2. Place the item on hold or extend the hold as provided in subsection B of this section and leave it on the premises.
3. When an item is confiscated, the person doing so shall provide identification upon request of the licensee, and shall provide the licensee the name
and phone number of the confiscating agency and investigator and the case number related to the confiscation.
D. When an order to hold/confiscate is no longer necessary, the Sheriff's Department shall so notify the licensee. (Prior Code § 7-13-15)
4-4-18: INSPECTION OF ITEMS:
At all times during the terms of the license, the licensee must allow law enforcement officials to enter the premises where the licensed business is located,
including all off site storage facilities as authorized in section 4-4-7 of this chapter, during normal business hours, except in an emergency for the purpose
of inspecting such premises and inspecting the items, wares and merchandise and records therein to verify compliance with this chapter and other
applicable laws. (Prior Code § 7-13-16)
4-4-19: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. No person under the age of eighteen (18) years may pawn or sell or attempt to pawn or sell goods with any licensee, nor may any licensee receive any
goods from a person under the age of eighteen (18) years. (Prior Code § 7-13-18)
B. No licensee may receive any goods from an intoxicated person. (Prior Code § 7-13-18; amd. 2018 Code)
C. No licensee may receive any goods, unless the seller presents identification in the form of a valid driver's license, a valid State of Minnesota
identification card, or current valid photo driver's license or identification card issued by the state of residency of the person from whom the item was
received.
D. No licensee may receive any item of property that possesses an altered or obliterated serial number or operation identification number or any item of
property that has had its serial number removed.
E. No person may pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or deposit any article of property not their own; nor shall any person pawn, pledge, sell, consign,
leave, or deposit the property of another, whether with permission or without; nor shall any person pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or deposit any
article of property in which another person has a security interest, with any licensee.
F. No person seeking to pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or deposit any article of property with any licensee shall give a false or fictitious name; nor give
a false date of birth; nor give a false or out of date address of residence or telephone number; nor present a false or altered identification, or the
identification of another; to any licensee. (Prior Code § 7-13-18)
4-4-20: DAYS AND HOURS OF OPERATION:
No licensee shall keep the pawnbroker business open for transaction of business on any day of the week before eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. or after nine
o'clock (9:00) P.M. (Prior Code § 7-13-19)
4-4-21: SIGNS AND NOTICES:
All licensees shall, by adequate signage and separate written notice, inform persons seeking to pawn, pledge, sell, leave or deposit articles of property
with the licensee of the forgoing requirements.
A. Signs: For the purposes of this chapter, "adequate signage" shall mean at least one sign of not less than four (4) square feet in surface area, comprised
of lettering of not less than three-fourths inch (3/4") in height, posted in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, stating the following:
TO PAWN OR SELL PROPERTY:
YOU MUST BE AT LEAST 18 YEARS OF AGE; AND,
YOU MUST BE THE TRUE OWNER OF THE PROPERTY; AND,
YOU MUST PRESENT VALID PHOTO IDENTIFICATION; AND,
VIOLATION OF ANY OF THESE REQUIREMENTS IS A CRIME.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 68/497
ALL TRANSACTIONS REPORTED DAILY TO LAW ENFORCEMENT
B. Notices: For the purposes of this chapter, "separate written notice" shall mean either the receipt as required by section 4-4-14 of this chapter or a
printed form incorporating a statement to the effect that a person pawning, pledging, selling, leaving or depositing the article is at least eighteen (18)
years of age; is the true owner of the article; that the article is free of all claims and liens; and that all transactions are reported daily to law
enforcement; which is acknowledged by way of the signature of the person pawning, pledging, selling, leaving or depositing the article. (Prior Code § 7-
13-20)
4-4-22: DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. Any license under this chapter may be denied, suspended or revoked for one or more of the following reasons:
1. The proposed use does not comply with any applicable provision of the zoning ordinance.
2. The proposed use does not comply with any health, building, building maintenance or other provisions of this Code or State law.
3. The applicant or licensee has failed to comply with one or more provisions of this chapter.
4. The applicant is not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien, or upon whom it is impractical or impossible to conduct a background or
financial investigation due to the unavailability of information.
5. Fraud, misrepresentation or bribery in securing or renewing a license.
6. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in the application and investigation for, or in the course of, the applicant's business.
7. Violation within the preceding five (5) years of any law relating to theft, damage or trespass to property, sale of a controlled substance, or operation
of a business.
8. The owner of the premises licensed or to be licensed would not qualify for a license under the terms of this chapter.
B. The City Council may act to suspend or revoke a license for noncompliance with an applicable statute, regulation or ordinance. A licensee shall be
given ten (10) days' written notice of a penalty, suspension or revocation action stating the reasons for the suspension or revocation as well as the
date, time and place at which the City Council will consider action. Opportunity to be heard with regards to the suspension or revocation of the license
shall be given to the licensee if present when the City Council considers action. (Prior Code § 7-13-21)
4-4-23: MISDEMEANOR VIOLATION; METHODS OF ABATEMENT:
A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. The licensing authority shall reserve the right to pursue any administrative, civil or
criminal procedure available thereto to abate a violation of this chapter. (Prior Code § 7-13-22)
Chapter 5
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
4-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings provided in this section:
PEDDLER: Any person who goes from dwelling to dwelling, business to business, street to street, or any other type of place to place, for the purpose of
offering for sale, displaying or exposing for sale, selling or attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the goods, wares, products,
merchandise, or other personal property that the person is carrying or otherwise transporting. The term "peddler" shall mean the same as the term
"hawker".
PERSON: Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, or association. As applied to groups,
organizations, corporations, limited liability companies, partnerships, and associations, the term shall include each member, officer, partner, associate,
agent, or employee.
SOLICITOR: A person who goes from dwelling to dwelling, business to business, street to street, or any other type of place to place, for the purpose of
obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares, products, merchandise, other personal property, or services, of which he or she may be carrying
or transporting samples, or that may be described in a catalog or by other means, and for which delivery or performance shall occur at a later time. The
absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a person from the scope of this definition if the actual purpose of the person's activity is to obtain or
attempt to obtain orders as discussed herein. The term "solicitor" shall mean the same as the term "canvasser".
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Any person who engages in any temporary and transient business in this State, either in one locality, or in traveling from place
to place in this State, selling goods, wares, and merchandise; and who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, hires, leases, occupies, or uses a
building, structure, vacant lot, vehicle or railroad car for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares, and merchandise. The term "transient merchant"
does not include a seller or exhibitor in a firearms collector show involving two (2) or more sellers or exhibitors. (Prior Code § 7-10-1)
4-5-2: LICENSING OF PEDDLERS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 69/497
A. License Required: Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, no person shall conduct business as either a peddler or a transient merchant without
first having obtained a license from the City.
B. Application For License: Application for a license to conduct business as a peddler or transient merchant shall be made at least fourteen (14) regular
business days before the applicant desires to begin conducting business within the City limits. Application for a license shall be made on a form
provided by the City. All applications shall be signed by the applicant. Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement on the application shall
constitute a violation of this chapter. All applications shall include the following information:
1. Applicant's full legal name, and any other names used or known by in the past;
2. All other names under which the applicant conducts business or to which the applicant officially answers;
3. A physical description of the applicant (hair color, eye color, height, weight, distinguishing marks and features, etc.);
4. Full address of the applicant's permanent residence;
5. Telephone number of the applicant's permanent residence;
6. Full legal name of any and all business operation(s) owned, managed, or operated by the applicant, or for which the applicant is an employee or
agent;
7. Full address of the applicant's regular place of business (if any);
8. Any and all business related telephone number(s) of the applicant;
9. The type of business for which the applicant is applying for a license;
10. The dates during which the applicant intends to conduct business and the number of days he or she will be conducting business in the City;
11. Any and all address(es) and telephone number(s) where the applicant can be reached while conducting business within the City, including the
location where a transient merchant intends to set up business;
12. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any felony, gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor, for violation of any State or
Federal Statute or any local ordinance, other than traffic offenses;
13. A list of the five (5) most recent locations where the applicant has conducted business as a peddler or transient merchant;
14. Written permission of the property owner or the property owner's agent for any property to be used by a transient merchant;
15. A general description of the items to be sold or services to be provided;
16. All additional information deemed necessary by the City Council;
17. A list of all individuals to be covered by a group license;
18. Source of items sold and the item's location at the time of licensing and time of sale;
19. License plate and registration information for any vehicle to be used in conjunction with the licensed business and a description of the vehicle;
20. The applicant's driver's license number or other acceptable form of identification;
21. Recent passport style photograph of the applicant;
22. Proof of any required State license for transient merchant activities (not applicable to door to door solicitations);
23. Written consent authorizing the City to request a criminal history background investigation in accordance with title 1, chapter 6 of this Code.
C. License Fees: All applications for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by the fee established in section 3-1-2 of this Code.
D. Procedure:
1. An application shall be determined to be complete only if all required information is provided. If the City determines that an application is incomplete,
it shall inform the applicant of the information required to be provided prior to issuance of a license.
2. a. The City shall review the application and order any investigation, including background investigations, necessary to verify the information provided
with the application.
b. Applicants for a license under this chapter shall be subject to a criminal history background investigation, as required by subsection 1-6-2C of this
Code and processed in accordance with section 1-6-3 of this Code.
3. The City shall either approve or deny the license within thirty (30) business days after receipt of a complete application.
4. If the application is denied, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the decision, the reason for the denial (including the provisions of section 1-6-3
of this Code), and the applicant's right to appeal the denial by requesting, within seven (7) days of the date of the denial, a hearing pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes sections 14.57 to 14.69 to be heard by the City Administrator, other designated staff or a Hearing Officer appointed by the City
Council within thirty (30) days of the date of the request. The final decision of the City Council following the hearing shall be appealed by petitioning
the Minnesota Court of Appeals for a writ of certiorari.
E. Duration: A license granted under this chapter shall be valid until the end of the calendar year in which it is granted. (Prior Code § 7-10-2)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 70/497
4-5-3: REGISTRATION AND LICENSING OF SOLICITORS:
All solicitors shall be required to register and be licensed by the City in accordance with the procedures set forth by section 4-5-2 of this chapter. (Prior
Code § 7-10-7)
4-5-4: EXEMPTIONS FROM LICENSE:
The licensing requirements of this chapter shall not apply to:
A. Any person selling or attempting to sell, or to take or attempt to take orders for, any product grown, produced, cultivated, or raised on any farm or
garden within the City. Such person must comply with the City's zoning ordinance and other applicable ordinances;
B. Persons exercising that person's State or Federal constitutional rights, except if that person's exercise of constitutional rights is merely incidental to a
commercial activity;
C. Persons selling personal property at wholesale to retailers;
D. Daily newspaper sales; or
E. Merchants or their employees or agents delivering goods in the regular course of business. (Prior Code § 7-10-3)
4-5-5: INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
The following shall be grounds for denying a license or registration under this chapter:
A. The failure of the applicant to obtain and show proof of having obtained any required license;
B. The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the information requested by the City as a part of the application, or the failure to sign the
application, or the failure to pay the required fee at the time of application;
C. The conviction of the applicant for any violation of any Federal or State Statute or regulation, or of any local ordinance, which adversely reflects on the
person's ability to conduct the business for which the license is being sought in an honest and legal manner that will not adversely affect the health,
safety, and welfare of the residents of the City. Such violations shall include, but not be limited to: burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful
business practices, and any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another person; or
D. The revocation within the past five (5) years of any license issued to the applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor, or
transient merchant. (Prior Code § 7-10-4)
4-5-6: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE:
No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred to any person other than the person to whom the license was issued. (Prior Code § 7-10-6)
4-5-7: TRANSIENT MERCHANTS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
A. Transient merchants are specifically prohibited within the City except in the following circumstances:
1. Transient merchants operating within a building;
2. The sale of plants, flowers or Christmas trees;
3. Persons selling local farm or garden products; and
4. Persons selling personal property at wholesale to retailers, to daily newspaper sales, to merchants or their employees or agents delivering goods in
the regular course of business, or to a person selling or peddling the products of the farm or garden.
B. Transient merchants that are not prohibited must comply with the City's zoning ordinance and any other applicable ordinances. (Prior Code § 7-10-8)
4-5-8: EXCLUSION BY PLACARD:
No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant, unless invited to do so by the property owner or tenant, shall enter the property of another for the purpose of
conducting business as a peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant when the property is marked with a sign or placard at least three and three-fourths
inches (33/4") long and three and three-fourths inches (33/4") wide with print of at least 48-point in size stating "No Peddlers, Solicitors, or Transient
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 71/497
Merchants", or "Peddlers, Solicitors, and Transient Merchants Prohibited", or other comparable statement. No person other than the property owner or
tenant shall remove, deface, or otherwise tamper with any sign or placard under this section. (Prior Code § 7-10-9)
4-5-9: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant shall conduct business in any of the following manners:
A. Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian traffic on any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public right-of-way.
B. Conducting business in such a way as to create a threat to the health, safety, or welfare of any individual or the general public.
C. Entering upon any residential premises for the purpose of carrying on the licensee's or registrant's trade or business between the hours of eight o'clock
(8:00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. of the following day, unless such person has been expressly invited to do so by the owner or occupant thereof.
D. Failing to provide proof of license or registration and identification when requested or using the license or registration of another person.
E. Failing to wear or display the certificate of registration or licensure provided by the City on the licensed or registered individual's outermost clothing or to
return the certificate to the City in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
F. Making any false or misleading statements about the product or service being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement. No peddler, solicitor, or
transient merchant shall claim to have the endorsement of the City solely based on the City having issued a license or certificate of registration to that
person.
G. Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave, or to otherwise conduct business in a manner a reasonable person would find obscene,
threatening, intimidating, or abusive.
H. Entering upon any premises or attempting to enter in or upon any premises wherein a sign or placard bearing the notice "peddlers or solicitors
prohibited" or language similar thereto, is located.
I. Selling or soliciting sales by transient merchants from public property or right-of-way or from private property unless he owns the property or has written
permission from the owner. (Prior Code § 7-10-10)
4-5-10: IDENTIFICATION REQUIRED:
All solicitors, peddlers and transient merchants must wear some type of identification conspicuously showing their name and the organization for which
they are soliciting or peddling, must carry their City and/or County issued license or registration certificate when conducting the business or activity
required to be licensed or registered under this chapter, and must wear or display on their outermost clothing the certificate of registration or licensure
provided by the City. (Prior Code § 7-10-11)
4-5-11: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR REGISTRATION:
A. Grounds: Any license or registration issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked at the discretion of the City for violation of any of the
following:
1. Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statements on the application form;
2. Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements made during the course of the license activity;
3. Conviction of any offense for which granting of a license could have been denied under this chapter;
4. Violation of any provision of this chapter; or
5. Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health,
safety, or general welfare of the public.
B. Notice Required: Prior to revoking or suspending any license issued under this chapter, the City shall provide the license holder with written notice of
the alleged violation(s) and inform the licensee of the licensee's right to a hearing on the alleged violation. Notice shall be delivered in person or by mail
to the permanent residential address listed on the license application, or if no residential address is listed, the business address provided on the license
application.
C. Hearing: Upon receiving the notice provided in subsection B of this section, the licensee shall have the right to request a hearing. If no request for a
hearing is received by the City within ten (10) regular business days following the service of the notice, the City may proceed with the suspension or
revocation. For the purpose of mailed notices, service shall be considered complete as of the date the notice is placed in the mail. If a public hearing is
requested within the stated time frame, a hearing shall be scheduled within twenty (20) days from the date of the request. Within three (3) regular
business days of the hearing, the City shall notify the licensee of its decision.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 72/497
D. Emergency Suspension: If, in the discretion of the City, imminent harm to the health or safety of the public may occur because of the actions of a
peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant licensed or registered under this chapter, the City may immediately suspend the person's license or registration
and provide notice of the right to hold a subsequent hearing as prescribed in subsection B of this section.
E. Appeals: Any person whose license is suspended or revoked under this section shall have the right to appeal that decision in court. (Prior Code § 7-10-
5)
4-5-12: MISDEMEANOR VIOLATION; ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT:
Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor or a Code violation subject to administrative enforcement. (Prior Code § 7-10-12)
Chapter 6
RENTAL HOUSING
4-6-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
A. Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to assure that rental housing in the City is decent, safe and sanitary and is so operated and maintained as not
to become a nuisance to the neighborhood or to become an influence that fosters blight and deterioration or creates a disincentive to reinvestment in
the community. The operation of rental residential properties is a business enterprise that entails certain responsibilities. Operators are responsible to
take such reasonable steps as are necessary to assure that the citizens of the City who occupy such units may pursue the quiet enjoyment of the
normal activities of life in surroundings that are: safe, secure and sanitary; free from crimes and criminal activity, noise, nuisances or annoyances; free
from reasonable fears about safety of persons and security of property; and suitable for raising children.
B. Intent: With respect to rental disputes and except as otherwise specifically provided by the terms of this chapter, it is not the intention of the City to
intrude upon the fair and acceptable relationship between tenant and landlord. The City does not intend to intervene as an advocate of either party, or
to act as an arbiter, or to be receptive of complaints from a tenant or landlord which are not specifically and clearly relevant to the provisions of this
chapter. In the absence of such relevancy, with regard to rental disputes, it is intended that the contracting parties exercise such legal rights as are
available to them without the intervention of the City. (Prior Code § 7-11-1)
4-6-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
Every rental dwelling unit and its premises used whole or in part as a home or residence, for a family or person, shall conform to the requirements of this
chapter irrespective of when such building was constructed, altered or repaired. This chapter establishes minimum standards for erected rental dwelling
units, accessory structures and related premises. (Prior Code § 7-11-2)
4-6-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A subordinate detached building or use which is located on the same lot on which the main building or use is situated and
which is reasonably necessary and incidental to the conduct of the primary use of such main building or use.
APPROVED: When used in reference to the design and capabilities of physical systems of a dwelling, shall mean having passed the inspection of the
compliance official. The basis for passage of such inspection shall be an analysis of the effective State codes and an analysis of the degree to which the
systems meet the standards established by such codes. It shall be the objective of the compliance official, unless otherwise specified, to establish
minimum qualifications for approval of such system, which qualifications can maintain substantial compliance with the effective State codes and can be
achieved in a reasonably economical and practical manner.
BUILDING: Any structure built for support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or moveable property of any kind, and includes any structure.
COMPLIANCE OFFICIAL: The City building official and his designated agents authorized to administer and enforce this chapter.
DWELLING: A building or portion thereof, designated exclusively for residential occupancy, including one-family, two-family, multiple-family dwellings and
manufactured houses, but not including hotels, motels, or boarding houses.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE FAMILY (APARTMENT): A building designed with three (3) or more dwelling units exclusively for the occupancy of three (3) or
more families living independently of each other, but sharing hallways, main entrances and exits.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A dwelling unit designed exclusively for occupancy by one family.
Attached: A dwelling which is joined to another at one or more sides by a party wall.
Detached: A dwelling unit not attached to another dwelling or structure or is entirely surrounded by open space.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A residence designed for or occupied by two (2) families only, with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each. A
two-family dwelling (duplex) with a separate rooming unit(s) shall be considered and classified as a multiple-family dwelling.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 73/497
Double Bungalow: A two-family dwelling with two (2) units side by side.
Duplex: A two-family dwelling unit with one unit above the other.
DWELLING UNIT: A residential building or portion thereof intended for occupancy by one or more persons with facilities for living, sleeping, cooking and
eating but not including hotels, motels, nursing homes, seasonal cabins, boarding or rooming houses, resorts, tourist homes or trailers.
FAMILY: An individual or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or a group of not more than three (3) persons who need not be
related by blood or marriage living together in a dwelling unit.
GARBAGE: Animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HABITABLE BUILDING: Any building or part thereof that meets minimum standards for use as a home or place of abode by one or more persons.
HABITABLE ROOM: A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms,
water closet compartments, laundries, furnace rooms, unfinished basements (those without required ventilation, required electric outlets and required exit
facilities), pantries, utility rooms of less than fifty (50) square feet of floor space, foyers, communicating corridors, stairways, closets, storage spaces and
workshops, and hobby and recreation areas in parts of the structure below ground level or in attics.
HEATED WATER: Water heated to a temperature of not less than one hundred twenty degrees Fahrenheit (120°F), or such lesser temperature required by
government authority, measured at the faucet outlet.
KITCHEN: A space which contains a sink with counter working space, adequate space for installing cooking and refrigeration equipment and adequate
space for the storage of cooking utensils.
LEASE: An agreement to rent. For use as a verb, see definition of rent.
OCCUPANT: Any person (including the owner or operator) sleeping, cooking and eating in a dwelling unit or living and sleeping in a rooming unit.
OPERATOR: The owner or his agent who has charge, care, control, or management of a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units
are let.
OWNER: Any person who, alone, jointly, or severally with others, shall be in actual possession of, or have charge, care or control of, any dwelling, dwelling
unit, or rooming unit within the City as title holder, as employee or agent of the title holder, or as trustee or guardian of the estate or person of the title
holder. Any such person representing the actual title holder shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this chapter to the same extent as the title
holder.
PARTY WALL: A common wall which divides two (2) independent structures by a fire wall.
PERMISSIBLE OCCUPANCY: The maximum number of persons permitted to reside in a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
PLUMBING: All of the following supplied facilities and equipment in a dwelling: gas pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, steam pipes, garbage
disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, catch
basins, drains, vents and any other similar fixtures and the installation thereof, together with all connections to water, sewer and gas lines.
PREMISES: A platted lot or part thereof or unplatted parcel of land occupied by any dwelling or nondwelling structure, including any such building,
accessory structure or other structure thereon.
PUBLIC HALL: A hall, corridor or passageway for providing egress from a dwelling unit to a public way and not within the exclusive control of one family.
REFUSE: All organic and nonorganic waste, including garbage and rubbish.
RENT: Consideration paid for the use of premises, including, but not necessarily limited to, money, services and property. As a verb, the term "rent" means
to get or give the use of premises in return for such consideration or any combination thereof. The term "rent" does not include arrangements whereby a
relative, as defined in Minnesota Statutes section 273.124, subdivision 1(c), occupies a dwelling for no consideration or for consideration that includes no
more than maintenance of the dwelling or premises, and which arrangement is detailed and sworn to in affidavits filed by each adult occupant of the
dwelling and each person who is an owner of the dwelling.
RENTAL DWELLING: A building or portion thereof let for rent or lease, designed or used predominantly for residential occupancy of a continued nature,
including single-family dwellings, attached or detached, and multiple-family dwellings, but not including hotels and motels.
RENTAL DWELLING UNIT: A single residential accommodation let for rent or lease which is arranged, designed, used or, if vacant, intended for use
exclusively as a domicile for one family. Where a private garage is structurally attached, it shall be considered as a part of the building in which the
dwelling is located.
REPAIR: To restore to a sound and acceptable state of operation, serviceability or appearance.
RODENT HARBORAGE: Any place where rodents can live, nest or seek shelter.
RUBBISH: Solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, grass and shrubbery clippings,
wood, glass, brick, plaster, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
SUBSTANDARD DWELLING: Any dwelling which does not conform to the minimum standards established by City ordinances.
SUPPLIED: Paid for, furnished by, provided by or under the control of the owner, operator or agent of a dwelling. Whenever the terms "dwelling", "dwelling
unit", "premises" and "structure" are used in this chapter, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof".
TOILET: A toilet, with a bowl and trap made in one piece, which is connected to the City water and sewer system or other approved water supply and
sewer supply. (Prior Code § 7-11-3; amd. Ord. 2018-11, 10-22-2018)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 74/497
4-6-4: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
A. License Required:
1. No person, firm, or corporation shall operate a rental dwelling unit without first having obtained a license to do so from the City as provided in this
chapter.
2. Single family, two-family, townhouse, and condominium multiple family dwelling units shall require a separate license for each dwelling unit.
3. Multiple family dwellings shall require one license per principal building as defined by the zoning ordinance under single ownership.
4. State licensed boarding care homes, nursing homes, and, residential care facilities, including memory care, whether a principal use or as
incorporated within a multiple family building shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2018-11, 10-22-2018)
B. Application For License: Applications for rental licenses shall be made in writing to the City by the owner of the rental dwelling unit(s) or his/her
designated agent. The applicant shall supply:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the dwelling owner, the owning partners if a partnership and/or that of the corporate officers if a
corporation.
2. The name, address and telephone number of the designated resident agent, if any.
3. The name, address and telephone number of the management representative.
4. The name, address and telephone number of the vendee, if the dwelling is being sold through a contract for deed.
5. The legal address of the dwelling.
6. The type of dwelling.
7. The type and number of dwelling units within the dwelling.
8. Number of occupants.
9. A description of the procedure through which tenant inquiries and complaints are to be processed.
10. An acknowledgement that the owner or designated agent has received a copy of this chapter.
11. Prior to approving an application for a rental housing license, the property owner shall provide certification to the City that there are no delinquent
Property Taxes, special assessments, interest, or City utility fees due upon the parcel of land to which the rental housing license application relates.
C. License Fees:
1. Fees for renewal of licenses under this chapter shall be due not less than thirty (30) days prior to the license expiration date. In cases of new
unlicensed dwellings, license fees shall be due upon issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
2. The amount of license fees shall be as set forth in section 3-1-2 of this Code. The licensee shall not be entitled to a refund of any license fee upon
revocation or suspension of the license. However, the licensee shall be entitled to a refund of any license fee, prorated monthly, upon proof of
transfer of legal control or ownership. (Prior Code § 7-11-4)
D. Inspection Required:
1. No license shall be issued or renewed under this chapter unless the rental dwelling and its premises conform to this Code and the laws of the State;
the City shall require an inspection of the rental dwelling and premises to make that determination.
2. Single family, townhouse, and condominium dwellings: An inspection shall be required at the time of application for an initial license and for renewal
of an existing license issued on December 31, 2017 or thereafter every three (3) years.
3. Multiple family dwellings within a building under single ownership: An inspection shall be required at the time of application for an initial license and
for renewal of an existing license every five (5) years from the date of approval. For renewal of an existing license, a schedule shall be established
subject to approval of the building official for annual inspection of areas of the principal building outside of the rental dwelling units and not less than
twenty percent (20%) of the rental dwelling units within the premises.
4. Failure to schedule or allow such inspection shall be dealt with as provided by title 1, chapter 5 of this Code.
E. Term Of License:
1. Each license shall be issued annually and shall expire one year following the issuance thereof. License renewals for the following years shall be filed
not less than thirty (30) days prior to the license expiration date.
2. A license issued in accordance with this chapter shall expire upon a change in ownership of the property.
3. Application for renewal of a license issued under this chapter shall be submitted not less than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the current
license. (Ord. 2018-11, 10-22-2018)
F. Posting License: Every licensee of a rental dwelling shall cause to be conspicuously posted in the main entryway or other conspicuous location therein
the current license of the respective rental dwelling. (Prior Code § 7-11-4)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 75/497
4-6-5: INSPECTION CRITERIA:
A. The City may inspect any rental unit if it falls within one or more of the following criteria:
1. Such a unit has been abandoned by the owner or the owner of such unit cannot be found.
2. The rental dwelling unit license has been suspended, revoked or denied.
3. Water, gas, or electric service to such unit has been discontinued as a result of nonpayment for more than thirty (30) continuous days.
4. The unit is on a parcel of land which is on the list of delinquent taxes filed by the County Auditor with the Court Administrator of the District Court
pursuant to Minnesota Statutes section 279.05.
5. The City has probable cause to believe that there exists within such unit one or more violations of the requirements of this chapter.
6. The unit of property within which the unit is located has, within the preceding six (6) months, renewed a license after suspension or revocation.
7. The unit is the subject of a pending notice of the City's intent to suspend or revoke the rental license. (Prior Code § 7-11-5)
B. The City compliance official is hereby authorized, in conformity with this chapter, to inspect all rental dwelling units to enforce this section and all
applicable Safety Codes.
C. The City compliance official is authorized to inspect all rental dwelling units in dwellings, whether having a rental license hereunder or not. The
inspection may include the building or structure containing the rental dwelling unit, the land upon which it is located and accessory uses or structures
related to the rental dwelling unit. All inspections authorized by this subsection shall be limited to those which are done for the purpose of seeking
compliance with the applicable Safety Codes, and shall take place only at reasonable hours or as may otherwise be agreed upon by the owner and the
City compliance official. (Prior Code § 7-11-5; amd. 2018 Code)
D. The City shall give notice to the owner of any violations of the applicable Safety Codes which are discovered during any inspection. (Prior Code § 7-11-
5)
4-6-6: RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS:
No owner or other person shall occupy or let another person occupy any rental dwelling unit, unless the premises is clean, sanitary, fit for human
occupancy and complies with all applicable legal requirements of the State and the City, including the following requirements:
A. License And Inspection Required: The owner of a rental dwelling unit shall obtain and license and shall pass the required inspection prior to any
occupancy of the rental dwelling unit.
B. Maintenance:
1. Shared Or Public Areas: Every owner of a rental dwelling unit shall maintain in a clean, sanitary and safe condition the shared or public areas of the
building and premises thereof.
2. Occupied Areas: All occupants of a rental dwelling unit shall maintain in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part or those parts of the building
and premises thereof that she/he occupies and controls.
C. Storage And Disposal Of Garbage And Rubbish:
1. All occupants of a rental dwelling unit shall store and dispose of all their rubbish in a clean, sanitary and safe manner.
2. All occupants of a rental dwelling unit shall store and dispose of all their garbage and any other organic waste which might provide food for insects
and/or rodents in a clean, sanitary and safe manner.
3. Every owner of a rental dwelling unit shall supply facilities of adequate size for the sanitary and safe storage and disposal of rubbish and garbage.
D. Pest Control:
1. Pest Extermination: Every owner of a rental dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of vermin infestations and/or rodents on the
premises. Every occupant of a dwelling unit containing more than one dwelling unit or an occupant of a nonresidential building containing more than
one unit shall be responsible for the extermination whenever his unit is the only one infested. Notwithstanding, however, whenever infestations
caused by the failure of the owner to maintain a building in a reasonable rodentproof or reasonable verminproof condition, extermination shall be the
responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two (2) or more of the units in any building, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility
of the owner. Whenever extermination is the responsibility of the owner, the extermination must be performed by a licensed pest control contractor.
2. Rodents:
a. No occupant of a rental dwelling unit shall accumulate boxes, lumber, scrap metal, or any similar materials in such a manner that may provide a
rodent harborage in or about any dwelling unit or building. Stored materials shall be stacked neatly.
b. No owner of a rental dwelling unit shall accumulate or permit the accumulation of boxes, lumber, scrap metal, or any other similar materials in such
a manner that may provide a rodent harborage in or about shared or public areas of a building or its premises. Materials stored by the owner or
permitted to be stored by the owner shall be stacked neatly.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 76/497
c. No owner or occupant of a rental dwelling unit shall store, place or allow to accumulate, any materials that may serve as food for rodents in a site
accessible to rodents.
E. Sanitary Maintenance Of Fixtures And Facilities: Every occupant of a rental dwelling unit shall keep all supplied fixtures and facilities therein in a clean
and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof.
F. Minimum Heating Capability And Maintenance: In every rental dwelling unit, when the control of the supplied heat is the responsibility of a person other
than the occupant, a temperature of at least sixty eight degrees Fahrenheit (68°F), or such lesser temperature required by government authority, shall
be maintained at a distance of three feet (3') above the floor and three feet (3') from exterior walls in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet
compartments from September through May.
G. Minimum Exterior Lighting: The owner of a rental building shall be responsible for providing and maintaining effective illumination in all exterior parking
lots and walkways.
H. Driveways And Parking Areas: One off street parking space must be provided for each tenant age of eighteen (18) years or older. The owner of a rental
building shall be responsible for providing and maintaining in good condition paved and delineated parking areas and driveways for tenants consistent
with title 11, chapter 21 of this Code. (Prior Code § 7-11-6)
I. Yards: The owner of the building shall be responsible for providing and maintaining the yards of premises consistent with section 5-2-3 of this Code.
J. Exterior Storage: Owners and occupants of rental dwelling units shall comply with the City's exterior storage requirements as regulated by section 11-
18-3 of this Code. (Prior Code § 7-11-6; amd. 2018 Code)
K. Public Nuisances: Owners and occupants of rental dwelling units shall comply with the City public nuisance ordinance as provided in title 5, chapter 1 of
this Code.
L. Taxes, Fees And Charges: The property owner shall be responsible for payment of all Property Taxes, City utility fees, special assessments, and
interest. Delinquent utility accounts shall be subject to section 8-1-9 of this Code. (Prior Code § 7-11-6)
4-6-7: MAXIMUM DENSITY:
No person shall occupy nor permit or let to be occupied any rental dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein which does not comply with the following
requirements:
A. With the exception of tenants occupying a respective dwelling unit prior to February 12, 2007, the maximum permissible occupancy of any dwelling unit
shall be determined as follows:
1. For the first occupant, one hundred fifty (150) square feet of habitable room floor space and for every additional occupant thereof, at least one
hundred (100) square feet of habitable room floor space.
2. In no event shall the total number of occupants exceed two (2) times the number of habitable bedrooms, less kitchen, in the dwelling unit.
B. Occupancy of a rental dwelling unit by a single family as defined by section 11-2-2 of this Code shall be exempt from the provisions of subsection A of
this section. (Prior Code § 7-11-7)
4-6-8: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
No person shall occupy, as owner/occupant, or let another occupy any rental building or rental dwelling unit which does not comply with the following
requirements, unless specifically exempt:
A. Minimum Ceiling Height: In order to qualify as habitable, rooms shall have a clear ceiling height of not less than seven feet six inches (7'6"); except, that
in attics or top half stories used for sleeping, study, or similar activities, the ceiling height shall be not less than seven feet six inches (7'6") over at least
one-half (1/2) of the floor area. In calculating the floor area of such rooms in attics or top half stories, only those portions of the floor area of the room
having a clear ceiling height of five feet (5') or more may be included.
B. Access Through Sleeping Rooms And Bathrooms: No dwelling unit containing two (2) or more sleeping rooms shall have a room arrangement such that
access to a bathroom or water closet compartment intended for use by occupants of more than one sleeping room can be gained only by going through
another sleeping room. A bathroom or water closet compartment shall not be used as the only passageway to any habitable room, hall, basement or
cellar of any dwelling unit.
C. Foundations, Exterior Walls And Roofs: The foundation, exterior walls, and exterior roof shall be substantially watertight and protected against vermin
and rodents and shall be kept in sound condition and repair. The foundation element shall adequately support the building at all points. Every exterior
wall shall be free of deterioration, holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers, and any other condition which might admit rain or dampness to the
interior portion of the walls or to the interior spaces of the building. The roof shall be tight and have no defects which admit rain, and roof drainage shall
be adequate to prevent rainwater from causing dampness in the walls. All exterior wood surfaces, other than decay resistant woods, shall be protected
from the elements and decay by paint or other protective covering or treatment. If the exterior surface is unpainted or determined by the compliance
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 77/497
official to be paint blistered, the surface shall be painted. If the exterior surface of the pointing of any brick, block or stone wall is loose or has fallen out,
the surface shall be repaired.
D. Windows, Doors And Screens: Every window, exterior door, and other exterior openings shall be substantially tight and shall be kept in sound condition
and repair. Every window, door and frame shall be constructed and maintained in such relation to the adjacent wall construction as to completely
exclude rain, wind, vermin and rodents from entering the building. Every openable window shall be supplied with 16-mesh screens during the insect
season, and shall be equipped with an approved lock if located less than six feet (6') above adjacent grade.
E. Floors, Interior Walls And Ceilings: Every floor, interior wall and ceiling shall be adequately protected against the passage and harborage of vermin and
rodents, and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. Every floor shall be free of loose, warped, protruding or rotted flooring materials. Every
interior wall and ceiling shall be free of holes and large cracks and loose plaster and shall be maintained in a tight, weatherproof condition. Toxic paint
and materials with a lasting toxic effect shall not be used. The floor of every toilet room, bathroom, and kitchen shall have a smooth, hard,
nonabsorbent surface and shall be capable of being easily maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
F. Rodent Control: Every structure and the premises upon which it is located shall be maintained in a rodent free and rodentproof condition. All openings in
the exterior walls, foundations, basements, ground or first floors, and roofs, which have a one-half inch (1/2") diameter or larger opening, shall be
rodentproofed in an approved manner. Interior floors or basements, cellars, and other areas in contact with the soil shall be paved with concrete or
other rodent impervious material.
G. Fences: All fences shall consist of metal, wood, masonry, or other decay resistant material. Fences shall be maintained in good condition both in
appearance and in structure. Wood material, other than decay resistant varieties, shall be protected against decay by use of paint or other
preservatives. All fences shall be subject to the provision of section 11-19-4 of this Code.
H. Grading And Drainage: During the period of May through October, every yard, court, passageway, and other portions of the premises on which a
building stands shall be graded and drained so as to be free of standing water that constitutes a detriment to health and safety.
I. Landscaping: Every yard of a premises on which a building stands shall be provided with lawn or combined ground cover of vegetation, garden, hedges,
shrubbery, and related decorative materials, and such yard shall be maintained consistent with prevailing community standards. Nonresidential sites
shall be maintained in accordance with an approved City landscape plan and shall be supplied with an irrigation system.
J. Screening: All outside trash disposal facilities, recycling containers, and outside or rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened from view by an
opaque fence or wall high enough to completely screen the equipment.
K. Safe Building Elements: Every foundation, roof, floor, exterior and interior wall, ceiling, inside and outside stair, every porch and balcony, and every
appurtenance thereto, shall be safe to use and capable of supporting loads required by the occupancy.
L. Facilities To Function: Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility required under City ordinances and every chimney and flue shall be installed
and maintained and shall function effectively in a safe, sound, and working condition.
M. Discontinuance Of Service Or Facilities: No owner, operator, or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment, or utility, which is required under
this chapter, to be removed, shut off or discontinued from any occupied building or portion thereof, except for such temporary interruptions as may be
necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in process, or during temporary emergencies. (Prior Code § 7-11-8)
4-6-9: MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES:
No person shall occupy, as owner/occupant, or let to another to occupy, any rental building or rental dwelling unit for the purposes of living, sleeping,
cooking and eating therein which does not comply with the following requirements:
A. Kitchen Facilities:
1. Every dwelling unit shall have a room or portion of a room in which food may be prepared and/or cooked and which is connected to an approved
sewer system.
2. Every dwelling unit shall have an approved kitchen sink in good working condition and properly connected to an approved water supply system, and
which provides at all times an adequate amount of heated and unheated running water under pressure, and which is connected to an approved
sewer system.
3. Every dwelling unit shall have cabinets and/or shelves for the storage of eating, drinking, and cooking equipment and utensils and of food that does
not require refrigeration for safekeeping, and a counter or table for food preparation. Said cabinets and/or shelves and counter or table shall be
adequate for the permissible occupancy of the dwelling unit and shall be of sound construction and furnished with surfaces that are easily cleaned
and that will not impart any toxic or deleterious effect to food.
4. Every dwelling unit shall have a stove or similar device for cooking food, and a refrigerator or similar device for the safe storage of food at or below
forty degrees Fahrenheit (40°F), which are properly installed with all necessary connections for safe, sanitary and efficient operation. Provided, that
such stove, refrigerator or similar device need not be installed when a dwelling unit is not occupied or when the occupant is expected to provide
same upon occupancy, in which case, sufficient space and adequate connections for the installation and operation of said stove, refrigerator or
similar device must be provided.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 78/497
B. Toilet Facilities: Within every rental dwelling unit there shall be an uninhabitable room which is equipped with an approved toilet in good working
condition. Such room shall have an entrance door which affords privacy. Said toilet shall be equipped with easily cleaned surfaces, shall be connected
to an approved water system that at all times provides an adequate amount of running water under pressure to cause the toilet to be operated properly,
and shall be connected to an approved sewer system.
C. Lavatory Sink: Within every rental dwelling unit there shall be an approved lavatory sink. Said lavatory sink may be in the same room as the flush water
closet, or if located in another room, the lavatory sink shall be located in close proximity to the door leading directly into the room in which the said
water closet is located. The lavatory sink shall be in good working condition and shall be properly connected to an approved water supply system and
shall provide at all times an adequate amount of heated and unheated running water under pressure, and shall be connected to an approved sewer
system.
D. Bathtub Or Shower: Within every rental dwelling unit there shall be an uninhabitable room which is equipped with an approved bathtub or shower in
good working condition. Such room shall have an entrance which affords privacy. Said bathtub or shower may be in the same room as the flush water
closet, or in another room, and shall be properly connected to an approved water supply system and shall provide at all times an adequate amount of
heated and unheated water under pressure, and shall be connected to an approved sewer system.
E. Stairways, Porches And Balconies: Every stairway inside or outside of a rental dwelling and every porch or balcony shall be kept in safe condition and
sound repair. Stairs, handrails and guards shall conform to the IRC/IBC.
F. Access And Egress: Access to or egress from each rental dwelling unit shall be provided without passing through any other rental dwelling unit.
G. Door Locks: No owner shall occupy nor let to another for occupancy any rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit unless all exterior doors of the dwelling or
dwelling unit are equipped with safe, functioning locking devices as follows:
1. Building Entrances: For the purpose of providing a reasonable amount of safety and general welfare for persons occupying multiple-family dwellings,
an approved security system shall be maintained for each multiple-family building to control access. The security system shall consist of locked
building entrance or foyer doors, and locked doors leading from hallways into individual dwelling units. Dead latch type doors shall be provided with
lever knobs (or doorknobs) on the inside of building entrance doors and with key cylinders on the outside of building entrance doors. Building
entrance door latches shall be of a type that are permanently locked from the outside and permanently locked from the inside.
2. Interior Dwelling Unit Entrances: Every door that is designed to provide ingress or egress for a dwelling unit within a multiple-family building shall be
equipped with an approved lock that has a deadlocking bolt that cannot be retracted by end pressure; provided, however, that such door shall be
openable from the inside without the use of a key or any special knowledge or effort. (Prior Code § 7-11-9)
4-6-10: MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR LIGHT AND VENTILATION:
No person shall occupy, as owner/occupant, or let to another to occupy, any rental building or rental dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which
does not comply with the following requirements:
A. Habitable Room Light And Ventilation: Except where there is supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the
compliance official, every habitable room shall have at least one window facing directly outdoors which can be opened easily. The minimum total of
openable window area in every habitable room shall be the greater of ten percent (10%) of the floor area of the room or ten (10) square feet. One-half
(1/2) of the required window area shall be openable.
B. Uninhabitable Room Ventilation: Every bathroom and water closet compartment, and every laundry and utility room shall contain at least fifty percent
(50%) of the ventilation requirement for habitable rooms contained in subsection A of this section; except, that no windows shall be required if such
rooms are equipped with a ventilation system which is approved by the compliance official.
C. Electric Service, Outlets And Fixtures: Every rental dwelling unit and all public and common areas shall be supplied with electric service, functioning
over current protection devices, electric outlets, and electric fixtures which are properly installed, which shall be maintained in good and safe working
condition, and which shall be connected to a source of electric power in a manner prescribed by the ordinances, rules, and regulations of the City and
by the laws of the State. The minimum capacity of such electric service and the minimum number of electric outlets and fixtures shall be as follows:
1. Rental dwellings containing one or two (2) rental dwelling units shall have at least the equivalent of sixty (60) ampere, 3-wire electric service per
dwelling unit.
2. Rental dwelling units shall have at least one branch electric circuit for each six hundred (600) square feet of dwelling unit floor area.
3. Every habitable room shall have at least one floor or wall type electric convenience outlet for each sixty (60) square feet or fraction thereof of total
floor area and, in no case, less than two (2) such electric outlets; provided, however, that one ceiling or wall type fixture may be supplied in lieu of
one required electric outlet.
4. Every bathroom, kitchen, laundry room, and furnace room shall contain at least one supplied ceiling or wall type electric light fixture, and every
bathroom, kitchen, and laundry room shall contain at least one electric convenience outlet.
5. Every public corridor and stairway in every rental dwelling shall be adequately lighted by natural or electric light at all times so as to provide effective
illumination in all parts thereof. Every public corridor and stairway in structures containing not more than two (2) dwelling units may be supplied with
conveniently located light switches controlling an adequate lighting system which may be turned on when needed, instead of full time lighting.
6. A convenient switch or equivalent device for turning on a light in each rental dwelling unit shall be located near the point of entrance to such unit.
D. Smoke And Carbon Dioxide Protection:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 79/497
1. Every rental dwelling unit shall have smoke detector devices as follows:
a. One per level.
b. One per bedroom.
c. One per hallway leading to bedrooms.
2. Every level of every rental dwelling unit shall have a carbon monoxide detection device located within ten feet (10') of any bedroom. (Prior Code § 7-
11-10)
4-6-11: DWELLINGS UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION:
A. Any rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit which is damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, or vermin or rodent infested, or which lacks
provision for basic illumination, ventilation or sanitary facilities to the extent that the defects create a hazard to the health, safety or welfare of the
occupants or of the public may be declared unfit for human habitation. Whenever any rental dwelling, rental dwelling unit or rooming unit has been
declared unfit for human habitation, the compliance official shall order the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit vacated within a reasonable amount of
time and shall post a placard on the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit indicating that it is unfit for human habitation, and any operating license
previously issued for such dwelling shall be revoked.
B. It shall be unlawful for such rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit to be used for human habitation until the defective conditions have been corrected and
written approval has been issued by the compliance official. It shall be unlawful for any person to deface or remove the declaration placard from any
such rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit.
C. The owner of any rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit which has been declared unfit for human habitation, or which is otherwise vacant for a period of
sixty (60) days or more, shall make the dwelling or dwelling unit safe and secure so that it is not hazardous to the health, safety and welfare of the
public and does not constitute a public nuisance. Any vacant dwelling open at doors or windows, if unguarded, shall be deemed to be a hazard to the
health, safety and welfare of the public and a public nuisance within the meaning of this chapter.
D. If a rental dwelling unit has been declared unfit for human habitation and the owner has not remedied the defects within a prescribed reasonable time,
the dwelling may be declared a hazardous building and treated consistent with the provisions of State Statutes. (Prior Code § 7-11-11)
4-6-12: PENALTIES AND VIOLATIONS:
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as prescribed by State law. The City may elect
alternative enforcement through civil penalties or through the City's administrative enforcement proceedings as authorized in title 1, chapter 5 of this
Code.
B. Every license issued under the provisions of this chapter is subject to suspension or revocation by the City should the licensed owner or the owner's
duly authorized agent fail to operate or maintain a licensed dwelling or unit therein consistent with the provisions of the ordinances of the City and the
laws of the State. The City shall appoint a person responsible for administration of this section who shall have the authority to investigate licensees and
to suspend or revoke licenses. The procedures for appealing a revocation or suspension of a license shall follow the City's administrative enforcement
proceedings as authorized by title 1, chapter 5 of this Code. (Prior Code § 7-11-12)
Chapter 7
LAWFUL GAMBLING
4-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate lawful gambling within the City, to prevent its commercialization, to ensure the integrity of operations, and to
provide for the use of net profits only for lawful purposes. (Prior Code § 7-12-3)
4-7-2: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED; CITY MAY BE MORE RESTRICTIVE:
A. The provisions of Minnesota Statutes chapter 349, as amended from time to time, with reference to the definitions of terms, conditions of operation,
provisions relating to sales, and all other matters pertaining to lawful gambling are hereby adopted by reference and are made a part of this chapter as
if set out in full. It is the intention of the City Council that all future amendments of Minnesota Statutes chapter 349 are hereby adopted by reference or
referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this chapter was adopted. (Prior Code § 7-12-1)
B. The City Council is authorized by the provisions of Minnesota Statutes section 349.213, as amended from time to time, to impose, and has imposed in
this chapter, additional restrictions on gambling within its limits beyond those contained in Minnesota Statutes chapter 349, as amended from time to
time. (Prior Code § 7-12-2)
4-7-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS; EXEMPTIONS:
This chapter shall be construed to regulate all forms of lawful gambling within the City except:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 80/497
A. Bingo conducted within a nursing home or a senior citizen housing project or by a senior citizen organization if the prizes for a single bingo game do not
exceed ten dollars ($10.00), total prizes awarded at a single bingo occasion do not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00), no more than two (2) bingo
occasions are held by the organization or at the facility each week, only members of the organization or residents of the nursing home or housing
project are allowed to play in a bingo game, no compensation is paid for any persons who conduct the bingo, and a manager is appointed to supervise
the bingo.
B. Raffles if the value of all prizes awarded by the organization in a calendar year does not exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). (Prior
Code § 7-12-5)
4-7-4: DEFINITIONS:
In addition to the definitions contained in Minnesota Statutes section 349.12, as amended from time to time, the following terms are defined for purposes of
this chapter:
BOARD: The State of Minnesota Gambling Control Board.
CITY: The City of Otsego.
COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of Otsego.
LICENSED ORGANIZATION: An organization licensed by the board.
LOCAL PERMIT: A permit issued by the City.
TRADE AREA: The City of Otsego, City of Albertville, City of Rogers, City of Monticello and Monticello Township. (Prior Code § 7-12-4)
4-7-5: LAWFUL GAMBLING PERMITTED; COUNCIL APPROVAL REQUIRED:
A. Lawful gambling is permitted within the City, provided it is conducted in accordance with Minnesota Statutes sections 609.75 to 609.763, inclusive, as
amended from time to time; Minnesota Statutes sections 349.11 to 349.23, inclusive, as amended from time to time, and this chapter. (Prior Code § 7-
12-6)
B. Lawful gambling authorized by Minnesota Statutes sections 349.11 to 349.23, inclusive, as amended from time to time, shall not be conducted unless
approved by the City Council, subject to the provisions of this chapter and State law. (Prior Code § 7-12-7)
4-7-6: LOCAL PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required: No organization shall conduct lawful gambling excluded or exempted from State licensure requirements by Minnesota Statutes section
349.166, as amended from time to time, without a valid local permit. This subsection shall not apply to lawful gambling exempted from local regulation
by section 4-7-3 of this chapter. (Prior Code § 7-12-9)
B. Application For Permit: Any organization seeking to obtain a premises permit or renewal of a premises permit from the board shall file with the City
Clerk an executed, complete duplicate application, together with all exhibits and documents accompanying the application as will be filed with the board
as well as an application form as prescribed by the City and the following information:
1. Name and address of the organization requesting the permit.
2. Name and address of the officers and person accounting for receipts, expenses, and profits for the event.
3. Dates of the gambling occasion for which the permit is requested.
4. Address of premises where the event will occur.
5. Copy of rental or leasing arrangement, if any, connected with the event including rental to be charged to the organization.
6. Estimated value of prizes to be awarded.
C. Review Of Application; Recommendation To City Council:
1. Upon receipt of an application for issuance or renewal of a premises permit, the City Clerk shall transmit the application to the County Sheriff for
review and recommendation.
2. The County Sheriff shall investigate the matter and make the review and recommendation to the City Council as soon as possible, but in no event
later than forty five (45) days following receipt of the notification by the City.
D. Permit Fee: The applicant shall pay a fee at the time of application for a local premises permit as established by section 3-1-2 of this Code for the City
Clerk to accept the application.
E. Consideration Of Recommendation:
1. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the date on which the City Council will consider the recommendation. (Prior Code § 7-12-8)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 81/497
2. The City Council shall receive the Sheriff's Office report and consider the application within forty five (45) days of the date the application was
submitted to the City Clerk. (Prior Code § 7-12-8; amd. 2018 Code)
3. The City Council shall, by resolution, approve or disapprove the application within sixty (60) days of receipt of the application.
4. The City Council shall only approve an application for issuance or renewal of a premises permit if there is compliance with all of the following
requirements: (Prior Code § 7-12-8)
a. The gambling organization shall not have been found to have violated any State Statute, State rule, or this Code relating to gambling within the
last three (3) years.
b. The establishment for which the premises permit is to be issued or the organization leasing the premises for gambling shall not have been found
to have violated any State Statute, State rule, or this Code relating to the operation of the establishment including, but not limited to, laws relating
to the operation of the establishment, laws relating to alcoholic beverages, gambling, controlled substances, suppression of vice and protection of
public safety within the last three (3) years.
c. The gambling organization has been in existence in the trade area for at least three (3) consecutive years prior to the date of application.
d. The gambling organization shall have at least fifteen (15) active members.
e. Lawful gambling subject to the requirements of this chapter shall be limited and will not take place at a premises the gambling organization owns
or rents.
f. Lawful gambling subject to the requirements of this chapter shall be limited to premises for which an on-sale liquor license has been issued.
g. Not more than one gambling organization licensed to conduct lawful gambling activities subject to the requirements of this chapter shall conduct
lawful gambling at any one premises.
F. Term Of Permit: Local premises permits shall be valid for one year after the date of issuance unless suspended or revoked. (Prior Code § 7-12-9)
G. Revocation Or Suspension Of Permit:
1. A local permit may be revoked or temporarily suspended for a violation by the gambling organization of any State Statute, State rule, or City
ordinance relating to gambling.
2. A license shall not be revoked or suspended until notice and an opportunity for a hearing have first been given to the permitted person. The notice
shall be sent by certified mail and shall state the provision reasonably believed to be violated. The notice shall also state that the permitted person
may demand a hearing on the matter, in which case, the permit will not be suspended until after the hearing is held. If the permitted person requests
a hearing, the City Council shall hold a hearing on the matter at least one week after the date on which the request is made. If, as a result of the
hearing, the Council finds that an ordinance violation exists, then the Council may suspend or revoke the permit. (Prior Code § 7-12-10)
4-7-7: CHANGES IN APPLICATION INFORMATION:
An organization holding a State issued premises permit or a local permit shall notify the City within ten (10) days in writing whenever any material change
is made in the information submitted on the application. (Prior Code § 7-12-12)
4-7-8: DISPLAY OF PERMITS:
All permits issued under State law or this chapter shall be prominently displayed during the permit year at the premises where gambling is conducted.
(Prior Code § 7-12-11)
4-7-9: LAWFUL PURPOSE EXPENDITURES IN DESIGNATED TRADE AREA:
A. Each organization licensed to conduct gambling within the City shall expend one hundred percent (100%) of its lawful purpose expenditures on lawful
purposes conducted within the City's trade area.
B. This section applies only to lawful purpose expenditures of gross profits derived from gambling conducted at a premises within the City's jurisdiction.
(Prior Code § 7-12-14)
4-7-10: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
A. Organizations conducting lawful gambling shall file with the City Clerk one copy of all records and reports required to be filed with the board, pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes chapter 349, as amended from time to time, and rules adopted pursuant thereto, as may be amended from time to time. The
records and reports shall be filed on or before the day they are required to be filed with the board.
B. Organizations licensed by the board shall file a report with the City proving compliance with the trade area spending requirements imposed by section
4-7-9 of this chapter. Such report shall be made on a form prescribed by the City and shall be submitted annually and in advance of application for
renewal. (Prior Code § 7-12-15)
4-7-11: DISTRIBUTION OF PROCEEDS:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 82/497
A. Each organization licensed to conduct lawful gambling within the City pursuant to Minnesota Statutes section 349.16, as amended from time to time,
shall contribute ten percent (10%) of its net profits derived from lawful gambling in the City to a fund administered and regulated by the City without cost
to the fund.
B. Payment required by subsection A of this section shall be made within thirty (30) days of the end of each quarter of the year.
C. The City shall disburse the funds for lawful purposes as defined by Minnesota Statutes section 349.12, subdivision 25, as amended from time to time.
D. The City's use of such funds collected pursuant to subsection A of this section shall be determined by resolution of the City Council. (Prior Code § 7-12-
13)
4-7-12: DAYS AND HOURS OF OPERATION:
Lawful gambling shall not be conducted between two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on any day of the week. (Prior Code § 7-12-16)
4-7-13: MISDEMEANOR VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter; Minnesota Statutes sections 609.75 to 609.763, inclusive, as amended from time to time; or
Minnesota Statutes sections 349.11 to 349.23, as amended from time to time, or any rules promulgated under those sections, as may be amended from
time to time, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be as established in section 1-4-1 of this Code. In addition, violations shall be reported to the board
and recommendation shall be made for suspension, revocation, or cancellation of an organization's license. (Prior Code § 7-12-17; amd. 2018 Code)
Chapter 8
MASSAGE BUSINESSES AND SERVICES
4-8-1: PURPOSE:
Massage services are subject to abuses which are contrary to the morals, health, safety and general welfare of the community. Control of these abuses
requires intensive efforts of the City law enforcement, as well as other departments of the City. These efforts exceed those required to control and regulate
other business activities licensed by the City. This concentrated use of City services tends to detract from and reduce the level of service available to the
rest of the community and thereby diminishes the ability of the City to promote the general health, welfare, morals, and safety of the community. (Ord.
2017-01, 1-9-2017)
4-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
HEALTHCARE FACILITY OR PROVIDER: Any person providing medical, surgical, dental, chiropractic or osteopathic services, or physical therapy
services pursuant to a prescription therefor, wherein practitioners are licensed by the State, such as, but not limited to, a hospital, sanitarium, rest home,
nursing home, boarding home, or other institution for the hospitalization or care of human beings duly licensed under the provisions of Minnesota Statutes
sections 144.50 to 144.69.
MASSAGE: The method of treating the superficial parts of the human body of another by rubbing, pressing, stroking, kneading, tapping, pounding,
vibrating, or stimulating with the hands or any instrument for hire or for consideration with the intention of positively affecting the health and well being of
the client. The term "massage" shall not include such activities when performed exclusively on a person's hand and/or foot in conjunction with a manicure
or pedicure.
MASSAGE BUSINESS: The offering of massage services to the general public, regardless of whether the offer is limited only to select invitees or
organizational members.
MASSEUR: A male person who practices or administers massage.
MASSEUSE: A female person who practices or administers massage.
OPERATE: To own, manage or conduct.
SANITARY: Free from pathogenic microorganisms. (Ord. 2017-01, 1-9-2017)
4-8-3: LICENSES REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS:
A. Licenses Required:
1. Except as may otherwise be provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a massage business or to personally perform
massage services or to hold one's self out as being a masseur or masseuse within the City unless such business or individual performing massage
services is currently licensed under this chapter.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 83/497
2. Employees of a massage business must be separately licensed to perform personal massage services under this chapter if they perform such
services.
3. A separate license shall be obtained for each place of business. The licensee shall display the license in a prominent place in the licensed business
at all times.
B. Exemptions:
1. The following people and businesses are exempt from the provisions of this chapter while performing activities covered by their professional licenses
or professional affiliations:
a. People licensed by the State of Minnesota to practice medicine, surgery, osteopathy, chiropractic, physical therapy, occupational therapy, podiatry,
and nursing, and people working solely for and under the direction of those individuals;
b. Athletic trainers, certified by the National Association of Athletic Trainers (NAAT), when working with an amateur, semiprofessional or professional
athlete or athletic team;
c. Beauty culturists and barbers licensed by the State of Minnesota who do not hold themselves out to give massages, other than that customarily
given in the field and limited to the face, neck and scalp for beautification purposes only; and
d. Healthcare facilities.
2. No business license shall be required for any premises where massage is offered as an accessory use or secondary use if it meets the following
criteria as evidenced by affidavits and other documents submitted to and reasonably acceptable to the City:
a. The principal activity of the business shall not be massage.
b. No more than thirty five percent (35%) of the establishment's annual gross revenue shall be derived from massage as shown by financial
statements certified as being true and correct by an independent certified public accountant.
(1) Such statements shall be filed each year with the Zoning Administrator by the person who operates the business establishment.
(2) Such filing shall be made within thirty (30) days of the end of the establishment's fiscal year and shall be for the fiscal year just completed.
(3) The Zoning Administrator may require additional or more frequent financial filings when deemed to be necessary to determine compliance with
this subsection B2.
c. All persons performing massage must possess a valid license issued by the City in accordance with this chapter.
d. The rooms where massage is performed shall not have an exclusive entrance from or exit to the exterior of the building in which the principal
business is located or to a public concourse or public lobby.
e. All fees or other consideration derived from performing massage shall be received by and be accounted for by the proprietor of the principal
business.
f. All individuals performing massage in connection with the business shall be employees of the principal business or shall be independent
contractors or agents who perform massage pursuant to a written agreement with the owner of the principal business.
3. A person or organization providing temporary massage services such as "chair massage" is not required to obtain a massage business license if the
following requirements are met:
a. The massage is provided in a place of business where the massage can easily be seen by any employee or visitor on the premises;
b. The location does not hold a license to sell alcoholic beverages;
c. Massages are offered at the location no more than ten (10) days per calendar year;
d. Each recipient of a massage remains in an upright position, either sitting or standing; and
e. Each recipient of a massage remains in the normal daytime attire worn when entering the business and does not remove any clothing, except
outerwear, such as a coat or jacket. (Ord. 2017-01, 1-9-2017)
4-8-4: APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSES:
Application for a massage therapy center license shall be made on forms provided by the Zoning Administrator and shall contain:
A. Business License:
1. A description of the property to be used.
2. Whether the operator is a natural person, a corporation, limited liability company, a partnership, or other form of organization.
a. If the operator is a natural person:
(1) The true name, place and date of birth, address and phone number of the operator.
(2) Whether the operator has ever used or has been known by a name other than his true name, and, if so, what was such name and information
concerning dates and places where used.
(3) The name of the business if it is to be conducted under a designation, name or style other than the full individual name of the operator; in such
case, a certified copy of the certificate, as required by Minnesota Statutes chapter 333, shall be attached to the application.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 84/497
(4) The street address at which the operator has lived during the preceding five (5) years.
(5) The kind, name and location of every business or occupation the operator has been engaged in during the preceding five (5) years.
(6) The names and addresses of the operator's employers and partners, if any, for the preceding five (5) years.
(7) Whether the operator has ever been convicted of any felony or other crime or violation of any ordinance other than traffic ordinances. If so, the
operator shall furnish information as to the time, place and offense for which convictions were had.
(8) The physical description of the operator.
(9) The operator's training or experience in performing massage services.
(10) The name of the manager or proprietor or other agent in charge of the business to be licensed.
b. If the operator is a partnership:
(1) The names, addresses and interest of all partners and all information concerning each partner as is required of an individual applicant in
subsection A2a of this section.
(2) The name of the manager or proprietor or other agent in charge of the business to be licensed.
(3) A true copy of the partnership agreement, which shall be submitted with the application. If the partnership is required to file a certificate as to a
trade name under the provisions of Minnesota Statutes chapter 333, a certified copy of such certificate shall also be attached.
c. If the operator is a corporation, limited liability company or other organization:
(1) The name and, if incorporated, the state of incorporation.
(2) A true copy of the certificate of incorporation, articles of incorporation, certificate of limited liability company, association agreement, and
bylaws, which shall be attached to the application. If a foreign corporation, a certificate of authority, as described in Minnesota Statutes chapter
303, shall also be attached.
(3) The name of the manager or proprietor or other agent in charge of the business to be licensed and all information concerning such persons as
is required in subsection A2a of this section.
(4) A list of all persons who are officers or directors of the corporation, limited liability company, or organization or who control or own an interest in
excess of five percent (5%) in such corporation or organization, and all information concerning such persons as is required in subsection A2a of
this section.
B. Personal Service Licenses:
1. All information required under subsection A2a of this section.
2. Proof acceptable to the City that the operator:
a. Has current insurance coverage as required by this chapter;
b. Is affiliated with, employed by, or owns a massage business licensed by the City or is exempt from such requirement; and
c. Has completed four hundred (400) hours of either certified therapeutic massage training under a massage training program whose standards are
verifiable and acceptable to the City, or the City, in its discretion, may waive the four hundred (400) hour requirement if the operator, masseur or
masseuse can demonstrate equivalent and independently verifiable job training experience.
C. Additional Information:
1. The names of those individuals to be licensed and working for the operator who may work in the City.
2. Whether the operator is licensed in other communities to run similar businesses, and, if so, where.
3. Whether the operator has previously been denied a massage license or had such a license or permit suspended or revoked, along with an
explanation of any such denial, suspension or revocation.
4. The names, residences, and business addresses of three (3) residents of Wright County, of good moral character, not related to the operator or
financially interested in the premises or business, who may be referred to as to the applicant's and/or manager's character.
5. Documents establishing the operator's interest in the premises on which the business will be located in the form of a lease, a deed, a contract for
deed or any other document which establishes the applicant's interest.
6. Such other information as the City may require.
D. Signatures Required: The application for license shall be signed and sworn to. If the application is by a natural person, it shall be signed and sworn to
by such person; if by a partnership, by one of the partners; if by a corporation, by an officer with authority and if by an unincorporated association, by
the manager or managing officer thereof.
E. Fees: The application investigation and license fees set forth by section 3-1-2 of this Code shall be paid when the application is filed. (Ord. 2017-01, 1-
9-2017)
4-8-5: REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS; ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF LICENSES:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 85/497
A. 1. Complete applications shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator for verification and investigation of the facts set forth in the application.
2. The application shall be referred to the building official, or to such other departments or the Wright County Sheriff's Office as the Zoning
Administrator shall deem necessary.
3. Operators for a license under this chapter shall be subject to a criminal history background investigation, as required by section 1-6-2 of this Code
and processed in accordance with section 1-6-3 of this Code.
4. The Zoning Administrator may conduct or authorize such additional investigation as he reasonably deems necessary. (Ord. 2017-01, 1-9-2017)
B. The Zoning Administrator, within sixty (60) days from the date of receiving a complete application, shall make the determination whether to approve or
deny the license. Any denial shall be communicated to the operator in writing specifying the reasons for denial. (Ord. 2017-01, 1-9-2017; amd. 2018
Code)
C. The following conditions govern the issuance of licenses:
1. Issuance If Free Of Convictions: Licenses shall be issued only if the operator and all of its owners, managers, employees and agents are free of
convictions for offenses which involve moral turpitude or which relate directly to such person's ability, capacity or fitness to perform the duties and
discharge the responsibilities of the licensed activity.
2. Issuance If License Not Previously Revoked: Licenses shall be issued only to operators who have not, within one year prior to the date of
application, been denied licensure or who have not, within such period, had a same or similar license revoked. A license may be denied for previous
revocation or denial more than one year prior to application if the reasons for previous revocation or denial are of such nature as to disqualify the
applicant from operating within the City, as determined at the sole discretion of the City.
3. All Information Received: Licenses shall be issued only to operators who have provided all of the information requested in the application, have paid
the full license fee and investigation fee, and have cooperated with the City in review of the application.
4. License Granted: If the operator is a natural person, a license shall be granted only if such person is eighteen (18) years of age or older.
5. List Of Masseurs And Masseuses: The licensee shall furnish the Zoning Administrator with a list of all masseurs and masseuses working at the
business, indicating their names and addresses. The licensee shall promptly notify the Zoning Administrator of any change in the list.
6. Personal Services License: No operator shall employ or use any person as a masseur or masseuse unless such person is licensed for performing
personal services by the City.
7. Age Requirement: No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall be employed in an establishment requiring a license under the provisions of this
chapter.
8. Insurance: The operator shall maintain and provide proof to the City in the form of insurance policies or certificates of insurance acceptable to the
City, and issued by insurance companies authorized to do business in the State having a minimum Best's Key Guide of A-VII, or as approved by the
City, for the following policies:
a. Professional liability in the practice of massage for a minimum limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
b. General liability for bodily injury and property damage liability with minimum combined single limits as follows:
(1) General aggregate: Three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00).
(2) Each occurrence: Three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00).
(3) Medical expense:
(A) Each person: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
(B) Aggregate: Ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
c. Workers' compensation and employers' liability as required by the State.
d. Should any of the policies be canceled or not renewed before the expiration date thereof, the issuing company shall mail thirty (30) days' written
notice to the Zoning Administrator, except such notice shall be ten (10) days for nonpayment of premium.
9. Locations Allowed: Licenses may be granted only for locations allowed by the zoning ordinance.
10. Code Requirements: Licenses shall be granted only to establishments which meet the Safety, Sanitary, and Building Code requirements of the City.
11. Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited: No license shall be issued for massage services upon a premises currently licensed in accordance with this
chapter for on- or off-sale liquor sales, and no alcoholic beverages shall be stored, possessed or consumed upon the property.
12. Soliciting Business Prohibited: No operator shall solicit business in any public place or in any licensed liquor establishment within the City. If a
license is under suspension or revocation, the licensee or former licensee, as the case may be, shall not solicit business or offer or agree to perform
massage services, nor shall any business licensee affected by a suspension or revocation of such license allow, encourage, or direct any employee
to solicit business or offer or agree to perform massage services within the City.
13. Activity Prohibited: No operator, whether as a licensee or employee or agent thereof or otherwise, shall engage or offer to engage in any specified
sexual activity, as defined in section 11-2-2 of this Code, engage or offer to engage in any activity prohibited by statute, ordinance, regulation or rule,
on the licensed premises or in connection with a massage or massage business.
14. Reasonable Conditions: Where a reasonable basis is found by the Zoning Administrator, additional reasonable conditions and restrictions on the
manner and circumstances under which the licensed activity shall be conducted may be required to preserve the public peace and protect and
promote the public's health, safety, welfare, good order and security.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 86/497
15. Inspection:
a. The operator shall permit and allow the inspection of the premises during business hours by all appropriate City agents including, but not limited
to, building inspection, zoning administration, and Sheriff's deputies.
b. Upon demand by any Sheriff's deputy, any person employed in any licensed premises shall identify himself by giving his true legal name and his
correct address.
D. The licensee shall have a continuing duty to immediately disclose to the City any change in the information supplied in the application.
E. Each license issued under this chapter shall be issued to the operator only and shall not be transferable to another operator or location. (Ord. 2017-01,
1-9-2017)
4-8-6: RENEWAL LICENSES:
A. Term Of Renewal; Expiration: Each license shall be issued for a maximum period of one year. (Ord. 2019-01, 1-28-2019)
B. Application For Renewal: Applications for the renewal of an existing license shall be made at least sixty (60) days prior to the date of the expiration of
the license, and shall state that everything in the prior applications remains true and correct, except as otherwise indicated. If, in the judgment of the
City Council, good and sufficient cause is shown by any operator for their failure to file for a renewal within the time period provided, the City Council
may, if there is compliance with other provisions of this chapter, grant the application. (Ord. 2017-01, 1-9-2017)
4-8-7: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
A. Compliance With Law: The licensee and the persons in its employ shall comply with all applicable regulations and laws of the City, Wright County, and
State of Minnesota relating to massage therapy service and to public health, safety, and morals.
B. Manager: If the licensee is a partnership, a corporation, or limited liability company, the operator shall designate a person to be manager and in
responsible charge of the business. The manager shall remain responsible for the conduct of the business until another suitable person has been
designated in writing by the licensee. The licensee shall promptly notify the Zoning Administrator in writing of any such change, indicating the name
and address of the new manager, and the effective date of such change.
C. Hours: Except with respect to healthcare facilities or providers, no patrons shall be allowed to enter or remain upon the licensed premises, nor shall any
massage or massage business be offered or conducted, after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and before eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. daily.
D. Required Clothing:
1. The person who is receiving the massage shall at all times have his anus and genitals covered with a nontransparent covering applicable to the
person's sex.
2. Any masseur performing any massages shall at all times have his anus, buttocks and genitals covered with a nontransparent material.
3. Any masseuse performing massages shall at all times have her breasts, buttocks, anus and genitals covered with a nontransparent material.
4. Every employee of any licensee shall at all times be covered and have his or her anus and genitals covered with a nontransparent covering
applicable to the employee's sex.
E. Construction Requirements:
1. All massage rooms, locker rooms, restrooms and bathrooms used in connection with a massage business shall be constructed of smooth and easily
cleanable materials which are resistant to moisture, bacteria, mold or fungus growth. The floor to wall and wall to wall joints shall be constructed to
provide a sanitary cove with a minimum radius of one inch (1").
2. There shall be a restroom(s) provided within the licensed premises, or within the tenant suite of a multiple occupancy business, for exclusive use by
the massage business. All restrooms shall be provided with mechanical ventilation with two (2) cfm per square foot of floor area, a hand washing sink
equipped with hot and cold running water under pressure, sanitary towels, and a soap dispenser.
3. All rooms in the licensed premises, including, but not limited to, massage rooms, restrooms, bathrooms, janitor's closet, hallways, reception areas
and any room used by customers, shall be illuminated with not less than thirty (30) foot-candles of illumination.
4. Each establishment shall have a janitor's closet that shall provide for the storage of cleaning supplies.
5. Individual lockers may be made available for use by patrons of massage therapy businesses. Such lockers shall have separate keys for locking.
6. Such establishments shall provide adequate refuse receptacles which shall be emptied as required.
7. Doors on massage rooms shall not be locked or capable of being locked; no locks, latches or other devices intended to secure a door so as to
prevent its being opened by any person from either side of the door with or without a key may be present on any doors on massage rooms.
8. All massage rooms shall be clearly identified by signs.
F. Maintenance:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 87/497
1. Floors, walls and equipment in massage rooms, restrooms and bathrooms used in connection with the massage business must be kept in a state of
good repair and sanitary at all times.
2. Linens and other materials shall be stored at least six inches (6") off the floor.
3. Sanitary towels, washcloths, cleaning agents and toilet tissue must be made available for each customer. (Ord. 2017-01, 1-9-2017)
4-8-8: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSES:
A. Authority: The Zoning Administrator may suspend or revoke a license issued under this chapter on the basis of the following:
1. Failure to comply with any City, County or State ordinances, rules, and statutes or condition of the license.
2. Control or possession by the owner, manager, lessee or any employee of the massage business of any alcoholic beverages or narcotic drugs or
controlled substances on the premises, possession of which is illegal as defined by State Statutes or City ordinances.
3. Conviction of the owner, manager, lessee, operator, or any employee of the massage business of a violation of any ordinance or State Statute or any
rule promulgated under either, arising on the premises to which the license was granted under this chapter.
4. Conviction of the owner, manager, lessee, operator, or any employee of the massage business of prostitution or any other crime or violation involving
moral turpitude or sexual misconduct on the licensed premises.
5. Failure to promptly notify the Zoning Administrator of any change in the information or facts required to be submitted in connection with an
application for a license.
6. Failure of the premises to be in compliance with the health, safety, and building regulations of the City.
7. Presence of the massage business being found to be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of the City.
8. Evidence of a material variance, without prior approval of the Zoning Administrator, in the actual plan and design of the premises when initially
licensed.
B. Procedure:
1. At any time that the Zoning Administrator shall determine that any operator licensed under this chapter shall have failed to comply with any
requirement of law or with any provision of this Code or other ordinance, he shall notify the licensee in writing of such violation and require
compliance with the said provisions of any requirement, law or ordinance in accordance with subsection 1-5-3A of this Code.
2. Upon expiration of such time, unless the licensee shall have requested an appeal, in writing, the Zoning Administrator may thereafter terminate such
license for violation of this chapter or any requirement, law, or ordinance. (Ord. 2017-01, 1-9-2017)
C. Suspension Pending Revocation Hearing: The Zoning Administrator may suspend a license pending a hearing on revocation, for a period not
exceeding thirty (30) days, by notifying the licensee in writing of such suspension to be delivered by the U.S. mail to the address stated on the license
application. (Ord. 2017-01, 1-9-2017; amd. 2018 Code)
D. Appeals: A licensee may appeal the decision of the Zoning Administrator that a violation has occurred or a decision to revoke a license in accordance
with the procedures established by subsection 1-5-4A of this Code. (Ord. 2017-01, 1-9-2017)
4-8-9: NO REFUND OF LICENSE FEES:
In the event that the application for license is denied or if the issued license is revoked, canceled, suspended, or surrendered, no part of the license fee
shall be returned to the applicant. (Ord. 2017-01, 1-9-2017)
4-8-10: MISDEMEANOR VIOLATIONS:
Every person who commits or attempts to commit, conspires to commit or aids or abets in the commission of any act constituting a violation of this chapter
or any rule promulgated hereunder, whether individually or in connection with one or more other persons, or as principal, agent, or accessory, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. Every person who falsely, fraudulently, forcibly or wilfully induces, causes, coerces, permits or directs another to violate any of the
provisions of this chapter or any rule promulgated hereunder is likewise guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2017-01, 1-9-2017)
Chapter 9
MINING
4-9-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the community and to establish reasonable uniform limitations, standards,
safeguards and controls for excavation and mining within the City. (Prior Code § 7-7-1)
4-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 88/497
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings respectively ascribed to them:
MINE OR EXCAVATION: A. Any removal of the exposed layer of the earth's surface or the removal of any layer of soil under the exposed layer of the
earth's surface, whether sod, dirt, topsoil, sand, gravel, soil, stone, or minerals performed with the intent of moving the same to another site as a raw
material or processed product.
B. Any area where the topsoil or overburden has been removed for the purpose of mining earthly deposits or minerals, yet the area has remained idle
since the topsoil removal.
C. Any area that is being used for stockpiling, storage, and processing of sand, gravel, black dirt, clay and other minerals.
OVERBURDEN: Those materials which lie between the surface of the earth and material deposit to be extracted.
REHABILITATION: To renew land to self-sustaining long term use which is compatible with contiguous land uses, present and future, in accordance with
the standards set forth in this chapter.
TOPSOIL: That portion of the overburden which lies closest to the earth's surface and supports the growth of vegetation. (Prior Code § 7-7-2)
4-9-3: PERMIT REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS:
A. Permit Required: Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for anyone to operate a mine or excavate without having first
obtained a written permit from the City authorizing the same in accordance with this chapter. Mining and excavation operations that predate this
chapter shall obtain a permit within six (6) months after the effective date hereof. (Prior Code § 7-7-3)
B. Exemptions: The following activities do not require a permit under this chapter:
1. Excavation for a foundation, cellar, or basement of a building if a building permit has been issued.
2. Grading a lot in conjunction with building if a building permit has been issued.
3. Excavation by the Federal, State, County or City government in connection with construction or maintenance of roads, highways, or utilities. This
exemption applies only to Federal, State, County, or City government projects which have received plan and specification approval by the City as
part of their plan review process.
4. Curb cuts, utility hookups, or street openings for which another permit has been issued by the City.
5. Excavation or grading for agricultural purposes.
6. Excavation or grading in accordance with a development contract approved under the City's subdivision ordinance. If the development contract
requires that a letter of credit or other security be posted, the letter of credit or other security must be posted before any excavation takes place.
7. Excavations of less than five hundred (500) cubic yards in a calendar year. (Prior Code § 7-7-4)
4-9-4: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
A. An application for a mine or excavation permit shall be processed in accordance with the same procedures and requirements specified in this Code
relating to conditional use permits. If conflicts occur between this chapter and the requirements for a conditional use permit as defined by this Code,
this chapter shall prevail. An application for a conditional use permit is also required to be submitted for mining activities in conjunction with an
application for a mining permit.
B. An application for a mine or excavation permit shall contain:
1. Application Form: A completed application form.
2. Fees: The required fees.
3. Cover Sheet: The cover sheet shall be twenty two inches by thirty four inches (22" x 34") in size and be utilized to depict general items relevant to
the project and plan set. As a minimum, the cover sheet shall contain the following:
a. Title of the project.
b. Sheet index for the plan set.
c. Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the record owner(s), those in possession of vendees under contract for deed, any agent having
control of the land, the applicant, land surveyor, geologist, engineer and preparer of the plan set.
d. A location of vicinity map, at a scale of one inch equals two thousand feet (1" = 2,000') or approved other, which depicts the project site relevant to
major roadways and other significant surrounding features. A north arrow and scale shall be shown.
4. Site Plan:
a. Generally: A standard twenty two inch by thirty four inch (22" x 34") plan sheet shall be utilized for depicting required site plan data. A grid shall be
incorporated onto the site plan to establish a coordinate system for referencing specific items on the plan. The site plan shall be at a scale of one
inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') with a contour interval of one foot (1'). The site plan shall contain a north arrow, graphic scale, and date of
preparation.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 89/497
b. Existing Conditions: As a minimum, the following items shall be depicted on the site plan:
(1) Boundary lines to include bearings, distances, curve data, and total acreage of the site.
(2) Existing zoning classifications for land in and abutting the site.
(3) Location, right-of-way width and names of existing or platted streets or other public ways, parks and other public lands, permanent buildings
and structures, easements and corporate lines. The aforementioned items shall be shown for the site and of all land located within three
hundred fifty feet (350') of the boundary of the site.
(4) Location and sizes of underground utilities, culverts and other below grade structures and facilities within the site area and to a distance of one
hundred feet (100') beyond the site's boundaries.
(5) Watercourses, marshes, wooded areas, rock outcrops, power transmission poles and lines, telephone poles and lines and other related surface
items which will affect the mining operation.
(6) Location of exploratory subsurface borings and tests to ascertain subsurface soil, rock and groundwater conditions. This shall be done to
augment test results submitted with the application.
(7) 100-year flood elevations, floodway and flood fringe areas.
(8) Wetlands in or within one hundred feet (100') of the site.
(9) Names, addresses and PID numbers of all property owners within three hundred fifty feet (350') of the property if located within platted areas of
the City or within five hundred feet (500') of the property if located in nonplatted areas of the City.
(10) A certificate of survey prepared by a professional land surveyor licensed in the State of Minnesota. The certificate shall include the legal
description of the property, a signed statement of certification, the registration number of the preparer, and date prepared.
c. Proposed Mining Features:
(1) Location of proposed permanent and temporary structures to be utilized in the operation. This shall include sanitary facilities, offices, trash
receptacles, processing plants and living quarters.
(2) Parking areas for employee vehicles and related equipment.
(3) Vehicular circulation plan for the site.
(4) Grading plan which depicts the limits of the material extraction from the site with a minimum of one foot (1') contours.
(5) Intermittent erosion and sedimentation control method.
(6) Location of temporary and permanent fencing and gates.
(7) Drainage swales, culverts or other devices utilized for routing off site flows around the site.
(8) Those areas of the site to be utilized for storage of topsoil and overburden.
(9) Yearly limits or extraction if operation is scheduled to last longer than one year.
5. Closure/Rehabilitation Plan: The closure/rehabilitation plan shall contain the same information as required for the site plan without showing the
proposed mining features. The plan shall contain the following additional items:
a. Proposed final contours at one foot (1') intervals. Typical grades shall be noted for all slopes.
b. Those areas of the site to be utilized for storage of topsoil and overburden if staged restoration is planned.
c. Areas of revegetation shall be noted. Areas to be landscaped and type of landscaping shall be noted.
d. Limits of staged restoration if mining operations are scheduled to last longer than one year.
e. All items required by the current City zoning ordinance for the proposed use of the land.
f. The closure/rehabilitation plan shall be updated and submitted as an as built drawing upon completion of site restoration procedures.
6. Cross Sections:
a. Cross sections shall be drawn to depict pre-mining grades, proposed post-mining grades and proposed closure/rehabilitation grades. Cross
sections shall be drawn both horizontally and vertically with reference to the site plan grid. Cross sections shall be evenly spaced across the
extraction site as depicted on the site plan and have an interval spacing of fifty feet (50') maximum. A minimum of three (3) cross sections each
way shall be depicted.
b. All cross sections shall be referenced to the grid system shown on the site plan. The scale for the cross sections shall be one inch equals fifty feet
(1" = 50') horizontal and one inch equals five feet (1" = 5') vertical. Cross sections shall be drawn on twenty two inch by thirty four inch (22" x 34")
mylar.
c. The cross sections shall be updated and resubmitted upon completion of mining or extraction operations and upon completion of
closure/rehabilitation procedures.
7. Traffic Control Plan: A traffic control plan shall be submitted for all operations which will access onto a public roadway. The traffic control plan shall
conform substantially to the latest edition of the Minnesota Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways as published by the
Minnesota Department of Transportation. The plan shall be prepared by a professional civil engineer and contain the following:
a. Generally: A standard twenty two inch by thirty four inch (22" x 34") plan sheet shall be utilized to depict the following information:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 90/497
(1) North arrow.
(2) Scale.
(3) Title block.
(4) Name, address, telephone number, and registration number of person responsible for preparing the plan.
(5) Location map.
b. Plan: The plan portion of the traffic control plan shall depict the following:
(1) Roadway right-of-way width for all affected roadways.
(2) Roadway width and asphalt width of all roadways affected.
(3) Location and type of traffic control signs, signals, markings, barricades, channelizing devices, lighting devices and flagging personnel. Location
shall be in reference to roadway intersections, and type shall reference the Mn/MUTCD.
(4) Notes referencing minimum mandatory requirements as dictated by the Mn/MUTCD.
(5) Details for each type of traffic control sign or device utilized.
8. Narrative: A narrative shall be provided to augment the required plan sheets. The narrative shall be prepared, signed and dated by a professional
civil engineer. The narrative shall be titled, dated and referenced to the permit application. As a minimum, the following items must be discussed in
the narrative:
a. A time schedule for completion of all mining related activities. This shall include the start date, extraction completion date, and final
closure/rehabilitation date. A schedule of typical hours of operation during the day shall be discussed, and typical days of the week and typical
weeks of the year shall be submitted.
b. A description and quantity of material to be excavated. This shall be documented by a sieve analysis, test hole logs and gradation curve
performed by certified and independent testing laboratory. The quantity of material shall be on a per year basis if mining operations are scheduled
to last longer than one year.
c. The depth of the water table throughout the area. This shall be documented by boring lots recorded by a certified and independent testing
laboratory.
d. The purpose and plan of operation. This shall include a description of the nature of any plants, source of water and means of water disposal.
e. Travel routes to and from the site. This shall be augmented with a legible sketch depicting the same.
f. A plan for drainage control. This shall include an analysis of the impact of the mining operation on the watershed drainage. Drainage calculations
utilizing the SCS method of determining flows and pond sizing shall be provided for review.
g. A plan for mitigating water runoff erosion shall be detailed for the site. This shall include erosion control methods to be utilized during the mining
operation and during rehabilitation of the site. A material list shall be provided for a typical erosion control strategy. The proposed use of silt fences,
straw bales, etc., shall be discussed.
h. A dust control strategy shall be discussed and include the following: type of equipment to be utilized, supply of water or other dust preventative
material to be utilized, where equipment is to be stored and location of water supply. These items shall be discussed as they apply to the site and
to haul routes and streets.
i. A street maintenance and haul material spill cleanup plan. This shall include equipment such as shovels, brooms, etc., which will be utilized for off
site cleanup. The location that vehicles and equipment will be stored. The personnel to be utilized for spill cleanup (i.e., will the same personnel
utilized for mining operations be utilized for cleanup operations?). Typical schedules for maintenance of streets and roadways shall be discussed.
j. A plan for storing topsoil and preventing wind erosion of the same.
k. A plan for preventing wind erosion at the site. This shall include standard details depicting erosion control methods such as blankets, dust
prevention materials, etc.
l. A discussion of the proposed use of the land following closure/ rehabilitation of the site.
m. A closure/rehabilitation plan which will provide for the orderly and continuing rehabilitation of all disturbed areas. Typical details may be included
and the site rehabilitation plan referenced in the narrative. The narrative shall discuss, as a minimum, the following:
(1) If fill material is to be imported to eliminate low areas, a gradation curve shall be provided for the imported soil.
(2) The type and extent of landscaping to be utilized.
(3) The timetable for which site closure/rehabilitation is to occur. This shall include dates for finalizing grading, dates for planting and seeding, and
dates for completion of erosion control methods. A generalized schedule shall be provided describing frequency of return visits to the site for
continuing maintenance. If mining operations are scheduled to continue longer than one year, a staged restoration plan shall be discussed.
(4) The type of erosion control and sedimentation control to be utilized between final grading and turf establishment.
n. Special conditions which may be specified to the site.
9. Attachments: The following shall be attached to the application for permit:
a. Soil logs. Soil logs shall be prepared by a certified and independent testing agency. The test bores shall be performed in the quantity required by
this regulation. Each test bore shall show, as a minimum requirement, the following:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 91/497
(1) Depth of bore.
(2) Soil stratifications.
(3) Type of soil for each stratification.
(4) High water mark.
(5) Existing water table.
b. Sieve analysis. A sieve analysis shall be performed at each test bore location on the material to be mined. A gradation curve shall then be plotted
and the results submitted with the soil logs.
c. A certified abstract listing the names of all landowners owning property within three hundred fifty feet (350') of the boundary of the subject property
if located within platted areas of the City or within five hundred feet (500') of the property if located in nonplatted areas of the City.
d. A written right of entry which cannot be terminated for one year after the anticipated closure date to the City for its officers or agents to enter the
land for the purpose of determining compliance with all applicable conditions imposed on the operation. The right of entry shall be submitted with
the application for permit. One set of keys to locked gates utilized for limiting site access shall be delivered to the City.
e. The plan set shall be submitted to all affected agencies for their review and comments related to the proposed mining activities. The applicant
shall be responsible for submitting any other required items to the individual agencies for their review. Prior to a mining permit being issued,
comment letters must be received from the following agencies:
(1) Wright County Highway Department.
(2) Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
(3) Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
(4) Minnesota Department of Transportation.
(5) United States Army Corps of Engineers.
(6) Other affected agencies.
f. A complete photographic log shall be submitted with the application for permit by the operator. Photographs shall be taken at close enough range
to allow for details of key items to be identified. A legend shall be supplied with each photograph describing the view depicted. Each photograph
shall contain a point of reference which will not be disturbed during mining operations for later use in site analysis. The photographs shall detail the
following:
(1) Existing on site conditions and significant features.
(2) Site perimeter with views depicting adjacent properties.
(3) Downstream drainage facilities which may be affected by mining operations.
(4) Site access and views of the roadway accessed in the immediate vicinity of the access point. (Prior Code § 7-7-5)
4-9-5: REVIEW OF APPLICATION; APPROVAL OF PLAN:
The City Council shall review the permit application and shall approve the permit if it is in compliance with this chapter, the City zoning ordinance and other
applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations. The Council may attach conditions to the permit approval to promote safety and prevent nuisance conditions.
The rehabilitation plan shall only be approved if it is consistent with the uses allowed in the City Comprehensive Plan and zoning ordinance. (Prior Code
§ 7-7-6)
4-9-6: AGREEMENT AND FINANCIAL GUARANTEE:
Prior to the approval and issuance of a permit, there shall be executed by the operator and submitted to the City Clerk an agreement to construct such
required improvements, to dedicate such property or easements, if any, to the City and to comply with such conditions as may have been established by
the City Council. Such agreement shall be accompanied by a financial guarantee acceptable to the City Zoning Administrator in the amount of the
established costs of complying with the agreement. The said guarantee shall be in the form of a certified check or irrevocable letter of credit, and shall be
provided for guaranteeing completion and compliance with the conditions set forth in the permit within the time approved by the City Council. The
adequacy, conditions and acceptability of any certified check or irrevocable letter of credit shall be determined by the City Zoning Administrator and shall
be reviewed annually by the City. The City may direct the amount of the financial guarantee to be increased to reflect inflation or changed conditions. The
City shall determine the required amount of the financial guarantee based upon the cost or value of the work to initiate mining operations, continue mining
operations and complete closure/rehabilitation procedures. (Prior Code § 7-7-11)
4-9-7: CONDITIONS OF PERMIT:
A permit may be approved or renewed subject to compliance with conditions in addition to those set forth in this chapter when such conditions are
reasonable and necessary to ensure compliance with the requirements and purpose of this chapter. When such conditions are established, they shall be
set forth specifically in the permit. Conditions may, among other matters, limit the size, kind or character of the proposed operation, require the
construction of structures, require the staging of extraction over a time period, require the alteration of the site design to ensure compliance with the
standards, require a financial guarantee by the operator to ensure compliance with this chapter or other similar requirements. (Prior Code § 7-7-8)
4-9-8: RENEWAL OF PERMIT:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 92/497
Request for renewal of a permit shall be made sixty (60) days prior to the expiration date. If application for renewal is not made within the required time, all
operations shall be terminated, and reinstatement of the permit may be granted only upon compliance with the procedures set forth in this chapter for an
original application. (Prior Code § 7-7-8)
4-9-9: TERMINATION OF PERMIT:
A. The material excavation permit may be terminated for violation of this chapter or any conditions of the permit. No permit may be terminated until the City
Council has held a public hearing to determine whether the permit shall be terminated, at which time the operator shall be afforded an opportunity to
contest the termination. The City Council may establish certain conditions, which if not complied with, will result in immediate suspension of operations
until the public hearing to consider termination of the permit can be held. Should the operator, for whatever reason, continue operations after
termination or suspension of the permit, said operator shall be responsible for all costs, including reasonable attorney fees, expended by the City in
enforcing the terms and provisions of this chapter.
B. The permit shall terminate on the date specified by the applicant on the application for permit.
C. It shall be unlawful to conduct mineral extraction or excavation after a permit has been terminated or suspended. (Prior Code § 7-7-7)
4-9-10: FEES:
A. Fees shall be required for the examination and review of applications for permits and the inspections of mining operations for compliance with the
conditions of this chapter. A fee shall be paid at the time of application for permit. A fee based upon the quantity of material removed from the site as a
result of the mining operation shall be paid according to the appropriate schedule listed below:
1. If mining operations are scheduled to continue for a period of time less than one year, the fee shall be paid within thirty (30) days of completion of
mining activities.
2. If mining operations are scheduled to continue for a period of time longer than one year, a fee shall be paid prior to January 31 each year for
materials removed from the site prior to December 31 of the previous year. A fee shall be paid within thirty (30) days of completion of mining activities
for materials removed that calendar year.
B. The fee shall be paid at a rate per cubic yard of material excavated. The amount of material excavated shall be rounded up to the nearest one thousand
(1,000) cubic yards and multiplied by the rate to determine the required fee. The quantity of material excavated shall be substantiated and certified by
the applicant's engineer. Quantity calculations based upon pre-mining site conditions and current topographic data shall be submitted with each
payment for City review. (Prior Code § 7-7-10)
C. The initial fee and rate per cubic yard of material excavated shall be as set out in section 3-1-2 of this Code. The City Council may change the initial fee
and rate per cubic yard of material excavated, from time to time. Such initial fees and fees related to the rate per cubic yard of material removed shall
be paid to the City and deposited to the credit of the General Fund. (Prior Code § 7-7-10; amd. 2018 Code)
4-9-11: NONLIABILITY OF CITY; RESPONSIBILITIES OF PERMITTEE:
Neither the issuance of a permit under this chapter, nor compliance with the conditions thereof or with the provisions of this chapter shall relieve any
person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor impose any liability or damage to persons or property. A
permit issued pursuant to this section does not relieve the permittee of the responsibility of securing and complying with any other permit which may be
required by any other law, ordinance or regulation. (Prior Code § 7-7-9)
4-9-12: SITE LOCATION:
Operations permitted under this section shall not be conducted within:
A. Fifty feet (50') of an existing street or highway.
B. Thirty feet (30') of the right-of-way on an existing public utility.
C. Fifty feet (50') of the boundary of any zone where such operations are not permitted.
D. Thirty feet (30') of the boundary of an adjoining property not in mining use, or as directed by the City Council. (Prior Code § 7-7-12)
4-9-13: SOILS INVESTIGATIONS:
A. A soils study shall be performed to aid in the analysis of the application for permit. Test borings shall be performed on the proposed mining site to
determine the subsurface conditions which exist at the site. The number of test bores required shall be determined by the amount of land affected by
the mining operations. Three (3) test bores shall be excavated for each site. One additional test bore will be required for each acre of land affected by
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 93/497
the mining operation. Test bores shall extend to five feet (5') below the lowest limits of the proposed mining excavation or to the water table. The
following information shall be noted at each test bore location:
1. Depth of bore.
2. Depth to high water mark.
3. Depth to water table.
4. Soil stratification and soil type within each stratification. Thickness of each strata.
B. A sieve analysis shall be performed at each test bore on all materials to be removed from the site. A gradation curve shall be developed based on the
sieve analysis. All test results shall be submitted to the City for use in reviewing the application for permit. (Prior Code § 7-7-13)
4-9-14: FENCING:
A. Fencing And Gate Required: Where mining operations are to continue for a period of one year or longer or are located in or adjacent to a residential
district, perimeter fencing of the extraction site will be required. A lockable gate will be provided across the access to the site. The gate shall be locked
when mining operations are not in progress.
B. Construction Specifications:
1. The perimeter fencing and gate construction shall conform to section 2557 of the Standard Specifications for Construction and Supplemental
Specifications, as published by the Minnesota Department of Transportation. (Prior Code § 7-7-14)
2. The perimeter fencing and gate shall be woven wire fence in accordance with standard plate no. 9320G of the Minnesota Department of
Transportation Standard Plates Manual. (Prior Code § 7-7-14; amd. 2018 Code)
C. Temporary Safety Fencing:
1. Temporary safety fencing shall be required where unsafe conditions warrant and are expected to last less than five (5) days. If unsafe conditions last
longer than five (5) days, perimeter fencing shall be installed. Unsafe conditions shall be considered as follows:
a. Where collections of water are one and one-half feet (11/2') in depth or greater.
b. Where slopes exceed three feet (3') horizontal to one foot (1') vertical.
c. Where machinery is left unattended for more than eight (8) hours.
d. Other similar situations deemed hazardous by the City Engineer.
2. Temporary safety fencing may be snow fencing forty inches (40") high or other fencing approved by the City Engineer. Perimeter fencing may be
required by the City Engineer if unsafe conditions warrant. (Prior Code § 7-7-14)
4-9-15: APPEARANCE AND SCREENING AT SITE:
The following standards are required at the extraction site of any operation permitted under this article:
A. Machinery shall be kept in good repair.
B. Abandoned machinery, inoperable equipment and rubbish shall be removed from the site at the end of each day's operations.
C. All buildings and equipment that have not been used for a period of one year shall be removed from the site.
D. All equipment and temporary structures shall be removed and dismantled no later than ninety (90) days after termination of the extraction operation and
expiration of the permit.
E. Where practical, stockpiles of overburden and materials shall be used to screen the extraction.
F. The perimeter of the site shall be planted or otherwise screened when such is determined by the City Council to be necessary.
G. Existing tree and ground cover shall be preserved to the extent feasible, maintained and supplemented by selective cutting and transplanting of trees,
shrubs, and other ground cover along all setback areas. (Prior Code § 7-7-15)
4-9-16: OPERATING STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
The following operating standards and requirements shall be observed at the extraction site at all times. Failure to comply with any of the following items
constitutes a violation of a mining permit and is cause for termination of the permit:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 94/497
A. Noise: All equipment used in conjunction with the mining operation shall be constructed, maintained and operated in such a manner as to minimize
noise levels at and adjacent to the site. The maximum noise level at the perimeter of the site shall be within the limits set by the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency (MnPCA) and the Federal Environment Protection Agency. If a violation is suspected or known to exist, the MnPCA will be notified and
mining operations terminated.
B. Hours Of Operation: Extraction and hauling operations shall be performed only between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
P.M. No work shall be performed on Saturdays, Sundays or holidays. Written permission must be obtained from the City for a variance to these
conditions. Permission is not required for minor work which may be required to ensure safety at the site.
C. Air And Water Pollution: Operators shall comply with all applicable City, County, State, and Federal regulations for the protection of air and water quality.
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency regulations for the protection of air and water quality shall be observed. No waste products shall be deposited into
any lake, stream or natural drainage system. All wastewater shall pass through a sedimentation basis before drainage into a stream. Downstream
drainageways affected by sedimentation due to the mining operation shall be dredged and restored by the operator. If a violation is suspected or known
to exist, the MnPCA will be notified and mining operations terminated. Sedimentation ponds, silt fences and straw bales shall be utilized to control
sedimentation from the site. Methods of sedimentation control shall be depicted on the site plan. The narrative shall include calculations or
explanations for the method utilized.
D. Topsoil: All topsoil shall be retained at the site until complete rehabilitation of the site has taken place according to the approved rehabilitation plan.
Topsoil which is to be used shall be free of roots, brush, weeds, debris and stones larger than one inch (1") in diameter. Topsoil shall be protected from
erosion, degradation and mixing with other on site materials. Topsoil borrow, if required, shall be in accordance with the Minnesota Department of
Transportation Standard Specifications for Construction and Supplemental Specifications section 3877. Topsoil shall be placed to an in-place depth of
four inches (4") over all areas requiring reseeding, resodding or other vegetative restoration.
E. Dust Control: All equipment used in the mining operation shall be maintained and operated in such a manner as to minimize dust conditions which are
annoying to adjacent property owners. The access to the site shall be paved, treated or watered in order to minimize dust conditions. The operator
shall maintain a water truck or similar equipment which may be utilized for dust control at or near the site for the duration of the mining operation. A
reliable source of water shall be obtained prior to mining operations commencing and be maintained during mining operations. Dust prevention and
control measures shall be utilized at all times by the operator. If dust becomes a safety concern or a public nuisance, the City may order the operator to
commence additional dust prevention measures or temporarily suspend mining operations. Citizen complaints will also serve as cause for the operator
to affect additional dust control measures. Continued neglect of dust control by the operator shall be cause for termination of the mining permit. A dust
prevention plan shall be outlined in the narrative to the application for permit.
F. Site Appearance: All buildings, structures and plants used for the mining operation shall be maintained in such a manner as to assure that they will not
become dilapidated. Weeds and any other unsightly or noxious vegetation shall be cut or trimmed weekly or as necessary to preserve a neat
appearance and to prevent seeding on adjoining property. Stockpile of excavated materials shall be in a manner that will cause the least amount of
damage to adjacent lawns, grassed areas, gardens, shrubbery or fences. No trees, except those specifically shown on the approved site plan to be
removed, shall be removed without the express acceptance of the City Engineer.
G. Off Site Protection And Traffic Control:
1. The operator shall ensure that no objectionable material will be allowed to blow from, wash off or drain off the subject property. If perimeter fencing is
utilized, the operator shall ensure that any objectionable materials lodged in the fence are removed daily. The operator shall police the site and
surrounding areas at the end of each day's operations.
2. The operator shall take all precautions necessary to ensure that streets and roads utilized for haul routes are not adversely affected by the mining
operation. All spilled dirt, gravel or other foreign material caused by mining operations shall be thoroughly cleaned from all off site streets and roads
at the conclusion of each day's operations. A more frequent cleaning of the streets may be required by the City Engineer if unsafe conditions are
caused by spilled materials.
3. A list of materials and equipment to be utilized for off site cleanup is required to be submitted with the application for permit.
4. If access from the mining operation is onto a public roadway, temporary traffic control shall be provided by the operator. Temporary signage shall
conform to the latest edition of the Minnesota Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways as published by the Minnesota
Department of Transportation. Temporary signage shall be placed prior to each day's mining operations commencing and be removed upon
completion of each day's mining operations. An approved traffic control plan shall be delivered to local, County and State authorities having
jurisdiction over the public roadway.
5. If the mining operation changes off site traffic conditions along the proposed haul route, traffic control shall also be provided by the operator.
6. The maximum gross vehicle weight (fully loaded) of all trucks or tractor-trailer rigs to be utilized in conjunction with the mining operation shall be
submitted in the narrative portion of the applications. The structural capacities of City roadways and bridges located along the proposed haul route
shall not be exceeded.
H. Drainage:
1. On Site Drainage: The operator shall ensure that on site drainage does not adversely affect the quality of surface or subsurface water.
Sedimentation shall be controlled by means of ponds, silt fences, or straw bales. If sedimentation ponds are utilized, the perimeter of the pond shall
be enclosed with safety fencing. Erosion control measures shall be utilized to prevent deterioration of the site.
2. Off Site Drainage: Off site drainage shall not be allowed to flow across the mining site. A plan for routing off site flows around the proposed site shall
be submitted with the application for permit. The plan shall utilize the United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service (SCS)
Technical Release 55, Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds (1986) method for determining flow quantities which will originate off site. Historic flow
rates (100-year event) shall not be exceeded at the release point of rerouted flows. Upon completion of mining operations, all previously existing
drainage ditches, swales and culverts shall be reopened and grade and natural drainage restored.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 95/497
I. Sanitary Facilities: Sanitary facilities shall be maintained at the site and kept in a sanitary condition at all times. The temporary facility shall conform to
Code requirements and be acceptable to sanitary authorities. Upon completion of the mining operation, the sanitary facility shall be removed and the
area restored to its original condition.
J. Access: One access will be allowed for ingress and egress to and from the mining site. Additional access roads to the site may be constructed to allow
emergency vehicles access to the site. These additional access roads shall not be utilized for the day to day affairs of the mining operation. Provisions
shall be made for vehicular turnaround and circulation within the site.
K. Groundwater Table: Mining operations shall not occur below the level of the groundwater table elevation as submitted in the soils report. (Prior Code
§ 7-7-16)
4-9-17: REHABILITATION STANDARDS:
The following rehabilitation standards shall apply to the site of any operation permitted under this chapter:
A. Rehabilitation shall be a continuing operation occurring as quickly as possible after the extraction operation has moved sufficiently into another portion
of the extraction site or once the extraction operation is terminated. All work shall be in accordance with the approved site rehabilitation plan as
submitted with the application for permit.
B. When planning for rehabilitation and subsequent plan set preparation, the following minimum requirements shall be observed:
1. If the mining site is proposed to be developed upon completion of the mining operation, the most recent edition of the City zoning ordinance shall
govern rehabilitation requirements. The rehabilitation plan will be reviewed in accordance with the applicable section(s) of the zoning ordinance.
2. If the mining site is proposed to be left as vacant upon completion of mining operations, there shall be compliance with the following guidelines for
land restoration:
a. Finished grades shall not exceed slopes of five feet (5') horizontal to one foot (1') vertical. Exposed slopes steeper in grade than ten feet (10')
horizontal to one foot (1') vertical shall be contour plowed to minimize direct runoff of water.
b. Disturbed areas shall be graded in accordance with the rehabilitation plan submitted with the application for permit. If significant changes or
alterations to the approved grading plan are required, a revised plan shall be submitted to the City for review.
c. Excavations which are to be backfilled and imported soils shall be subject to the following: Imported materials shall be course grained soils free
from debris, roots, organic material and nonmineral matter containing no particles larger than four inches (4") in size. The material shall be
nonnoxious, nonflammable and noncombustible.
d. All areas shall be grated to allow for complete drainage of the site. The peaks and depressions of the area shall be reduced to a surface which will
result in a gently rolling topography.
e. The graded areas shall be cleared of all foreign debris, roots, weeds and rocks larger than four inches (4") in diameter.
f. A minimum of four inches (4") of topsoil shall be placed over the finished grade.
g. Turf establishment shall be in accordance with the Minnesota Department of Transportation (MnDOT) regulations. All areas that have been
disturbed and subsequently regraded will require topsoil and turf establishment. Specifically, the Minnesota Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications for Construction and Supplemental Specifications section 2575 shall govern the execution of the work related to turf establishment.
Material requirements shall be as follows:
(1) Seed Mixture: The seed mixture shall be the Minnesota Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Construction and
Supplemental Specifications section 3876 mixture number 700 or 800 applied at the rate of fifty (50) pounds per acre.
(2) Imported Topsoil: Topsoil imported for the purpose of turf establishment shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Minnesota Department
of Transportation Standard Specifications for Construction and Supplemental Specifications section 3877.
(3) Sod: Sod shall conform to the Minnesota Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Construction and Supplemental
Specifications section 3878.
(4) Commercial Fertilizer: Commercial fertilizer shall conform to the Minnesota Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for
Construction and Supplemental Specifications section 3881 and shall be a minimum analysis of 20-10-10 and be applied at a rate of five
hundred (500) pounds per acre.
(5) Mulch: Mulch material shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Minnesota Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for
Construction and Supplemental Specifications section 3882 (type I) and be applied at a rate of two (2) tons per acre. The mulch shall be disc
anchored.
h. Temporary erosion control measures shall be utilized to protect the site from wind and water damage until a self-sustaining ground cover is
established. The Minnesota Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Construction and Supplemental Specifications section 2573
shall govern the execution of work related to the use of temporary erosion control measures. Materials shall be as referenced under the same
section. Temporary erosion control measures shall be shown on the rehabilitation plan and installed per the same plan. (Prior Code § 7-7-17)
4-9-18: MISDEMEANOR VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
Any person, firm, operator, corporation or association of persons who violate any of the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be guilty of
misdemeanor as defined by State law and shall be punishable in accordance with the then existing applicable penalty provisions for a misdemeanor
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 96/497
offense, plus costs of prosecution. Each separate day of violation shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable as such. If civil action, including
application for injunctive relief, is required to enforce this chapter, the operator, or other parties responsible for violation(s), shall be responsible for all
costs, including reasonable attorney fees, incurred by the City for such enforcement action. (Prior Code § 7-7-18)
Chapter 10
CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE
4-10-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter will be known and cited as the CABLE ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-2: FINDINGS AND INTENT:
A. Findings: The City finds that multiple providers may be interested in providing cable service in the City. The City is authorized to grant one or more
nonexclusive franchises to provide cable service in the City.
B. Intent: The City's intent in adopting this chapter is to further the public interest in the delivery of cable service and ensure that all providers of cable
service are subject to comparable burdens consistent with applicable law. This chapter may encourage further development of, and competitive
choices for, cable service and related communications services in the City. Such a development could contribute significantly to the communication
needs and desires of residents of the City, benefit local economic development, and improve public and Municipal services. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations must have the meaning given herein. Terms, phrases and
words contained in this chapter that are not defined herein or in a franchise will have their normal and customary meaning. When not inconsistent with the
context, words in the singular number include the plural number. The words "must" and "will" are always mandatory and not merely directory. The word
"may" is directory and discretionary and not mandatory.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE: Means any service tier which includes the lawful retransmission of local television broadcast signals and any public,
educational, and governmental access programming required by a franchise.
CABLE SERVICE: Means:
A. The one-way transmission to subscribers of: 1) video programming, or 2) other programming service; and
B. Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service.
CABLE SYSTEM: Means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment
that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such
term does not include: a) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; b) a facility that serves
subscribers without using any right-of-way; c) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of subchapter II of 47
USC section 521, except that such facility shall be considered a Cable System to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming
directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; d) an Open Video System that complies with 47
USC section 573; or e) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system.
CHANNEL: Means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a system and which is capable of delivering a television channel
(as television channel is defined by the FCC by regulation).
CITY: Means the City of Otsego, Minnesota, a Municipal corporation, in the State of Minnesota.
COMPETITION: Means the offering of cable service to substantially the same potential customers in the City by two (2) or more providers pursuant to
franchises.
DROP: Means the cable that connects the ground block on the subscriber's terminal device to the nearest feeder cable of the system.
FCC: Means the Federal Communications Commission, or its lawful successor.
FEE: Means a franchise fee, a fee on gross revenues in-lieu of a franchise fee or an assessment imposed by the City on a grantee solely because of its
status as a recipient of a franchise. The term "franchise fee" does not include: a) any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability; b) capital costs which
are required by the franchise related to the provision of public, educational, or governmental access facilities; c) requirements or charges incidental to
awarding or enforcing the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds or letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties or liquidated
damages; d) any fee imposed under title 17 of the United States Code.
FRANCHISE, CABLE FRANCHISE OR FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: Means an agreement between the City and any provider of cable service pursuant to
this chapter granting an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, to provide cable service or operate a system in the City.
GRANTEE: Is any recipient of a franchise, and its agents and employees, lawful successors, transferees or assignees.
GROSS REVENUES: Means all revenues received by a grantee or its affiliates from the sale or provision of cable service in the City. By way of example
and not limitation, gross revenues shall include all carriage revenues received by a grantee or its affiliates from unaffiliated video programming providers,
and any advertising revenues received by a grantee or its affiliates in connection with the provision of cable service. Gross revenues shall not include bad
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 97/497
debt, any taxes or fees on services furnished by the grantee imposed by any municipality, state, or other governmental unit and collected by the grantee
for such governmental unit, revenues received by the grantee or its affiliates from the provision of telecommunications services in the City, fees collected
by a grantee or its affiliates from subscribers, and any other fees collected by a grantee or its affiliates from subscribers to support PEG access facilities.
INSTALLATION: Means the connection of the system with the subscriber terminal device.
LOCKOUT DEVICE: Means an optional mechanical or electrical accessory to a terminal device which inhibits the viewing of a certain program, certain
channel or channels provided over a system.
NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS: Means those hours during which most businesses in the City are open to serve customers. Normal business hours
generally means between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. but must include some evening hours at least one night per week and/or
some weekend hours.
NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS: Means those service conditions which are within the control of a grantee. Those conditions which are not within the
control of a grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual
weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of a grantee include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view
events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade/construction of a grantee's facilities.
OPEN VIDEO SYSTEM: Means a facility consisting of a set of transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that
is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, provided that the
FCC has certified such Open Video System complies with 47 CFR subpart S.
PEG ACCESS FACILITIES: Means public, educational, and governmental programming channels, or any equipment or facilities for use of such channels.
PAY TELEVISION: Means the delivery of pay-per-channel or pay-per-program audio-visual signals to subscribers for a fee or charge, in addition to the
charge for cable service.
PERSON: Means any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or other legal entity.
RIGHT-OF-WAY OR RIGHTS-OF-WAY: Means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane, and public sidewalk
in which the local government unit has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel purposes and utility easements of local government
units.
RIGHT-OF-WAY ORDINANCE: Means an ordinance adopted by the City creating requirements regarding regulation, management and use of rights-ofway,
including registration and permitting requirements.
STANDARD INSTALLATION: Means any residential installation that can be completed using a drop of one hundred fifty feet (150') or less.
SUBSCRIBER: Means any person who lawfully receives cable service via a system.
SYSTEM: Means a Cable System, an Open Video System or any other network of antennas, cables, wires, lines, towers, waveguides, or other
conductors, terminal devices, equipment, or facilities located in whole, or in part, in the City and designed and constructed for the purpose of producing,
receiving, transmitting, amplifying, or distributing cable service in the City.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES: Shall have the meaning ascribed in 47 USC section 153(46), as may be explained or interpreted by final action of
the FCC.
TERMINAL DEVICE: Means an electronic device that converts signals to a form accessible by the subscriber. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-4: FRANCHISES:
4-10-4-1: GENERALLY:
A. No person may provide cable service in the City, nor operate a system in the City, unless and until such person is granted a franchise. All franchises
must be granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
B. Any franchise granted hereunder will authorize the grantee to deliver cable service and construct, operate and maintain a system in the rights-of-way in
the City.
C. All franchises shall be nonexclusive, and City may grant additional franchises at any time. To the extent consistent with applicable law, the City will not
grant a franchise for an area included in an existing franchise on terms and conditions more favorable or less burdensome than those in the existing
franchise pertaining to: 1) the area served; 2) public, educational, or governmental access requirements; or 3) franchise fees, unless the area in which
the additional franchise is being sought is not actually being served by any existing grantee. The City may impose additional terms and conditions on
any additional franchises.
D. This chapter and franchises granted pursuant hereto are intended to comply with Minnesota Statutes chapter 238 and applicable law. Any applicable
requirement established by Minnesota Statutes section 238.084 not expressly incorporated in this chapter or a franchise shall be deemed incorporated
by reference in the franchise as though fully set forth therein.
E. The performance of any grantee is subject to periodic evaluation by the City upon reasonable notice to the grantee. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-4-2: USE OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 98/497
A. Use of the rights-of-way to provide cable service and operate a system must not be inconsistent with the terms and conditions by which such rights-ofway
were created or dedicated and is subject to all legal requirements related to the use of such rights-of-way.
B. The City may adopt and enforce a right-of-way ordinance and all grantees shall be subject to such right-of-way ordinance. To the extent that rights,
duties and obligations regarding the use of rights-of-way are specifically addressed in a franchise, such franchise terms shall prevail over any
conflicting provisions of a right-of-way ordinance. The terms of this chapter shall be subordinate to any conflicting provisions of a right-of-way
ordinance. A grantee shall not, through adoption or amendment of a right-of-way ordinance be subject to additional burdens or obligations with respect
to usage of the right-of-way which exceed the burdens on other users of the right-of-way under a right-of-way ordinance.
C. The City may construct, maintain, repair or relocate sewers; grade, pave, maintain, repair, relocate and/or alter any right-of-way; construct, repair,
maintain or relocate water mains; or construct, maintain, relocate, or repair any sidewalk or other public work.
D. All system facilities, lines and equipment in the City must be located so as not to obstruct or interfere with the proper use of rights-of-way, alleys and
other public ways and places, and cause minimum interference with the rights of property owners who abut any of the said rights-of-way, alleys and
other public ways and places, and not interfere with existing public utility installations.
E. Upon request, the grantee shall make available to the City maps, plats, and permanent records of the location of all facilities in the right-of-way.
F. If the City alters, or changes the grade or location of any right-of-way, alley or other public way, a grantee shall, at its own expense, upon reasonable
notice by City, remove and relocate poles, wires, cables, conduits, manholes and other system fixtures, and in each instance comply with the standards
and specifications of City. If City reimburses other occupants of the right-of-way, the affected grantee will be likewise reimbursed.
G. A grantee shall not place poles, conduits, or other system fixtures where the same will interfere with any gas, electric, telephone, water or other utility
fixtures and all such poles, conduits, or other fixtures placed in any right-of-way shall be so placed as to comply with all lawful requirements of City.
H. A grantee will, on request of any person holding a moving permit issued by the City, temporarily raise or lower its wires or fixtures to permit the moving
of buildings with the expense of such temporary removal to be paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee will be given no less than ten
(10) business days' advance notice to arrange for such temporary changes. A grantee may require payment in advance.
I. A grantee will be liable for the failure to exercise reasonable care during construction, operation or maintenance of a system. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-4-3: TREE TRIMMING:
A grantee is authorized to trim trees in or overhanging rights-of-way to the extent reasonably necessary to prevent the branches of such trees from coming
in contact with wires and cables of a system, or as is otherwise necessary to protect a system. The City may condition the authority to trim trees as it
deems appropriate and may supervise tree trimming activities. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-4-4: FRANCHISE TERM:
Franchises will be granted for a term established in the Franchise Agreement. No franchise may be granted for a period exceeding fifteen (15) years from
the date of acceptance by the grantee. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-4-5: REGULATION OF CABLE SERVICE:
A. The requirements of this chapter define the City's regulatory authority over systems and cable services subject to applicable laws. All grantees are
subject to all lawful exercise of the City's police power, ordinance-making authority, and power of eminent domain.
B. The terms of a Franchise Agreement define the contractual rights and obligations of the City and the grantee thereunder. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-4-6: INITIAL FRANCHISE APPLICATIONS:
A. Upon request or its own initiative, the City may initiate a cable franchise application process consistent with Minnesota Statutes section 238.081 and
other applicable laws. Any person desiring an initial franchise must file an application with the City.
B. The City will establish an application fee in an amount to offset the costs of processing applications and awarding a franchise. Such application fees will
not constitute a franchise fee.
C. Upon receipt of an application for a franchise, City staff will prepare a report and recommendations to the City Council regarding the application(s).
D. A public hearing concerning applications will be held prior to rejection or acceptance of applications, and award of any franchises. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-
2019)
4-10-4-7: FRANCHISE RENEWAL:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 99/497
Franchise renewals will be conducted in accordance with applicable laws. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-5: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
4-10-5-1: REGISTRATION, PERMITS AND CONSTRUCTION CODES:
A. Within ninety (90) days of acceptance of a franchise, the grantee must apply for the necessary governmental permits, licenses, certificates, and
authorizations to construct, repair, replace, relocate, operate, maintain or reconstruct a system. Grantees must strictly adhere to all State and local laws
and Building and Zoning Codes currently or hereafter applicable to location, construction, installation, operation or maintenance of the facilities used to
provide cable service in the City.
B. The City may inspect any construction or installation work performed pursuant to the provisions of a franchise. The City may make such tests as it must
find reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this chapter, the franchise, and applicable provisions of local, State and Federal law.
(Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-5-2: REPAIR OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND PROPERTY:
A. Any rights-of-way or other property disturbed or damaged during the construction, repair, replacement, relocation, operation, maintenance or
reconstruction of a system shall be fully and promptly restored, subject to weather conditions (i.e., winter conditions/frozen ground), by the grantee
performing such work, at its expense, to a condition as good as that prevailing prior to such work.
B. If a grantee fails to promptly perform the restoration required herein, the City shall have the right, following ten (10) business days' written notice to
grantee, to restore rights-of-way and other public property to a condition as good as that prevailing prior to the grantee's work. The City shall be fully
reimbursed by the grantee for its actual costs relating to such restoration. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-5-3: UNDERGROUNDING OF FACILITIES:
A. In all areas of the City where utility facilities are required to be placed underground, or where all other utility lines are underground, all grantees must
construct and install system facilities underground.
B. Amplifier boxes and pedestal mounted terminal boxes may be placed above ground, but such facilities shall be of such size, design, and location as not
to be unsightly or unsafe, as reasonably approved by the City.
C. A grantee must bury new drops within a reasonable time period, subject to weather conditions. If the ground is frozen, grantee will be permitted to delay
burial until the ground thaws. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-5-4: ERECTION, REMOVAL AND JOINT USE OF POLES:
A. In any area of the City where facilities may be located above ground, a grantee must make use of existing poles and other facilities to the extent
technically and economically feasible.
B. No poles, above-ground conduits, amplifier boxes, similar structures, or other wire-holding structures may be erected or installed by the grantee on
public property without prior approval of the City with regard to location, height, type and other pertinent aspects.
C. All facilities are subject to applicable zoning and other land use regulations. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-5-5: SAFETY REQUIREMENTS:
A. A grantee must at all times employ ordinary and reasonable care in the construction, installation and maintenance of system facilities and must use
commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public.
All system facilities must at all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order, and repair so that the same must not menace or endanger the life
or property of the City or any person.
B. A grantee must install and maintain equipment and facilities in accordance with all applicable Federal, State and local laws and regulations, and the
requirements of the National Electric Safety Code and in such manner that they will not interfere with private radio, police and fire communications or
any installations of City or of any public utility serving City. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-6: SYSTEM DESIGN AND EXTENSION PROVISIONS:
4-10-6-1: SYSTEM CAPACITY AND CHANNELS:
At a minimum, any franchise granted hereunder shall describe the grantee's network in terms of the total system capacity such as the total number of
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 100/497
analog and digital video channels which can be provided, and the minimum number of video channels which will be offered. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-6-2: CABLE SERVICE AVAILABILITY:
A. Any franchise granted hereunder may authorize cable service throughout the City, or a portion thereof.
B. Each franchise will identify a required service area. A grantee will be required to offer cable service to all dwellings, homes and businesses within its
required service area. Franchises may authorize and require cable service throughout the corporate boundaries of the City, as it exists from time to
time, or such smaller area as the City reasonably and lawfully deems appropriate and is agreeable to the grantee.
C. Any franchise granted hereunder may establish requirements for the extension of the system and provision of cable service beyond the initially required
service area.
D. Cable service shall not be denied to any group of potential residential cable subscribers because of the income of the residents of the area in which
such group resides. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-6-3: NON-STANDARD INSTALLATIONS:
Grantees must provide cable service to any person requesting other than a standard installation provided the cable service can meet FCC technical
specifications and all payment obligations are met, except that a grantee may charge for the incremental increase in material and labor costs incurred
above the cost of making a standard installation. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-6-4: TECHNICAL STANDARDS:
Any system offering cable service in the City must comply, at minimum, with the technical standards promulgated by the FCC relating to cable systems
pursuant to title 47, section 76.601 to 76.617, as may be amended or modified from time to time. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-6-5: SYSTEM TESTING:
A. In the event City finds that there are signal or system performance difficulties which may constitute violations of applicable FCC technical standards, the
grantee will be notified and afforded fifteen (15) business days to investigate and, if necessary, correct problems or complaints. If the performance
difficulty is not resolved within fifteen (15) days the City may require the grantee to demonstrate compliance via testing or other means selected by the
grantee.
B. If a performance difficulty continues after the provision of subsection A of this section, the City may test any system or facilities used to provide cable
service in the City. The City will seek to arrange its testing so as to minimize hardship or inconvenience to grantee and subscribers. In the event that
testing reveals that the source of the technical difficulty is within the grantee's reasonable control, the cost of the testing must be borne by the grantee.
If the testing reveals the difficulties to be caused by factors that are beyond grantee's reasonable control, the cost of the testing must be borne by the
City. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-6-6: FCC REPORTS:
Grantees must, upon written request from City, file all required FCC technical reports with the City. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-6-7: NONVOICE RETURN CAPABILITY:
Grantees are required to provide a system with capacity and technical capability to provide nonvoice return communications. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-6-8: LOCKOUT DEVICE:
Grantees shall provide by sale or lease a lockout device to any requesting subscriber. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-6-9: EMERGENCY ALERT SYSTEM:
All grantees must provide an emergency alert system (EAS) that complies with FCC requirements. Grantees must further ensure that City can insert, or
direct the insertion of, brief audio and video emergency messages simultaneously on all channels. The City shall indemnify grantee for City's use of a
system for emergency messages unless such use is consistent with the FCC's EAS requirements. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-7: CONSUMER PROTECTION AND CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS:
4-10-7-1: ENFORCEMENT OF CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 101/497
This section 4-10-7 shall be fully applicable except during periods when competition exists in the City. The City will stay and not enforce this section 4-10-7
in areas where competition exists in the City, except that the City may initiate enforcement of this section while competition exists in the event the City
receives, in any thirty (30) day period, at least five (5) written complaints with respect to each competitor concerning similar customer service issues. In
such case, the City Council may initiate enforcement of this section by adopting a resolution indicating the basis for initiating enforcement. (Ord. 2019-03,
1-28-2019)
4-10-7-2: REGULATION OF CABLE SERVICE RATES:
A. The City may regulate rates for the provision of cable service to the extent allowed under Federal or State law(s).
B. Upon request, a list of grantee's current subscriber rates and charges for cable service shall be filed with City, and shall also be made available on
grantee's consumer website or otherwise be available for public inspection. For purposes of this section, the availability of this information on grantee's
website shall constitute compliance. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-7-3: SALES PROCEDURES:
A grantee may not exercise deceptive sales procedures when marketing any of its cable services within City. Grantees may conduct marketing consistent
with local ordinances and other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-7-4: TELEPHONE INQUIRIES AND COMPLAINTS:
A. A grantee must maintain local, toll-free or collect call telephone access lines which will be available to its subscribers twenty four (24) hours a day,
seven (7) days a week.
B. During normal business hours, trained representatives of grantee must be available to respond to subscriber inquiries. Grantees must ensure that: 1) an
adequate number of trained company representatives will be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries during normal business hours, and;
2) after normal business hours, the access line will be answered by a trained company representative or a service or an automated response system
such as an answering machine.
C. Inquiries received after normal business hours must be responded to by a trained company representative on the next business day. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-
28-2019)
4-10-7-5: TELEPHONE ANSWER TIME AND BUSY SIGNALS:
A. Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a customer representative, including wait time, must not exceed thirty (30) seconds when
the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time must not exceed thirty (30) seconds.
B. These standards must be met no less than ninety percent (90%) of the time under normal operating conditions, measured on a quarterly basis. Under
normal operating conditions, the customer must receive a busy signal less than three percent (3%) of the time. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-7-6: INSTALLATION, OUTAGE AND SERVICE CALLS:
Under normal operating conditions each of the following standards will be met no less than ninety five percent (95%) of the time measured on a quarterly
basis:
A. Excluding conditions beyond the reasonable control of a grantee which prevent performance, grantees will begin working on service interruptions
promptly, and in no event later than twenty four (24) hours after the interruption becomes known, and grantees must begin actions to correct other
service problems the next business day after notification of the service problem and resolve such problems as soon as is reasonably possible;
B. The "appointment window" alternatives for installations, service calls, and other installation activities will be either a specific time or, at maximum, a fourhour
time block during normal business hours. Grantees may schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of normal business hours
for the convenience of the customer;
C. A grantee may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment;
D. If a representative of a grantee is running late for an appointment with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the
customer will be contacted. The appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time during normal business hours which is convenient for the
customer. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-7-7: COMPLAINT AND OTHER SERVICE RECORDS:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 102/497
A. Upon written request by the City, and subject to a grantee's obligation to maintain the privacy of certain information, grantees must prepare and
maintain for a period of one year, written records of all complaints received and the resolution of such complaints, including the date of such resolution.
B. Written complaint records must be on file at the office of a grantee. Upon written request by the City, grantees must provide the City with a written
summary of such complaints and their resolution on a quarterly basis and in a form mutually agreeable to the City and grantee.
C. Upon written request by the City, grantees must provide detailed compliance reports on a quarterly basis with respect to the objectively measurable
service standards required in this section. A grantee will not be required to acquire equipment or perform surveys to measure compliance with the
telephone answering standards contained in this section 4-10-7 unless a historical record of complaints indicates a failure to comply. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-
28-2019)
4-10-7-8: SUBSCRIBER CONTRACTS:
Grantees must provide to the City upon request any standard form subscriber contract utilized. If no such written contract exists, grantee must provide a
document completely and concisely stating the length and terms of the subscriber contract offered to customers. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-7-9: VIDEO PROGRAMMING:
All franchises will identify the initial video channels to be provided by a grantee. To the extent required by 47 USC section 544(b), prior City approval is
required for any change in the broad categories of video programming provided. Individual programming decisions may be made in the discretion of a
grantee. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-7-10: BILLING AND SUBSCRIBER COMMUNICATIONS:
A. A grantee must give the City and subscribers thirty (30) days' advance written notice of any changes in rates, programming services, or channel
alignments.
B. Bills must be clear, concise, and understandable. Bills must clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates,
and credits. In case of a billing dispute, the grantee must respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within thirty (30) days. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-
2019)
4-10-7-11: ADDITIONAL CUSTOMER SERVICE REQUIREMENTS:
The City may adopt additional or modified customer service requirements to address subscriber concerns or complaints. Such requirements must be
consistent with applicable laws. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-8: COMMUNITY SERVICES:
4-10-8-1: PEG ACCESS FACILITIES:
Franchises will establish obligations to provide PEG access facilities to meet the community's needs and interests. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-8-2: SERVICE TO PUBLIC OR EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS:
Franchises will establish obligations for the provision of free or reduced cost services to identified public or educational institutions. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-
2019)
4-10-9: ADMINISTRATION PROVISIONS:
4-10-9-1: ADMINISTRATION OF FRANCHISE:
A. The City Administrator will have continuing regulatory supervision over systems, cable services, and franchise compliance; provided, however, the City
Council shall have the sole authority to hold hearings and take final enforcement action as provided in subsections 4-10-14-1C through D of this
chapter or revoke a franchise as provided in section 4-10-14-2 of this chapter.
B. The City Administrator may delegate this regulatory supervision by giving written notice of such delegation to affected grantees. Grantees must
cooperate with any such delegatee of the City Administrator. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-9-2: FEE:
A. A grantee must pay to the City a fee in the amount established in the Franchise Agreement.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 103/497
B. Fee payments are payable quarterly. Fee payments must be made within sixty (60) days of the end of each calendar quarter.
C. Each fee payment must be accompanied by a report certified by an officer of the grantee, in form reasonably acceptable to City, detailing the
computation of the payment. All amounts paid must be subject to audit and recomputation by the City and acceptance of any payment must not be
construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount.
D. A grantee may designate that portion of a subscriber's bill attributable to the fee as a separate line item on the bill. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-9-3: ACCESS TO RECORDS:
A. The City may, upon reasonable notice and during normal business hours, and subject to the privacy provisions of 47 USC section 521 et seq., inspect
any records maintained by a grantee which relate to its franchise or system operations, including specifically grantee's records relating to gross
revenues. Grantees must make copies of documents upon City's reasonable request but may identify and label any such documents as "confidential
trade secret".
B. Grantees must prepare and furnish to the City such reports with respect to the operations, affairs, transactions or property, as they relate to this
franchise or cable services as City may reasonably request. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-10: INDEMNIFICATION AND INSURANCE:
4-10-10-1: INDEMNIFICATION OF THE CITY:
A. A grantee must indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, its officers, boards, committees, commissions, elected officials, employees and agents
(an "indemnified party") from and against any loss or damage to any real or personal property of any person, or for any injury to or death of any person,
arising out of or in connection with the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of, or other action or event with respect to a system or
other facilities used by a grantee to deliver cable service.
B. A grantee must indemnify, defend, and hold harmless an indemnified party from and against all lawsuits, claims, actions, liability, damages, costs,
expenses or penalties incurred as a result of the award or enforcement of a franchise.
C. A grantee shall not be required to provide indemnification or defense for any intentional misconduct, willful neglect or negligence by an indemnified
party, for any enforcement action taken by an indemnified party against a grantee, or for any claim based solely on the City's operation of PEG access
facilities, delivery of PEG access programming, or EAS messages originated by the City.
D. With respect to each claim for indemnification:
1. The indemnified party must promptly notify the grantee in writing of any suit, claim or proceeding which gives rise to such right;
2. The grantee must afford the indemnified party an opportunity to participate in any compromise, settlement or other resolution or disposition of any
suit, claim or proceeding; and
3. The indemnified party must cooperate with reasonable requests of the grantee, at grantee's expense, in its participation in a suit, claim or
proceeding.
E. Subject to the limitations in Minnesota Statutes chapter 466, the City shall indemnify, defend and hold a grantee harmless for any damage resulting
from any intentional misconduct, willful neglect or negligence by an indemnified party in utilizing any PEG access facilities or PEG channels, or in
connection with work performed on or adjacent to the system. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-10-2: INSURANCE:
A. A grantee must obtain and maintain in full force and effect, at its sole expense, a comprehensive general liability insurance policy, in protection of the
grantee, and the City, its officers, elected officials, boards, commissions, agents and employees for damages which may arise as a result of operation
of the system or delivery of cable service.
B. The policies of insurance must be in the sum of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury or death of any one person, and two
million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for personal injury or death of two (2) or more persons in any one occurrence, five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) for property damage to any one person and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one act or
occurrence.
C. The insurance policy must be maintained by grantee in full force and effect during the entire term of the franchise. Each certificate of insurance must
contain a statement on its face that the insurer will not cancel the policy or fail to renew the policy, whether for nonpayment of premium, or otherwise,
and whether at the request of grantee or for other reasons, except after thirty (30) days' advance written notice have been provided to the City. (Ord.
2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-11: FRANCHISE TRANSFER OR ABANDONMENT:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 104/497
4-10-11-1: ABANDONMENT OF SERVICE:
A grantee may not discontinue the provision of cable service without having first given three (3) months' written notice to the City. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-
2019)
4-10-11-2: SYSTEM REMOVAL AFTER ABANDONMENT, TERMINATION OR FORFEITURE:
A. In the event of termination or forfeiture of the franchise or abandonment of the system, the City may require the grantee to remove all or any portion of
its system from all rights-of-way and public property within the City; provided, however, that the grantee will not be required to remove its system to the
extent it is authorized to provide telecommunications services or non-cable services over the system.
B. If the grantee has failed to commence removal of its system, or such part thereof as was designated by the City, within one hundred twenty (120) days
after written demand for removal is given, or if the grantee has failed to complete such removal within twelve (12) months after written demand for
removal is given, the City may apply funds secured by the franchise toward removal and/or declare all right, title, and interest in the system to be in the
City with all rights of ownership including, but not limited to, the right to operate the system or transfer the system to another for operation by it pursuant
to the provisions of 47 USC section 547. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-11-3: SALE OR TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE:
A. No sale or transfer of ownership of a grantee or "fundamental corporate change" in a grantee as defined in Minnesota Statutes 238.083, nor sale of
transfer of a franchise, is permitted without City approval. However, no consent shall be required for sales of property or equipment in the ordinary
course of business or for a transfer in trust, mortgage, or other instrument of hypothecation, in whole or in part, to secure an indebtedness.
B. A grantee must file a written request with the City prior to any transaction described above. The City will approve or deny a transfer request within one
hundred twenty (120) days of receipt of a written request. The City will not unreasonably withhold, delay or condition its approval.
C. In no event will a transaction be approved under subsection A of this section unless the transferee becomes a signatory to, and assumes all rights and
obligations under, the franchise.
D. In the event of any proposed transaction described above, the City will have the right to purchase the system. In the event a grantee has received a
bona fide offer for purchase of its system, the City shall have the right to purchase for the price which the proposed assignee or transferee agreed to
pay. The City will be deemed to have waived its right to purchase the system in the following circumstances:
1. The City does not notify the grantee in writing, within ninety (90) days of notice, that it accepts all material terms and conditions of the purchase of
the system; or
2. The City approves the transaction. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-12: PROTECTION OF INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS:
4-10-12-1: DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED:
No grantee may deny cable service or otherwise discriminate against citizens or businesses on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age,
status as to public assistance, affectional preference, or disability. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-12-2: SUBSCRIBER PRIVACY:
A. Grantees must comply with the subscriber privacy-related requirements of 47 USC section 551.
B. No signals of a Class IV channel may be transmitted from a subscriber terminal for purposes of monitoring individual viewing patterns or practices
without the express written authorization of the subscriber.
C. No lists of the names and addresses of subscribers or any lists that identify the viewing habits of subscribers may be sold or otherwise made available
to any party other than to grantee and its employees for internal business use, and also to the subscriber subject of that information, without the
express written authorization of the subscriber.
D. Written authorization from a subscriber is not required for conducting system-wide or individually addressed electronic sweeps to verify system integrity
or monitor for billing purposes. This information must be kept confidential subject to the provision set forth in subsection B of this section. (Ord. 2019-
03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-13: UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS:
A. It is unlawful for any person, without the express consent of the grantee, to make or possess, or assist anybody in making or possessing, any
connection, extension, or division, whether physically, acoustically, inductively, electronically or otherwise, with or to any segment of a grantee's system
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 105/497
or receive cable service from a grantee's system without a grantee's authorization.
B. It is unlawful for any person to willfully interfere, tamper, remove, obstruct, or damage, or assist thereof, any part or segment of a system for any
purpose whatsoever.
C. Any person found guilty of violating this section may be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and the costs of the action nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) and the costs of the action for each and every subsequent offense. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-14: ENFORCEMENT OF THIS CHAPTER OR FRANCHISE:
4-10-14-1: VIOLATIONS OR OTHER OCCURRENCES GIVING RISE TO ENFORCEMENT ACTION:
A. In order to take enforcement action pursuant to this chapter or a franchise, the City must provide the grantee with written notice of the violation or other
occurrence giving rise to the City's action.
B. The grantee shall have thirty (30) days subsequent to receipt of the notice to cure the violation or occurrence giving rise to the City's action.
Alternatively, the grantee may, within fourteen (14) days of receipt of notice from the City, notify City in writing that there is a dispute as to whether a
violation or failure has in fact occurred. Such written notice by the grantee to the City shall specify with particularity the matters disputed by grantee.
C. In the event a grantee does not timely cure to the City's reasonable satisfaction the violation or other occurrence giving rise to the City's action, or timely
disputes whether a violation has occurred, the City will schedule a public hearing affording grantee due process. The City will endeavor to schedule the
hearing for a date within ninety (90) days of the initial violation notice. Notice of the hearing must be provided to the grantee.
D. At the completion of the hearing, the City will issue written findings of fact and its final determination. A grantee may not initiate legal proceedings until
the City's final determination is issued. The grantee may appeal such determination to an appropriate court, which shall have the power to review the
decision of the City de novo and may stay the City's right to pursue the enforcement remedies provided for in this section until such time as the action
has been finally adjudicated. The grantee may continue to operate the Cable System until all legal appeals procedures have been exhausted.
E. In the event City determines that no violation has taken place, the City will rescind the notice of violation in writing. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-14-2: FRANCHISE REVOCATION:
A. In addition to all other rights and remedies that the City possesses pursuant to applicable law, equity and the terms of the Franchise Agreement, the
City may revoke or terminate the franchise, and all rights and privileges pertaining thereto, in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 4-10-
14-1 of this section 4-10-14, if the City determines that:
1. The grantee has violated any material requirement or provision of this chapter or a franchise and has failed to timely cure; or
2. The grantee has attempted to evade any of the material provisions of this chapter or a franchise; or
3. The grantee has practiced fraud or deceit upon the City; or
4. The grantee has filed for bankruptcy.
B. During any revocation proceeding, including any appeal period, the franchise will remain in full force and effect unless the term thereof sooner expires.
(Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
4-10-14-3: COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL, STATE AND LOCAL LAWS:
The City and grantee will conform to State laws and rules regarding cable service or the system not later than one year after they become effective, unless
otherwise stated, and conform to Federal laws and regulations regarding cable service or the system as they become effective. (Ord. 2019-03, 1-28-2019)
Chapter 11
DYNAMIC DISPLAY SIGNS
4-11-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
A. The City has established the fundamental basis for the regulation of signs generally in section 11-37-1 of this Code.
B. The City finds that dynamic display signs are highly visible from long distances and at very wide viewing angles both day and night and are designed to
attract the attention of persons in their vicinity and hold it for extended periods of time and that if the operation of such signs is not regulated, there is
potential for significant harm to public health, safety, and welfare.
C. It is not the purpose or intent of this chapter to regulate the message displayed on any dynamic sign but to:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 106/497
1. Allow for operation of dynamic signs in compliance with the standards set forth in this chapter to lessen the impact of such signs on the environment
and the public health, safety, and welfare.
2. Provide for the administration and enforcement of provisions regulating the operation of dynamic display signs as set forth in this chapter. (Ord.
2018-02, 4-9-2018)
4-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms, wherever they occur in this chapter, shall be interpreted as herein defined:
APPLICANT: The owner, their agent or person having legal control, ownership and/or interest in land for which the provisions of this chapter are being
considered or reviewed.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN, ELECTRONIC: A sign or portion thereof that displays electronic, nonpictorial text information in which each alphanumeric
character, graphic, or symbol is defined by a small number of matrix elements using different combinations of light emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics,
light bulbs or other illumination devices within the display area. Electronic changeable copy signs include computer programmable, microprocessor
controlled electronic displays. Electronic changeable copy signs include projected images or messages with these characteristics onto buildings or objects.
Electronic changeable copy signs do not include official signs.
DYNAMIC DISPLAY: Any characteristics of a sign that appear to have movement or that appear to change, caused by any method other than physically
removing and replacing the sign or its components, whether the apparent movement or change is in the display, the sign structure or any other component
of the sign. This includes displays that incorporate technology or methods allowing the sign face to change the image without having to physically or
mechanically replace the sign face or its components as well as any rotating, revolving, moving, flashing, blinking or animated display and any display that
incorporates rotating panels, LED lights manipulated through digital input, digital ink or any other method or technology that allows the sign face to present
a series of images or displays.
ELECTRONIC GRAPHIC DISPLAY SIGN: A sign or portion thereof that displays electronic, static images, static graphics or static pictures, with or without
text information, defined by a small number of matrix elements using different combinations of light emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics, light bulbs or other
illumination devices within the display area where the message change sequence is accomplished immediately or by means of fade, repixalization or
dissolve modes. Electronic graphic display signs include computer programmable, microprocessor controlled electronic or digital displays. Electronic
graphic display signs include projected images or messages with these characteristics onto buildings or other objects.
ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any sign which contains an element designed to emanate artificial light internally or externally.
MULTIVISION SIGN: Any sign composed in whole or part of a series of vertical or horizontal slats or cylinders that are capable of being rotated at intervals
so that partial rotation of the group of slats or cylinders produces a different image and when properly functioning allows on a single sign structure the
display at any given time one of two (2) or more images.
OFFICIAL SIGN: Signs of a public noncommercial nature including public notification signs, safety signs, traffic signs, direction to public facilities when
erected by or on behalf of a public official or employee in the performance of official duty.
SIGN: Any letter, word or symbol, poster, picture, statuary, reading matter or representation in the nature of advertisement, announcement, message or
visual communication, whether painted, posted, printed, affixed or constructed, including all associated brackets, braces, supports, wires and structures,
which is displayed for informational or communicative purposes.
VIDEO DISPLAY SIGN: A sign that changes its message or background in a manner or method of display characterized by motion or pictorial imagery,
which may or may not include text and depicts action or a special effect to imitate movement, the presentation of pictorials or graphics displayed in a
progression of frames that gives the illusion of motion, including, but not limited to, the illusion of moving objects, moving patterns or bands of light, or
expanding or contracting shapes, not including electronic changeable copy signs. Video display signs include projected images or messages with these
characteristics onto buildings or other objects.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The person designated by the City Council to be the Zoning Administrator for the City of Otsego. (Ord. 2018-02, 4-9-2018)
4-11-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Display or operation of a dynamic display sign within the City of Otsego shall require approval of a valid license issued by the City pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 2018-02, 4-9-2018)
4-11-4: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
A. Application Form: An application for a license must be submitted by the property owner or their authorized agent on a form provided by the Zoning
Administrator.
B. Fees: The applicant shall pay the license fee in accordance with section 3-1-2 of this Code for the application to be accepted.
C. Required Information:
1. An application shall be considered complete if it includes the information required in this subsection C.
2. The application shall include the following information:
a. Names and addresses of the sign contractor and owners of the sign and lot.
b. Written consent of the owner or lessee of any site on which the sign is to be erected.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 107/497
c. The address at which any signs are to be erected.
d. The lot, block and addition at which the signs are to be erected and the street on which they are to front.
e. Type and size of sign and type of dynamic display.
f. The specifications of the signs related to illumination and brightness.
g. Specifications for controls needed to regulate the display both for normal operation and in the event of a malfunction.
h. Any electrical permit required and issued for the sign.
3. The applicant shall provide any and all other information as may be requested by the Zoning Administrator to determine compliance with this
chapter.
D. Zoning Administrator Review:
1. The Zoning Administrator shall approve or deny an application for a license within sixty (60) days of a complete application being submitted with
written notice to be provided to the applicant.
2. Applications found to be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter shall be issued a license that shall expire on December 31 of the same
year.
3. The Zoning Administrator shall state in writing the reasons for an application for a license having been denied. The applicant may resubmit an
application for a license in accordance with the procedures in this chapter or, within ten (10) days of the Zoning Administrator's decision, submit an
appeal in accordance with subsection 4-11-6D3c of this chapter.
E. Transferability: Licenses are issued to the applicant only and for one location, and such licenses are nontransferable between property owners, tenants,
or locations.
F. Expiration:
1. All licenses expire upon the following events, whichever occurs first:
a. Removal or replacement of the sign or the dynamic display components specifically,
b. Change in property tenant to which the sign is an accessory use.
c. Change in property ownership.
d. A license is revoked in accordance with subsection 4-11-6D of this chapter.
2. An expired license may be renewed only by making application as provided in this section. (Ord. 2018-02, 4-9-2018)
4-11-5: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
A. Allowed Signs: Only those dynamic display signs defined and identified herein shall be allowed to be operated within the City in accordance with this
chapter and the zoning ordinance:
1. Electronic changeable copy signs.
2. Electronic graphic display signs.
B. Requirements: The operation of a dynamic display sign allowed by this chapter shall conform to the following requirements:
1. Changing Display: The display shall change display not more often than once every six (6) minutes.
2. Prohibited Effects: The display sign shall not include scrolling, flashing, animation, or other effects.
3. Static Display: The display must be static and the transition from one static display to another must be instantaneous without any special effects.
4. No Continuation: The display must be complete in themselves, without continuation in content to the next image or message.
5. Brightness:
a. The brightness of the sign shall not exceed five thousand (5,000) NITS after sunrise and before sunset or five hundred (500) NITS after sunset
and before sunrise each day.
b. The sign shall be equipped with an automatic dimmer control or other mechanism that automatically controls the sign's brightness to comply with
this condition.
6. Malfunctions:
a. The display must be designed and equipped to freeze the device in one position if a malfunction of the electronic display occurs.
b. The display must also be equipped with a means to immediately discontinue the display if it malfunctions, and the sign owner must immediately
stop the electronic display when notified by the City that it is not complying with the stipulations of this section.
7. Compliance: The sign shall comply with title 11, chapter 37 of this Code. (Ord. 2018-02, 4-9-2018)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 108/497
4-11-6: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. Administration: This chapter shall be administered by the Zoning Administrator.
B. Inspections:
1. Any licensee shall, at all times during the term of the license, allow the Zoning Administrator to enter the premises for the purpose of verifying
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
2. The licensee shall provide certification as to compliance with subsection 4-11-5B5 of this chapter to the City upon request by the Zoning
Administrator.
C. Suspension: The Zoning Administrator may suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days following written notice and an opportunity to
be heard if the Zoning Administrator determines that a licensee has violated or is not in compliance with this chapter.
D. Revocation:
1. Notice: The Zoning Administrator shall issue a written statement of intent to revoke a license if a cause of suspension in subsection D2 of this
section occurs.
2. Basis For Revocation: The Zoning Administrator may initiate action to revoke a license if the Zoning Administrator determines that:
a. The license has been suspended two (2) times within the preceding twelve (12) months.
b. A licensee has knowingly operated an electronic sign during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended.
c. A licensee is delinquent in payment to the City for ad valorem taxes or other taxes or fees related to business.
3. Process:
a. Licensee Response: Within ten (10) days of receipt of such notice of suspension or intent to revoke, the licensee may provide to the Zoning
Administrator, in writing, a response that shall include a statement of reasons why the license should not be suspended or revoked.
b. Hearing Date: Within three (3) days of the receipt of licensee's written response, the Zoning Administrator shall notify respondent in writing of the
hearing date on licensee's suspension or revocation proceeding.
c. Appeal And Hearing:
(1) Within thirty (30) working days of the receipt of licensee's written response, the City Council shall conduct a hearing on licensee's appeal of the
Zoning Administrator's decision.
(2) Hearings on the appeal shall be open to the public and the licensee or applicant shall have the right to appear and be represented by legal
counsel and to offer evidence in its behalf.
(3) At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall make a final decision.
(A) If a response is not received by the City in the time stated or, if after the hearing, the City Council finds that grounds as specified in this
section exist for suspension or revocation, then such suspension or revocation shall become final three (3) days after the City sends written
notice that the license has been suspended, or revoked. Such notice shall include a statement advising the applicant or licensee of the right to
appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
(B) If the City Council finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of a license, then within three (3) days after the hearing,
the Zoning Administrator shall withdraw the intent to suspend or revoke the license, and shall so notify the licensee in writing of such action.
(Ord. 2018-02, 4-9-2018)
4-11-7: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this chapter. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted the chapter and each subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase
thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared invalid. (Ord. 2018-02, 4-9-2018)
Title 5
HEALTH, SANITATION AND ENVIRONMENT
Chapter 1
PUBLIC NUISANCES
5-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City by prohibiting the occurrence and maintenance of
public nuisances and eliminating junk and blight within the City. This chapter allows for the abatement of public nuisances and provides penalties for and
remedies against those causing or maintaining a public nuisance. (Prior Code § 5-8-1 #1)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 109/497
5-1-2: PUBLIC NUISANCE DEFINED:
A public nuisance is a thing, act or use of property which:
A. Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys, injures, or endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort, or repose of any considerable
numbers of the public; or
B. Interferes with, obstructs, or renders dangerous for passage any public highway or right-of-way, or waters used by the public; or
C. Any other act or omission declared by law or this chapter to be a public nuisance. (Prior Code § 5-8-1 #2)
5-1-3: PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH:
The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health:
A. Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or vegetable matter.
B. All animals running at large.
C. All ponds or pools of stagnant water.
D. Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within twenty four (24) hours after death.
E. Accumulation of manure, refuse, or other debris.
F. The discharge, disposal, accumulation, or collection of sewage or industrial waste without proper permit or approval.
G. Garbage cans or other refuse containers which are not rodent free or flytight or which are so maintained as to constitute a health hazard or to emit foul
and disagreeable odors and which waste is not removed at least once a week.
H. The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake, canal or other body of water by sewage, industrial waste, or any other substances.
I. All noxious weeds, as defined in Minnesota Statutes chapters 18.75 to 18.87, and other rank growths of vegetation, upon public or private property.
J. Burning in violation of chapter 4 of this title.
K. Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot or cinders in unreasonable quantities.
L. Any offensive trade or business as defined by either ordinance or State Statute or such trade or business whose operation constitutes a clear and
present danger to the health of the public in general. (Prior Code § 5-8-2; amd. 2018 Code)
5-1-4: PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY:
The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public morals and decency:
A. Any gambling device not authorized by State law and not properly permitted by the appropriate jurisdiction including, but not limited to, slot machines
and punchboards.
B. Betting or bookmaking, not allowed by State law, and all apparatus used in such operations.
C. All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution.
D. All places where intoxicating liquor or illegal drugs are manufactured or dispensed in violation of law or where, in violation of law, persons are permitted
for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor or ingesting or otherwise using illegal drugs, or where intoxicating liquor or illegal drugs are kept for sale
or other disposition in violation of law, and all liquor, illegal drugs, and other property used for maintaining such places.
E. Any vehicle used for the illegal transportation of intoxicating liquor and/or illegal drugs, or for prostitution and/or other immoral or illegal purpose. (Prior
Code § 5-8-4)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 110/497
5-1-5: PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY:
The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and safety:
A. Water, Wastewater, Snow And Ice:
1. The allowing of rainwater, ice, or snow to fall from any building or structure upon any street or sidewalk or to flow across any sidewalk.
2. Wastewater cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets or other public property.
3. All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks within twelve (12) hours after the snow or other precipitation causing the condition has ceased to
fall.
4. Depositing, or causing to be deposited, any snow or ice on or against any fire hydrant or on any sidewalk or roadway, including the movement of
snow across the street surface.
B. Objects Overhanging Public Ways:
1. All trees, hedges, billboards, or other obstructions which prevent persons from having a clear view of all traffic approaching an intersection.
2. All wires and limbs of trees which are so close to the surface of a sidewalk or street as to constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles.
3. All hanging signs, awnings, and other similar structures over streets and sidewalks, or so situated so as to endanger public safety, or not constructed
and maintained as provided by ordinance.
C. Obstructing Public Ways And Property:
1. Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary use by the public of streets, alleys, sidewalks, or public grounds except under such conditions as
are permitted by City ordinances or other applicable law.
2. Placing or storing on any street, sidewalk, alley, or public right-of-way any boxes, goods, wares, merchandise, building materials, machinery,
business or trade article except for the purpose of immediately transferring the same to some other proper place.
3. Any tree, shrub, bush, or other vegetation located on private property which obstructs the use or travel on any public right-of-way.
4. Any use of property abutting a public street or sidewalk or any use of a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather,
obstructing traffic and the free use of the street or sidewalk, and which activity is conducted without a permit, license, or other permission duly
granted by the City.
5. Obstruction of the free flow of water in a natural waterway or a public street drain, storm sewer, gutter, or ditch with trash or other materials.
D. Dangerous Antennas: Radio aerials or television antennas erected or maintained in a dangerous manner.
E. Electric Or Barbed Wire Fences: Any electric or barbed wire fencing strung lower than six feet (6') in height and within three feet (3') of a public sidewalk
or way, except when used in conjunction with agricultural uses in an area zoned for such use.
F. Dangerous Machinery: All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so situated or operated on private property as to attract the public.
(Prior Code § 5-8-5)
G. Accumulations Attracting Vermin And Pests: Accumulations in the open of broken or unused metal, wood, lumber, cement, electrical fixtures, plumbing
fixtures, building materials (but excluding building materials awaiting use and stored for a reasonable period of time for allowable or improvement
presently in progress on the same premises), discarded or unused machinery, household appliances, automobile bodies, trash, debris, rubbish or other
material, in a manner conducive to the harboring of rats, mice, snakes, or vermin, or the rank growth of vegetation among the items so accumulated, or
items accumulated in a manner creating fire, health, or safety hazards. (Prior Code § 5-8-5; amd. 2018 Code)
H. Dangerous Openings: Any well, hole, or similar excavation which is left open or uncovered or in such other condition as to constitute a danger to any
child or other person coming on the premises where it is located.
I. Damaging Public Ways: Digging excavations, placing culverts, placing dams, or doing any act which may alter or affect the drainage of public property,
streets, alleys or sidewalks; or affect flows of the public storm sewer and drainage ditch system, without authorization by the City.
J. Prohibited Deposits Onto Public Ways:
1. The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk, or other public property of any glass, tacks, nails, bottles, or other substance which may injure any
person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire when passing over such substance.
2. The deposition of garbage or refuse on a public right-of-way or on adjacent private property.
3. Throwing, placing, or depositing dirt, rocks, sand, leaves, trash, lawn clippings, weeds, grass, or other materials in the streets, sidewalks, ditches or
other public ways and the gutters thereof.
4. Permitting dirt, rocks or mud from construction or landscaping activities to be carried or deposited onto nearby streets, sidewalks, ditches or other
public ways and the gutters thereof.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 111/497
K. Artificial Lighting: Operation of any artificial lighting facilities upon any private property without an effective shade or equivalent device to protect nearby
residential premises from being adversely affected thereby.
L. Abandoned Containers: Any used refrigerator, icebox, or freezer, with door latch intact, which is accessible to children.
M. Construction Sites: Maintenance of construction sites for which a building permit has been issued shall consist of the following:
1. All debris, paper, construction material waste, scrap construction material and other trash on the construction site shall be stored in a building or in a
container so as to prohibit the waste from being scattered by wind or rain or accessed by rodents and other vermin.
2. All materials associated with the construction site, including equipment, shall be stored within the site. The storage of material shall not obstruct
access to the structure under construction or create a public safety hazard. Materials shall not be stored within the public right-of-way.
3. All loading and unloading of materials and/or equipment is limited to the construction site and public right-of-way.
4. A silt fence must be maintained at all times.
5. The site must be cleared of all debris in accordance with this subsection M at the conclusion of each workday.
6. Damage to landscaping or other property on an abutting or adjacent property as a result of construction activities shall be replaced and restored to
its original condition at the contractor's expense.
N. Other Conditions: All other conditions or things which are likely to cause injury to the person or property of anyone. (Prior Code § 5-8-5)
5-1-6: STORAGE OF PERSONALTY:
A. Nuisance Declared: Unsheltered storage of unused, stripped, junked, and other automobiles, recreational vehicles, motorcycles, watercraft or any other
motor vehicle, not in good and safe operating condition and bearing a current State of Minnesota license or registration for that type of vehicle, and of
any other vehicles, machinery, implements, and/or equipment and personal property of any kind which is no longer safely usable for the purposes for
which it was manufactured, all of which is hereinafter described as "said personalty", for any period of thirty (30) days or more within any given year
(except in licensed junkyards) within the corporate limits of the City is hereby declared to be a nuisance and dangerous to the public safety.
B. Interpretation:
1. For purposes of this section, unsheltered storage means said personalty which is not stored in a permitted structure complying with the then existing
and controlling City ordinances.
2. The period of one year, for purposes of considering whether or not a continuing violation exists, commences upon the date of notice of the violation.
In the event that any violation is corrected but a same or similar act occurs within the one year time period set forth herein, it shall be considered a
continuation of the original violation, and each day that said violation exists may be considered a separate violation as well as a continuation of the
original violation.
C. Abatement Procedures:
1. Abatement By Owners: The owner, owners, tenants, lessees and/or occupants of any lot within the corporate limits of the City upon which the above
prohibited storage or any other violation of this section is made, and also the owner, owners, and/or lessees of said personalty involved in such
storage of any other material constituting a violation of this section, all of whom are hereinafter collectively referred to as "owners" shall jointly and
severally abate said nuisance by the prompt removal of said personalty or materials into completely enclosed buildings authorized to be used for
such purposes, or to a licensed junkyard or waste facility, or removed to a location outside the corporate limits of the City.
2. Abatement By City: Whenever the owners fail to abate the nuisances, the City shall remove the said personalty or materials to a location of its
selection. Abatement of such nuisance by the City shall be in accordance with section 5-1-11 of this chapter. Costs incurred by the City during said
abatement, including the cost of storage or disposal, shall be recoverable from the owners, jointly and severally, in accordance with section 5-1-12 of
this chapter or in a suit at law.
D. Disposal Of Property After Abatement By City: When said personalty or materials have been removed and placed in storage by the City, as provided
herein, said personalty shall be sold by the City after the lapse of such time as is provided by law. If the proceeds of such sales are insufficient to pay
the costs of abatement and storage, the owners shall be liable to the City for the balance of the costs. If the proceeds are in excess of the costs,
including storage, the balance shall be paid to said owners or deposited in the City Treasury for their use. (Prior Code § 5-8-6)
5-1-7: HAZARDOUS BUILDINGS:
The "Hazardous Building Law", Minnesota Statutes sections 463.15 through 463.261, is adopted by reference. Any hazardous building or dangerous
excavation may be abated in accordance with the provisions of that law. (Prior Code § 5-8-7)
5-1-8: NOISE:
A. Public Nuisance Noise Prohibited:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise which
unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety, or welfare of others, or precludes the quiet
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 112/497
enjoyment of their property or affects their property's value, or affects the peace and quiet of any neighborhood, or which causes discomfort or
annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing in the area. This general prohibition is not limited by the specific restrictions of
subsection B of this section.
2. Standards to be considered in determining a violation of this subsection A include, but are not limited to, the following:
a. The volume of the noise.
b. The intensity of the noise.
c. Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual.
d. The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any.
e. The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping.
f. The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates.
g. The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates.
h. The time of day or night the noise occurs.
i. The duration of the noise.
j. Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant.
k. Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity. (Prior Code § 5-8-8)
B. Nuisance Noises Enumerated:
1. The following listed acts are declared to be nuisance noises in violation of this Code, but this listing shall not be deemed to be exclusive.
a. Horns, Signaling Devices, Etc.:
(1) The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle on any street, public place, or private property
within the City except as a present danger warning. (Prior Code § 5-8-9)
(2) The creation by means of any noise from such horn or signaling device for any unreasonable period of time. (Prior Code § 5-8-9; amd. 2018
Code)
(3) The sounding of any such device for any unnecessary and unreasonable period of time.
(4) The use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity.
(5) The use of any horn, whistle, or other device operated by engine exhaust.
(6) The use of any such signaling device when traffic is held up for any reason. (Prior Code § 5-8-9)
b. Radios, Television Sets, Amplifiers And Similar Devices: Using, operating or permitting to be played any radio, musical instrument, phonograph,
jukebox, amplifier or other machine or device for the producing, reproducing or amplifying of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet
or comfort of persons residing, working or peaceably gathered in its vicinity. Prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection B1b shall include
(but not be limited to) operation of the device if done in such a manner as to be plainly audible:
(1) Within any other building or structure used for residential purposes; or
(2) At the distance of fifty feet (50') from the property, building, structure or vehicle in which the device is located; or
(3) Between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. unless otherwise allowed by this Code. (Prior Code § 5-8-8)
c. Loudspeakers, Amplifiers For Advertising: Using, operating, or permitting to be used or operated, any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public
streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure by persons other than
personnel of law enforcement or other governmental agencies.
d. Sound Trucks For Advertising Purposes: The use of sound trucks or any other vehicle equipped with sound amplifying devices for the purposes of
advertising any program, project, or meeting of any public agency, private business, religious organization, civic group, political party, or charitable
organization.
e. Yelling, Shouting: Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of
persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel, motel, or other place of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity.
f. Hawkers, Peddlers: The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers, and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
g. Animals: The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons
in the vicinity.
h. Whistles And Sirens: The blowing of a locomotive whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler or any siren whatsoever except to give
notice of the time to begin to stop work, as a warning of fire or danger, or by public emergency vehicles.
i. Exhausts: The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat, motor vehicle, motorcycle or
snowmobile except through a muffler or other device which effectively prevents loud or explosive noises therefrom and which complies with all
applicable State laws and regulations.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 113/497
j. Defect In Vehicle Or Load: The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or other motor vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or operated in such manner
as to create loud and unnecessary grating, rattling, or other noise which shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity.
k. Loading, Unloading, Opening Boxes: The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the
opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates, and containers.
l. Building Construction: The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration, or repair of any building between the hours and on any day
prohibited by section 9-1-3 of this Code.
m. Pile Drivers, Hammers: The operation between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. of any pile driver, power
shovel, pneumatic hammer, jack hammer, derrick, power or electric hoist, or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual
noise.
n. Blowers: The operation of any noise creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to
the explosion of operation gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled, and such engine is equipped with a muffler device
sufficient to deaden such noise.
o. Internal Combustion Engines: No person shall create any excessive noise by permitting diesel engines to idle, or by building, repairing or testing
motor vehicles or other internal combustion engines, which causes a disturbance beyond the property line of the property on which the activity
takes place. (Prior Code § 5-8-9)
p. Schools, Courts, Churches, Hospitals: The creation of any excessive noise on any street or private property adjacent to any school, institution of
learning, place of worship, court, or hospital while the same is in use which unreasonably interferes with the use thereof, provided conspicuous
signs are displayed on such indicating that the same is a school, hospital, or court or place of worship. (Prior Code § 5-8-9; amd. 2018 Code)
q. Noise In Residential Areas: No person shall, between hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., congregate because of, or
participate in, any party or gathering of people from which noise emanates of a sufficient volume so as to disturb the peace, quiet, or repose of
persons residing in any residential area. Noise between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. of such volume as to
be plainly audible at a distance of fifty feet (50') from the residential dwelling unit wherein such party or gathering is located shall be prima facie
evidence of a violation of this subsection. No persons shall visit or remain within any residential unit wherein such party or gathering is taking place
except the owner, persons residing in that unit, or persons who have gone there for the sole purpose of abating the disturbance.
2. Standards established in Minnesota Rules 7010.0010 to 7010.1600, noise pollution control, are hereby adopted by reference and exceeding these
standards is considered prima facie evidence of noise constituting a nuisance. (Prior Code § 5-8-9)
C. Responsibility For Noises: The owner and tenant of any premises on which a violation of subsections A and B of this section occurs shall make every
reasonable effort to see that the violation ceases. Violation of said subsections shall be deemed the act of both the person committing the act and the
person in possession, control, custody, or having charge of the premises who allows or permits the violation to take place. Violation of subsections A
and B of this section shall also be deemed the act of a nonresident landlord, provided he has received written notice from the City of the violation and
has failed to make every reasonable effort to see that the violation ceases. (Prior Code § 5-8-10)
5-1-9: CONSUMPTION, POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC:
A. Consumption:
1. No person shall consume intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor on any public sidewalk or street, or in a vehicle upon a public street. (Prior
Code § 5-8-11; amd. 2018 Code)
2. No person shall consume intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor in any public parking lot. (Ord. 2018-14, 12-10-2018)
B. Possession: No person shall have in possession intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor in an open container on any public sidewalk or street or in
a vehicle upon a public street. (Prior Code § 5-8-11; amd. 2018 Code)
5-1-10: ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS:
The City Council shall have the duty of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, and the City Council may, by resolution, delegate to other officers or
agencies power to enforce particular provisions of this chapter, including the power to inspect private premises, and the officers charged with enforcement
of this chapter shall take all reasonable precautions to prevent the commission and maintenance of public nuisances. (Prior Code § 5-8-12)
5-1-11: ABATEMENT PROCEDURES:
A. Notice To Abate: Whenever the officer charged with enforcement determines that a public nuisance is being maintained or exists on premises in the
City, the officer shall notify in writing the owner or occupant of the premises of such fact and order that such nuisance be terminated or abated. The
notice shall be served in person or by certified or registered mail. If the premises is not occupied and the owner is unknown, the notice may be served
by posting it on the premises. The notice shall specify the steps to be taken to abate the nuisance and the time, not exceeding thirty (30) days, within
which the nuisance is to be abated.
B. Failure To Abate; Hearing Notice: If there is not compliance with the notice within the time specified, the enforcing officer shall, in the same manner
described in subsection A of this section, serve notice at least seven (7) days prior to a scheduled hearing by the City Council upon the owner or
occupant of the property.
C. Notice Regarding Abatement By City: Thereafter, the City Council may, after notice to the owner or occupant and an opportunity to be heard, provide for
abating the nuisance by the City. The City Council shall, by resolution, adopt a Notice of Abatement, which shall set forth the nuisance to be abated
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 114/497
and shall indicate a date and time on which the City will enter onto the property and abate the nuisance. The notice shall also notify the property owner
that the costs of abatement will be billed to the property owner and, if not paid, will be assessed against the property. The Notice of Abatement shall be
served upon the owner and/or occupant in person or by certified or registered mail at least seven (7) days prior to the proposed date for the City to
abate the nuisance. If the premises is unoccupied or the owner and/or occupant cannot be served, notice may be posted upon the premises at least
seven (7) days prior to the proposed abatement.
D. Emergency Abatement: When the officer charged with enforcement determines that a nuisance constitutes a serious and eminent danger to the public
safety or health, the officer may summarily abate the nuisance after a reasonable attempt to notify the owner or occupant of the property. The officer
shall immediately thereafter notify in writing the owner or occupant of the premises of the action taken. The notice shall be served in person or by
registered or certified mail. (Prior Code § 5-8-13)
5-1-12: COST RECOVERY:
A. Personal Liability: The owner of the premises on which a nuisance has been abated by the City shall be personally liable for the cost to the City of the
abatement, including legal and administrative costs. As soon as the work has been completed and the costs determined, the City Clerk or other official
designated by the City Council shall prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner. Thereupon, the amount shall be immediately due and payable at
the Office of the City Clerk. (Prior Code § 5-8-14)
B. Assessment: If the nuisance is a public health or safety hazard on private property or the accumulation of snow and ice on public sidewalks, the City
Clerk shall, on or before September 1, next following abatement of the nuisance, list the total unpaid charges (including all applicable legal and
administrative costs) along with all other such charges as well as other charges for current services to be assessed under Minnesota Statutes section
429.101, against each separate lot or parcel to which the charges are attributable. The Council may then spread the charges against such property
under that statute and other pertinent statutes for certification of the County Auditor and collection along with current and following year taxes, or in
annual installments, not exceeding ten (10), as the Council may determine. (Prior Code § 5-8-14; amd. 2018 Code)
5-1-13: MISDEMEANOR VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
A. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable pursuant to applicable
State Statute regarding misdemeanor penalties, as amended, plus the costs of prosecution. Each day a nuisance continues to exist is deemed a
separate punishable offense under this chapter.
B. The City may, in its discretion, seek any civil remedies available to it as well, including injunctive relief or abatement.
C. Each right or remedy accruing to the City under this chapter or at law is separate and distinct and may, in the City's discretion, be exercised
independently or simultaneously with any other right or remedy. (Prior Code § 5-8-15)
Chapter 2
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
5-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, for the purpose of this chapter, shall be defined as follows:
BOULEVARD:
Rural Streets: The public right-of-way lying between the outside line of the area maintained by the City for roadway purposes by right-of-way or
prescriptive easement and the edge of the paved or unpaved roadway surface, including shoulders.
Urban Streets: The public right-of-way lying between the property line and sidewalk, and between the sidewalk and the roadway, or where no
sidewalk exists, between the property line and the roadway.
CURRENT SERVICE: One or more of the following: snow, ice or rubbish removal from sidewalks; weed elimination from street grass plots adjacent to
sidewalks or from private property; removal or elimination of public health or safety hazards from private property, excluding any hazardous building
included in Minnesota Statutes, sections 463.15 to 463.26; installation or repair of water service lines; street sprinkling, street flushing, light street oiling, or
other dust treatments of streets, repair of sidewalks and alleys; trimming and care of trees and removal of unsound and insect infected trees from the
public streets or private property; the operation of a street lighting system; the operation and maintenance of a fire protection system; or pedestrian skyway
system.
NATURAL LANDSCAPING: Any land managed to preserve or restore native Minnesota grasses, forbs, native trees, shrubs, wildflowers and aquatic
plants.
NATURAL LANDSCAPING MAINTENANCE PLAN: A document submitted with an application for a natural landscaping permit demonstrating a precise
course of maintenance for numerous individual plants in a landscape over months and seasons.
NATURAL LANDSCAPING PERMIT: A permit issued by the City pursuant to this chapter allowing an owner or occupant to cultivate native Minnesota
grasses, forbs, native trees, shrubs, wildflowers and aquatic plants upon his/her property, subject to the restrictions of this chapter.
NOXIOUS WEED: An annual, biennial or perennial plant that the State of Minnesota designates to be injurious to public health, the environment, public
roads, crops, livestock or other property.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 115/497
TURF GRASS: Cultivated vegetation consisting of a highly maintained surface of dense grass underlain by a thick root system.
UNDESIRABLE PLANT: A nonnoxious species that is classified as exotic, invasive, injurious or poisonous including, but not limited to, broadleaf and grass
weeds. (Prior Code § 5-7-1)
5-2-2: SNOW, ICE, DIRT AND RUBBISH REMOVAL:
A. Removal Required: All snow, ice, dirt, and rubbish remaining on a public sidewalk more than twelve (12) hours after its deposit thereon is a public
nuisance. The owner and the occupant of any property adjacent to a public sidewalk shall use diligence to keep such walk safe for pedestrians. No
such owner or occupant shall allow snow, ice, dirt, or rubbish to remain on the walk longer than twelve (12) hours after its deposit thereon.
B. Depositing On Public Ways Prohibited: No person shall throw, deposit, place or dump any snow, ice, dirt or rubbish or any other material or substance
that may injure any person or vehicle or otherwise obstruct travel upon any City street, including movement of such materials or substances across the
roadway for the purpose of depositing it within boulevard or ditch portion the public right-of-way. (Prior Code § 5-7-2)
5-2-3: YARDS AND BOULEVARDS:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish minimum standards for lawn and yard maintenance while recognizing that a variety of landscapes
within a community adds diversity and richness to the quality of life for all residents. Turf grass lawns continue to be recognized as the dominant
feature in the landscape; however, alternatives to this traditional type of lawn are recognized as important parts of a diverse and successful landscape.
B. General Maintenance Requirements:
1. The owner or occupant of any lot or parcel shall install and maintain turf grass or combined ground cover of cultivated vegetation, garden, hedges,
trees and shrubbery. All plants shall be alive, of good quality, and disease free or shall be replaced or removed unless dormant due to season or
exceptional weather conditions.
2. Plantings shall be maintained so as not to present hazards to adjoining properties or to persons or vehicles traveling on public ways and shall be
maintained so as to enhance the appearance of the property on which located and thereby the appearance of the neighborhood and the City.
3. The owner or occupant of any lot or parcel shall be responsible for lawns and the boulevard portion of the public right-of-way to be maintained to a
height not to exceed eight inches (8").
C. Irrigation:
1. Properties within agricultural and residential zoning districts established by section 11-50-1 of this Code developed after April 27, 2009, with twofamily,
townhouse or multiple-family dwelling units or institutional uses shall provide an exterior in ground irrigation system within the property and the
boulevard portion of the public right-of-way abutting the property where necessary to ensure that all turf grass, ground cover of cultivated vegetation,
garden, hedges, trees and shrubbery maintenance can be accomplished.
2. Properties within business, industrial and institutional districts established by section 11-50-1 of this Code developed after April 27, 2009, shall
provide an exterior in ground irrigation system within the property and the boulevard portion of the public right-of-way abutting the property where
necessary to ensure that all turf grass, ground cover of cultivated vegetation, garden, hedges, trees and shrubbery maintenance can be
accomplished.
D. Prohibited Plants:
1. The owners and occupants of all property within the City shall destroy all of the following plants listed on the prohibited noxious weeds list
established by Minnesota Statutes sections 18.75 to 18.88 and Minnesota Rules parts 1505.0730 to 1505.0760, which include the following:
Bull thistle, Cirsium vulgare.
Canada thistle, Cirsium arvense.
Field bindweed, Convolvulus arvensis.
Garlic mustard, Alliaria petiolata.
Hemp, Cannabis sativa.
Leafy spurge, Euphorbia esula.
Musk thistle, Carduus nutans.
Perennial sowthistle, Sonchus arvensis.
Plumeless thistle, Carduus acanthoides.
Poison ivy, Toxicondendron radicans (native species to Minnesota).
Purple loosestrife, Lythrum salicaria, virgatum.
2. Any property subject to subsection B of this section containing dead or diseased plants, secondary noxious weeds as established by Minnesota Rule
1505.0740, or undesirable plants or turf grass growing to a height in excess of eight inches (8") shall be in violation of the provisions of this section
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 116/497
and deemed a nuisance.
E. Boulevard Plantings:
1. A property owner in the City shall be permitted to plant and maintain trees and gardens on the boulevards abutting their property along local streets
defined by the Comprehensive Plan.
2. No boulevard shall be planted without written documentation that the property owner has contacted "Gopher State One Call" to determine location of
sewer and water mains, laterals and service and other underground utility lines forty eight (48) hours before digging.
3. Trees installed after April 27, 2009: (Prior Code § 5-7-3)
a. Trees shall be deciduous of the type authorized by section 11-19-2 of this Code. (Prior Code § 5-7-3; amd. 2018 Code)
b. Trees shall not be planted within ten feet (10') of any sewer or water line or driveway or within two feet (2') of any gas, electric or telephone lines
underground.
c. Trees shall be planted a minimum of three feet (3') from the back of curb or edge of shoulder of a public street.
d. Tree limbs shall be maintained to provide a minimum fourteen feet (14') of clearance for the nearest vehicle lane on a public street and eight feet
(8') of clearance along public sidewalks.
4. Plantings other than trees allowed by subsection E3 of this section installed after April 27, 2009:
a. Plantings may include flowers, vegetables and other plants, but in no event shall any noxious weed be planted or maintained.
b. Plantings may not exceed thirty six inches (36") in height. Plantings within thirty feet (30') of any intersection (as measured from the property line)
or within twenty feet (20') of any alley, or driveway approach (as measured from the end of the radius or within 5 feet of a public utility fixture or
street curb) may not exceed twelve inches (12") in height.
c. Plantings shall be limited to twelve inches (12") in height within ten feet (10') of the curb on street sections that do not have parking lanes or along
street sections where "no parking" restrictions of any kind apply.
5. Plantings must be maintained in such a way that there is no overhang or encroachment onto the sidewalk, curb or street area.
6. Notwithstanding the foregoing, all boulevards remain public property and are subject to the right of the City to restrict any plantings and/or private
irrigation systems that are deemed to interfere with the use of the public right-of-way as determined necessary by the City or which affects the safety
of pedestrians and motorists alike:
a. The City and other right-of-way users allowed by title 8, chapter 6 of this Code shall have the right to perform necessary work to plant, trim and
otherwise maintain trees, to access utilities and to store excess snow.
b. In the event the City or other right-of-way user interferes with boulevard plantings or private irrigation in the course of such work, they shall be
responsible only to restore the boulevard to the original grassy state by use of black dirt and grass seed.
c. In no event shall the City or other right-of-way user be liable for any damage to, disruption of or removal of plantings, either direct or indirect, as a
result of the City, its employees, agents or contractors performing any installation, maintenance or repairs.
F. Natural Landscaping: Any owner or occupant of a lot or parcel within the R-4A, R-4, R-5, R-6, R-7 or R-MH District established by title 11 of this Code
that is subject to subsection B of this section desiring natural landscaping, as defined in section 5-2-1 of this chapter, may apply for a natural
landscaping permit, where native grasses and forbs may exceed eight inches (8") in height, subject to the review and approval by the Zoning
Administrator; provided, that:
1. Submission Of Application: An application for a natural landscaping permit shall be submitted on the form provided by the City and shall include the
required application fee established by section 3-1-2 of this Code and the following information:
a. Statement of intent and purpose in cultivating natural landscaping.
b. A site plan drawn to scale illustrating the following information:
(1) Lot lines.
(2) Location of principal and accessory buildings.
(3) Any drainage and utilities easements upon the property.
(4) Boundaries of wetlands, wetland buffers, required buffer yards, stormwater basins, drainageways or public waters within the property.
(5) Location of the proposed natural landscaping.
c. Latin and common names of the species the property owner or occupant plans to cultivate.
d. Name and address of a professional landscaping company which has been hired to perform maintenance on the natural landscaping; or the name,
address, and qualifications of the person(s) who will be responsible for maintenance of the natural landscaping.
e. A maintenance plan, which shall contain the following:
(1) Planting diagram showing the location and mature height of all specimens of natural landscaping; and
(2) Detailed information on the upkeep of each specimen; and
(3) Details of any long term maintenance required for natural landscaping; and
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 117/497
(4) Other information as may be required by the Zoning Administrator.
2. Maintenance Of Setbacks And Drainage Swales:
a. Natural landscaping shall be set back ten feet (10') from any lot line abutting a public right-of-way and five feet (5') from interior side and rear lot
lines.
b. All stormwater basins and drainage swales shall be free of plantings and maintained in accordance with subsections B and C of this section.
c. In addition, a five percent (5%) area, exclusive of the setback area, shall be left open for maintained paths.
3. Review And Approval Requirements:
a. The Zoning Administrator shall review the natural landscaping permit list of all registered natural landscaping properties within thirty (30) days of
the submittal and notify in writing the owner or occupant of any noncompliance with this subsection.
b. The Zoning Administrator shall approve no natural landscaping for any owner or occupant having unresolved City Code violations or administrative
citations.
4. Enforcement:
a. The Zoning Administrator shall regularly inspect any property holding a natural landscaping permit for compliance with the maintenance plan on
file with the City.
b. Any property out of compliance with the maintenance plan shall be subject to enforcement action as provided in subsection I of this section.
G. Composting: Composting shall be allowed on agricultural properties, properties where there is a single-family detached dwelling or on property owned
or operated by the City as an essential service in conformance with the following standards:
1. Permitted Composting Materials: Only yard waste, straw, fruit, vegetable scraps, coffee grounds or egg shells generated on the site are permitted
composting materials as well as commercially available ingredients specifically designed to speed up or enhance decomposition and can be placed
in the composting structure.
2. Prohibited Composting Materials: The following materials shall not be placed in the composting structure: woody yard waste, meat, bones, fat oils,
whole eggs, dairy products, unshredded branches or logs, weeds heavily loaded with seeds, plastics, synthetic fibers, human or pet wastes,
diseased plants, or any other garbage or refuse except those permitted in subsection G1 of this section.
3. Composting Structure: All composting materials shall be contained in a structure constructed of wood, wire mesh, a combination of wood and wire or
in commercially fabricated compost bins designed to contain composting materials subject to the following:
a. Allowance Per Lot: One composting structure shall be allowed per lot.
b. Volume: Composting structures shall not exceed a total of three hundred (300) cubic feet in volume.
c. Location:
(1) The composting structure shall be located in the rear yard of the property as defined by the zoning ordinance.
(2) The composting structure shall comply with setbacks applicable to the property for accessory structures established by the zoning ordinance.
(3) The composting structure shall be a minimum of forty feet (40') from any habitable building on abutting properties.
4. Maintenance: Standard compost management shall be used to enhance rapid biological degradation of the material to prevent combustion and
objectionable odors, including aeration, adding moisture and providing a balance of composting materials.
5. Noncompliance A Nuisance: The composting or operation of composting structure in a manner that is not compliant with the provisions of this
subsection G or that results in objectionable odors shall be a public nuisance and a violation of this chapter. (Prior Code § 5-7-3)
H. Exceptions:
1. Fence lines and open pastures within agricultural zoning districts defined by section 11-50-1 of this Code or other properties being actively farmed
shall be exempt from the provisions of subsection B3 of this section.
2. Outlots platted within subdivisions zoned R-C Residential Rural Open Space Cluster District and designated as permanent open space in
accordance with section 11-60-7 of this Code shall be exempt from the provisions of subsection B3 of this section. (Prior Code § 5-7-3; amd. 2018
Code)
3. Outlots and undeveloped parcels shall comply with the following:
a. The outlot or undeveloped parcel(s) shall be planted with a seed mixture approved by the Zoning Administrator and maintained to prevent growth
of noxious weeds prohibited by subsection D1 of this section.
b. For an outlot or undeveloped parcel(s) consisting of:
(1) A contiguous tract of less than one acre shall be exempt from subsection B3 of this section and shall be maintained to a height not to exceed
twelve inches (12"); provided, that a physical barrier exists to separate the parcel from adjacent properties.
(2) A contiguous tract of one acre or more shall be exempt from subsection B of this section if a physical barrier exists to separate the parcel from
adjacent properties.
(3) A transition strip of land measuring ten feet (10') on that property that is maintained in compliance with subsection B3 of this section is required
next to the abutting properties if a physical barrier separating the properties does not exist.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 118/497
c. For the purposes of this chapter, a physical barrier shall meet one of the following criteria:
(1) The properties are separated by a public right-of-way, wetland, water body, floodplain, public open space, park or other such similar publicly
reserved and development restricted area with a minimum width of thirty feet (30') across its entire length.
(2) The abutting land use is a nonresidential use allowed in the district in which it is located.
d. The Zoning Administrator may, at his discretion, provide additional exceptions from the requirements of subsection B3 of this section where the
physical characteristics and conditions of the outlot or undeveloped parcel(s) make property maintenance prohibitive or where such actions may
result in erosion.
4. Any privately or publicly owned land encumbered by a stormwater basin, drainageway, wetland, wetland buffer or public water shall be exempt from
subsection B of this section.
5. Parks, natural areas and other properties owned by the City shall be exempt from this chapter.
6. Public rights-of-way maintained by the State, County or City shall be exempt from subsection B of this section.
7. Natural landscaping approved in accordance with subsection F of this section.
I. Enforcement:
1. On or before May 15 of each year and at such other times as ordered by resolution of the City Council, the City Clerk shall publish once in the official
newspaper a notice directing owners and occupants of property within the City to destroy all plantings declared by subsection D of this section to be
a nuisance and stating that if not destroyed within ten (10) days after publication of the notice, the City may act to abate the nuisance.
2. If the owner or occupant of any property in the City fails to comply with an administrative notice issued in accordance with section 1-5-3 of this Code
for a property maintenance violation of this chapter within ten (10) days after its issuance, the Zoning Administrator shall order cutting and/or removal
of such weeds and maintain a record showing the cost of such work attributable to each separate lot and parcel and shall deliver such information to
the City Clerk. (Prior Code § 5-7-3)
5-2-4: PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY HAZARDS:
When the City removes or eliminates public health or safety hazards from private property under chapter 1 of this title, the Administrative Officer
responsible for doing the work shall keep a record of the cost of such removal or elimination against each parcel of property affected and annually deliver
such information to the City Clerk. This section does not apply to hazardous buildings under the Hazardous Building Law, Minnesota Statutes sections
463.15 to 463.26. (Prior Code § 5-7-4)
5-2-5: REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS AND ALLEYS:
A. The owner of any property within the City abutting a public sidewalk or alley shall keep the sidewalk or alley in repair and safe for pedestrians.
B. The authority designated by the City Council shall make such inspections as are necessary to determine that public sidewalks and alleys within the City
are kept in repair and safe for pedestrians or vehicles. If he finds that any sidewalk or alley abutting on private property is unsafe and in need of repairs,
he shall cause a notice to be served, by registered or certified mail or by personal service, upon the record owner of the property and the occupant, if
the owner does not reside within the City or cannot be found therein, ordering such owner to have the sidewalk or alley repaired and made safe within
fourteen (14) days and stating that if the owner fails to do so, the authority designated by the City Council will do so on behalf of the City, that the
expense thereof must be paid by the owner, and that if unpaid, it will be made a special assessment against the property concerned.
C. If the sidewalk or alley is not repaired within fourteen (14) days after receipt of the notice, the authority designated by the City Council shall report the
facts to the Council, and the Council shall, by resolution, order said authority to repair the sidewalk or alley and make it safe or order the work done by
contract in accordance with the law. The authority designated by the City Council shall keep a record of total cost of the repair attributable to each lot or
parcel of property and report such information to the City Clerk. (Prior Code § 5-7-6)
5-2-6: STREET SPRINKLING, STREET FLUSHING, TREE CARE:
A. The City Council shall each year determine by resolution what streets and alleys shall be sprinkled or flushed, oiled, or given other dust treatment
during the year and the kind of work to be done on each. The Council shall also determine by resolution from time to time the streets on which trees
shall be trimmed and cared for, the kind of work to be done, and what unsound trees shall be removed. Before any work is done pursuant to either of
these resolutions, the Clerk shall, under the Council's direction, publish notice that the Council will meet to consider such projects. Such notice shall be
published in the official newspaper at least once not less than two (2) weeks prior to such meeting of the Council and shall state the date, time, and
place of such meeting, the streets affected and the particular projects proposed, and the estimated cost of each project either in total or on the basis of
the proposed assessment per front foot or otherwise.
B. At such hearing or at any adjournment thereof, the Council shall hear property owners with reference to the scope and desirability of the proposed
projects. The Council shall thereupon adopt a resolution confirming the original projects with such modifications as it considers desirable and shall
provide for the doing of the work by day labor through the authority designated by the City Council or by contract.
C. The authority designated by the City Council shall keep a record of the cost and the portion of the cost properly attributable to each lot and parcel of
property abutting on the street or alley on which the work is done and shall report such information to the City Clerk. (Prior Code § 5-7-7)
5-2-7: LIABILITY FOR COSTS; RECOVERY BY ASSESSMENT:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 119/497
A. The owner of property on which or adjacent to which a current service has been performed shall be personally liable for the cost of such service. As
soon as the service has been completed and the cost determined, the City Clerk, or other designated official, shall prepare a bill and mail it to the
owner, and thereupon, the amount shall be immediately due and payable to the Office of the City Clerk. (Prior Code § 5-7-9)
B. On or before September 1 of each year, the Clerk shall list the total unpaid charges for each type of current service against each separate lot or parcel
to which they are attributable under this chapter. After notice and hearing, as provided in Minnesota Statutes section 429.061, the Council may then
spread the charges against property benefited as a special assessment under Minnesota Statutes section 429.101 and other pertinent statutes for
certification to the County Auditor and collection along with current taxes the following year or in annual installments, not exceeding ten (10), as the
Council may determine in each case. (Prior Code § 5-7-10)
5-2-8: MISDEMEANOR VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
A. Any person who maintains a nuisance in violation of the provisions of this chapter and any person who interferes with a City employee or other
authorized person in the performance of any current service under this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished pursuant to applicable
State Statute regarding misdemeanor penalties, as amended, plus the costs of prosecution.
B. The City may, in its discretion, seek any administrative or civil remedies available to it as well, including administrative fines, injunctive relief or
abatement. Each right or remedy accruing to the City under this chapter or at law is separate and distinct and may, in the City's discretion, be exercised
independently or simultaneously with any other right or remedy. (Prior Code § 5-7-11)
Chapter 3
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
5-3-1: POLICY AND PURPOSE:
It is the policy of the City to comply with the policies and purposes of the State of Minnesota as stated in Minnesota Statutes section 115A.02, as
amended, and further to provide a safe and healthy environment for the citizens of the City. This chapter governs the collection, transportation, and
disposal of all waste generated within, transported through or within and disposed of within the corporate limits of the City. (Prior Code § 7-8-1)
5-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings given them in this section:
AGENCY: The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
CITY: The City of Otsego.
CITY COUNCIL: The Governing Body of the City of Otsego.
COLLECTION: The aggregation of any waste from the place at which it is generated including all activities up to the time the waste is delivered to a waste
facility, Minnesota Statutes section 115A.03, subdivision 5.
COLLECTOR: Any person who performs the act of waste collection including any generator who transports waste generated by that person to any facility
whether the facility is located within or outside the City.
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS: Waste building materials, packaging and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition of buildings and
roads but specifically excluding any and all hazardous waste, hazardous materials or problem materials, Minnesota Statutes section 115A.03, subdivision
7.
COUNTY: Wright County.
DISPOSAL FACILITY: Waste facility permitted by the agency and other applicable government authority that is designed or operated for the purpose of
disposing of waste on or in the land, together with any appurtenant facilities needed to process waste for disposal or transfer to another waste facility,
Minnesota Statutes section 115A.03, subdivision 10.
DISPOSAL OR DISPOSE: The discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any waste into or onto any land or water so that the
waste, or any constituent thereof, may enter the environment, or be emitted into the air, or discharged into any waters including groundwater, Minnesota
Statutes section 115A.03, subdivision 9.
FLOODPLAIN: The areas adjoining a watercourse which has been or hereafter may be covered by the 100-year flood as determined by the use of the
100-year flood profile and other technical data in the Flood Insurance Study.
GARBAGE: Discarded material resulting from the handling, processing, storage, preparation, serving and consumption of food, Minnesota Rules 7035.03,
subparagraph 40.
GENERATION: The act or process of producing waste, Minnesota Statutes section 115A.03, subdivision 11.
GENERATOR: Any person who generates waste, Minnesota Statutes section 115A.03, subdivision 12.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Any refuse, sludge, or other waste material or combinations of refuse, sludge, or other waste materials in solid, semisolid, liquid or
contained gaseous form which, because of its quantity, concentration, physical or infectious characteristics, may: a) cause or significantly contribute to an
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 120/497
increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or b) pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human
health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of, or otherwise managed. Categories of hazardous waste materials
include, but are not limited to, explosives, flammables, oxidizers, poisons, irritants, and corrosives. Hazardous waste does not include source, special
nuclear, or byproduct material as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, Minnesota Statutes section 116.06, subdivision 11.
LANDSPREADING: The placement of waste or waste byproducts on or incorporation of them into the soil surface, Minnesota Rules 7035.03,
subparagraph 54.
LEACHATE: Liquid that has percolated through solid waste and has extracted, dissolved, or suspended materials from it, Minnesota Rules 7035.03,
subparagraph 56.
MAJOR APPLIANCE: Clothes washers and dryers, dishwashers, hot water heaters, garbage disposals, trash compactors, conventional ovens, ranges and
stoves, air conditioners, refrigerators, and freezers, Minnesota Statutes section 115A.03, subdivision 17a.
MIXED MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE: Garbage, refuse, and other solid waste from residential, commercial, industrial and community activities which is
generated and collected in aggregate, but does not include auto hulks, ash, construction debris, mining waste, sludge, tree and agricultural wastes, tires,
lead acid batteries, used oil, and other material collected, processed and disposed of as separate waste streams. Street sweepings are excluded from the
definition of mixed Municipal solid waste only if they are properly screened, meet applicable MPCA standards for heavy metal content, and are free of any
pollutants or material determined to be solid waste or hazardous waste pursuant to this chapter, or any other material determined by the City Engineer to
be a public health or safety hazard, Minnesota Statutes section 115A.03, subdivision 21.
OPERATOR: The person or persons responsible for the operation of the facility, Minnesota Rules, subparagraph 73.
OWNER: An individual, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity holding an equitable or legal ownership interest in
land, buildings, structures, dwelling unit(s), or other property.
PERSON: Any individual or entity.
PROCESSING: The treatment of waste after collection and before disposal. Processing includes, but is not limited to, reduction, storage, separation,
exchange, resource recovery; physical, chemical or biological modification including composting; and transfer from one waste facility to another, Minnesota
Statutes section 115A.03, subdivision 25.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL: Any materials that are separated from mixed Municipal solid waste for the purpose of recycling; except, that refuse derived
from fuel or other material destroyed by incineration is not a recyclable material, Minnesota Statutes section 115A.03, subdivision 25a.
RECYCLING: The process of collecting and preparing recyclable materials and reusing the materials in their original form or using them in manufacturing
processes that do not cause the destruction of recyclable materials in a manner that precludes further use, Minnesota Statutes section 115A.03,
subdivision 25b.
REFUSE: Putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator ash, incinerator residue, street cleanings, and
market and industrial solid wastes, and including Municipal treatment wastes which do not contain free moisture, Minnesota Rules 7035.03, subparagraph
89.
RELEASE: Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing into the
environment which occurred at a point in time or which continues to occur.
RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid wastes, including ashes, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans,
yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, or litter of any kind, Minnesota Rules 7035.03, subparagraph 94.
RUNOFF: Any liquid that drains over land from any part of a facility, Minnesota Rules 7035.03, subparagraph 95.
SEWAGE SLUDGE: The solids and associated liquids in Municipal wastewater which are encountered and concentrated by a Municipal wastewater
treatment plant. Sewage sludge does not include incinerator residues and grit, scum, or screenings removed from other solids during treatment, Minnesota
Statutes section 115A.03, subdivision 29.
SLUDGE: Any solid, semisolid or liquid waste generated from a Municipal, commercial or industrial wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment
plant or air contaminant treatment facility, or any other waste having similar characteristics and effects, Minnesota Statutes section 116.06, subdivision 21.
SOLID WASTE: Garbage, refuse, sludge from a water treatment plant or air contaminant treatment facility, and other discarded waste materials and
sludge in solid, semisolid, liquid, or contained gaseous form, resulting from industrial, commercial, mining and agricultural operations, and from community
activities, but does not include hazardous waste; animal waste used as fertilizer; earthen fill, boulders, rock, sewage sludge, solid or dissolved material in
domestic sewage or other common pollutants in water resources, such as silt, dissolved or suspended solids in industrial wastewater effluents or
discharges which are point sources subject to permits under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, or applicable State law, dissolved
materials in irrigation return flows or source, special nuclear, or byproduct material as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, Minnesota
Statutes section 116.06, subdivision 22.
SOURCE SEPARATION: The segregation by the generator of recyclable and reusable materials and yard waste from mixed Municipal solid waste for
collection in a separate waste stream resulting in reuse, recycling, resource recovery or other processing resulting in a usable end product.
WASTE: Solid waste, sewage sludge and hazardous waste, Minnesota Statutes section 115A.03, subdivision 34.
WETLANDS: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that in
normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps,
marshes, bogs and similar areas. Wetlands have the following general diagnostic environmental conditions:
A. Vegetation: The prevalent vegetation consists of macrophytes that are typically adapted to areas having hydrologic and soil conditions described
above. Hydrophytic species, due to morphological, physiological and/or reproductive adaptation(s), have the ability to grow, effectively compete,
reproduce and/or persist in anaerobic soil conditions. The period of inundation or soil saturation varies according to the hydrologic/soil moisture
conditions.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 121/497
B. Soil: Soils are present and have been classified as hydric, or they possess characteristics that are associated with reducing soil conditions.
C. Hydrology: The area is inundated either permanently or periodically at mean water depths less than or equal to two meters (2 m) (6.6 feet), or the
soil is saturated to the surface at some time during the growing season of the prevalent vegetation. The period of inundation or soil saturation varies
according to the hydrologic/soil moisture regime. Indicators of vegetation associated with wetlands, of development under reducing conditions, and of
hydrologic conditions that occur in wetlands are listed in the "Corps of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual" (U.S.-ACOE, Environmental
Laboratory, 1987. Technical Report Y-87-1, U.S. Army Engineer Waterways Experiment Station, Vicksburg, Miss.). As defined here, wetlands also
include any watercourse, natural drainage system, water body, stormwater detention basin or wetland that may be subject to periodic flooding,
overflow, and/or seasonal high water table.
YARD WASTE: Garden wastes, leaves, lawn cuttings, weeds and prunings generated at residential or commercial properties, Minnesota Rules 7035.03,
subparagraph 121.
YARD WASTE COMPOSTING FACILITY: A facility that accepts yard waste originating on other property and processes that waste to produce a usable
end product. (Prior Code § 7-8-2; amd. 2018 Code)
5-3-3: STORAGE AND COLLECTION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Scope: This section applies to all solid waste generated and collected within the City including, but not limited to, mixed Municipal solid waste, yard
waste, industrial waste, commercial waste, construction debris, hazardous waste, household hazardous waste, recyclable materials, other solid waste
and waste.
B. Responsibility For Collection: The owner and the occupant of any premises, business establishment, or industry and the collector or collection service
shall be responsible for the satisfactory and prompt collection of all waste accumulated at a premises, business establishment or industry and its
transportation to an appropriate waste disposal facility for which a permit has been issued by the agency and the local government with the jurisdiction
and responsibility to do so.
C. Storage Of Waste:
1. Responsibility For Satisfactory Storage: The owner and the occupant of any premises, business establishment, or industry shall be responsible for
storing the generated waste in a satisfactory manner that prevents threats to community health, safety and welfare. Storage of waste by any collector
is prohibited within the limits of the City.
2. Containers:
a. Garbage Containers: Garbage and any putrescible material shall be placed in a durable, rust resistant, nonabsorbent, watertight, rodentproof,
cleanable container with a close fitting, flytight cover. (Prior Code § 7-8-3)
b. Refuse Containers: Refuse must be stored in a durable container that is waterproof. Where refuse and any garbage or putrescible material are
stored together, the container must meet the requirements of subsection C2a of this section. (Prior Code § 7-8-3; amd. 2018 Code)
c. Container Size And Type: Contractual relationships between individual generators and collectors may determine the allowable size of the
container and the construction material as long as the chosen container meets the above standards and serves to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the community.
d. Maintenance Of Containers: All storage containers shall be maintained to prevent creation of a nuisance or any menace to public health.
3. Exceptions: Any objects or materials too large or otherwise unsuitable for storage containers shall be stored in a pollution and nuisance free manner
that meets the intentions of the above provisions and is in compliance with applicable Federal, State, County, and City statutes, regulations, rules,
ordinances and resolutions.
D. Acceptable Waste: Mixed Municipal solid waste, source separated recyclable material, and yard waste are the only materials authorized for regular
collection by persons holding City collector licenses. All other waste types require special arrangement with a collector licensed and authorized by the
State of Minnesota and the County to transport that type of waste. Notice shall be provided to the City of the collection of other waste types before they
are collected.
E. Prohibited Waste:
1. Waste Oil: Disposal of waste oil in any form as part of the mixed Municipal solid waste stream is prohibited.
2. Lead Acid Batteries: Disposal of lead acid batteries, or any part of those batteries containing traces of lead or acid, as part of the mixed Municipal
solid waste stream is prohibited.
3. Tires: Disposal of tires, used or new, as part of the mixed Municipal solid waste stream is prohibited.
F. Ownership Of Waste: Ownership of the waste shall transfer from the generator to the collector upon collection. At no time shall ownership of any waste
reside in the City. If the City comes into possession of any waste as a result of a response to a release, ownership continues to vest in the person
owning the waste at the time of the release. (Prior Code § 7-8-3)
5-3-4: SOLID WASTE COLLECTORS:
A. Contract With Waste Generators: The collection of mixed Municipal solid waste shall utilize free contracting between individual generators and
collectors except as regulated by this chapter.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 122/497
B. License Requirements:
1. License Required; General Provisions: Collectors of any solid waste, including source separate recyclable materials and yard waste, that operate in
the City shall obtain a City collector's license, and no collector shall operate within the City without such a license. The City collector's license is
revocable upon violation of any part of this chapter or any conditions attached by the City to the license. Issuance of the license does not constitute
endorsement of the collector nor does it indicate any intention on the City's part to be bound or held liable for any actions taken by the collector or the
results of those actions.
2. Application For License: Applicants for City collector licenses shall make application to the City on forms provided by the City and through
procedures prescribed by the City Council.
3. Bond And Insurance Requirements:
a. Bond: The amount of the required bond shall be set annually by resolution of the City Council. The bond posted as a license requirement is
intended to provide indemnification to the City in the event of a release of any waste that is related to the bonded collector's activities. The posting
of this bond does not relieve the collector of any liability for the release of waste. In the event that the City is caused to respond, the bond will be
forfeited to the extent of the City's response costs. If the response costs exceed the bond amount, the collector shall remain liable to the City for
costs in excess of the bond amount.
b. Insurance: City collector license applicants shall furnish the City with certificates of insurance containing a thirty (30) day cancellation notice issued
by insurers duly licensed by the State of Minnesota. Insurance must include the following:
(1) Commercial or business vehicle liability insurance, including nonowned and hired vehicles, with combined single liability limits not less than five
hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence.
(2) Workers' compensation insurance in accordance with Minnesota Statutes section 176.182, and including employer's liability coverage with
limits not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). (Prior Code § 7-8-4)
4. License Fee: The annual City collector license fee shall be as set out in section 3-1-2 of this Code.
5. Issuance Or Denial Of License: City collector licenses shall be granted to any collector of solid waste upon presentation to the City Clerk of evidence
that a current State of Minnesota and Wright County licenses have been obtained, evidence of adequate levels of insurance coverage and posting of
a bond in the name of the City of Otsego. An applicant denied a license may have the decision reviewed by the City Council. The applicant shall
request such review in writing within ten (10) days after denial of the license.
6. Term Of License; Renewal: The City collector's license shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance unless revoked earlier and shall be
renewable upon application in accordance with section 3-1-2 of this Code.
7. Suspension Or Revocation Of License: The City Council may suspend or revoke the City license of any collector whose conduct is found to be in
violation of this chapter. Suspension or revocation may also be based on other health, safety and welfare concerns arising out of the performance of
any licensed collector. Revocation or suspension shall be preceded by a public hearing conducted in accordance with Minnesota Statutes sections
14.57 to 14.69. The City Council may appoint a hearing examiner or may conduct the hearing itself. The hearing notice shall be given at least ten
(10) days prior to the hearing, shall include notice of the time and place of the hearing, and shall state the nature of the charges against the collector.
Notice shall be provided to the collector by mail. (Prior Code § 7-8-4; amd. 2018 Code)
8. No Vested Right: No collector holding a City collector's license pursuant to this chapter shall acquire a vested right of any kind in that license. The
City may, upon finding that public necessity requires, determine to establish other means of refuse collection.
9. Exemptions From License: The license requirements of this section shall not apply to persons who haul garbage, refuse, or recyclables from their
own residence or business property. Provided the following conditions are met:
a. Garbage and refuse is hauled in containers meeting the standards established in this chapter.
b. Garbage and refuse is disposed of only at designated sanitary landfills or other facilities authorized by the County.
c. Recyclables are disposed of only at a recycling facility, an organized recycling drive, or through licensed collectors.
d. Yard waste is privately composted, or is disposed of at a composting facility authorized by the government agency or political subdivision with
jurisdiction to do so.
C. Duty To Provide Service: A licensed collector of mixed Municipal solid waste shall pick up all such waste which has been deposited for collection
pursuant to this chapter and the contract between the collector and the generator.
D. Schedule Of Collection: Regularly scheduled collection of mixed Municipal solid waste, recyclable material and yard waste shall be in accordance with
the following provisions:
1. Hours Of Collection: Collection shall only occur between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on the scheduled day of
service.
2. Days Of Residential Collection: Collection from any residential premises, except those located within commercial zoning districts, shall occur only on
Thursday of each week.
3. Collection As Needed: Collection from any commercial, industrial or institutional use shall occur on an as needed basis agreed to between the
generator and collector.
4. Holidays:
a. No collection shall occur on the following holidays:
(1) New Year's Day.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 123/497
(2) Memorial Day.
(3) Independence Day.
(4) Labor Day.
(5) Thanksgiving Day.
(6) Christmas Day.
b. For any week during which a holiday established by this chapter occurs between Monday and Friday, the collection service shall be allowed on the
next calendar day after that collection date established by this chapter.
E. Service Charge: Licensed collectors of mixed Municipal solid waste shall not charge their customers a flat fee. To the extent possible, charges shall
reflect the volume or weight of mixed Municipal solid waste collected.
F. Liability Of Unlicensed Collectors: Any nonlicensed collector operating within the City shall be liable for any damage or threat to community health,
safety and welfare and subject to this chapter just as if that collector had obtained a City collector's license.
G. Vehicles And Containers: Collectors of waste shall utilize vehicles and containers that are covered, leakproof, durable, of easily cleanable construction
and suitable for the type of waste being collected. The vehicles and containers shall be cleaned to prevent nuisances, pollution, vermin and insect
breeding and shall be maintained in good repair and serviceable condition at all times.
H. Dropping, Leaking Waste: If any material is released from a collector's vehicle or container, the collector shall pick up the material immediately and
properly clean the area. If the material is hazardous in nature or a hazardous waste, the collector must immediately notify the City and comply with all
other applicable statutes, rules, and regulations.
I. Exemptions From Provisions: This chapter shall not apply to collection of solid waste from a single property related to a construction or landscaping
project or other activity occurring on a temporary basis as may be allowed by this Code. (Prior Code § 7-8-3)
5-3-5: HAZARDOUS WASTE:
A. Generation License Required: Any person generating hazardous waste within the City shall hold a license issued by the agency. If the County
undertakes the issuance of licenses for the generation of hazardous waste, all generators located within the City shall be so duly licensed.
B. Collection Restrictions: Hazardous waste shall be collected only by handlers of hazardous materials duly licensed by the State of Minnesota and the
County. In the event that any hazardous waste is released in the City, the collector or transporter shall immediately notify City authorities and shall
immediately begin removal and remedial actions designed to protect the environment and the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City.
C. Disposal Within City Prohibited: Disposal of hazardous waste within the City is prohibited. Any collector or transporter operating within the City shall
dispose of hazardous waste only in accordance with applicable Federal law, Minnesota Statutes and the rules promulgated by the agency. (Prior Code
§ 7-8-4)
5-3-6: YARD WASTE:
A. Source Separation Required: All persons who are owners, lessees, or occupants of any building, commercial or residential, within the City that
generates yard waste shall separate that yard waste from all solid waste. Commingling of yard waste and mixed Municipal solid waste is prohibited.
B. Licensed Collector Required: Collectors of yard waste shall hold a valid City collector's license.
C. Collection Requirements: The collection, removal, and disposal of yard waste shall be by contract with a collector duly licensed to perform such
collection by the agency and the County and holding a City collector's license. Yard waste shall be collected as part of any regular system of collection
of mixed Municipal solid waste operated within the City. Such collection shall be in accordance with section 5-3-3 of this chapter and the following
provisions:
1. Responsibility: The owner and the occupant of any premises, business establishment, or industry and the collector or collection service shall be
responsible for the satisfactory and prompt collection of all yard waste accumulated at a premises, business establishment or industry and its
transportation to an appropriate waste disposal facility for which a permit has been issued by the agency and the local government with the
jurisdiction and responsibility to do so.
2. Suitable Material: Yard waste is the only material suitable for collection in this separate waste stream. Inclusion of any feces, animal or human, in the
yard waste placed for collection shall be considered a nuisance and is prohibited.
3. Placement: Yard waste shall be placed separately from other solid waste by the owner or resident of the property from which the waste is derived.
4. Collection Sites: Yard waste collection sites shall be located at the property or residence generating the waste or at a suitable nearby location that is
accessible to the owner or resident and the collector.
5. Containers: Yard waste shall be separately contained in bags that prevent the release of any such yard waste, are odorproof and which are capable
of being lifted and transported without breakage.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 124/497
6. Accumulation: Yard waste shall not be allowed to accumulate in excessive amounts that represent a hazard to public health. Accumulation of
excessive amounts of yard waste at any property or collection location shall be considered a public nuisance.
D. Method Of Disposal: Yard waste generated in the City shall not be disposed of in any landfill. The preferred method for yard waste disposal is
composting that produces a usable end product or incorporation into the soil as an agricultural amendment.
E. Self-Composting Encouraged: Self-composting of yard waste in a backyard composting facility or by leaving lawn clippings in place is encouraged as an
efficient, safe and cost effective method of disposal for this waste. (Prior Code § 7-8-5)
5-3-7: RECYCLING:
A. Licensed Collector Required: Collectors of recyclable materials shall hold a valid City collector's license.
B. Opportunity To Recycle: Each licensed collector shall provide its customers with an opportunity to recycle through weekly curbside collection of the
recyclables targeted below. The targeted recyclables shall be collected from a site at or near the customer's mixed Municipal solid waste collection site.
The City collector's license may specify how and where a customer is to place recyclables for collection.
C. Ownership Of Recyclables: The holder of the City collection license is deemed the owner of the recyclables upon collection and may market them.
D. Quarterly Report On Recyclables: Each licensed collector of recyclable materials shall submit a quarterly report to the City to include the weight in tons
of mixed recyclables collected by that licensee within the City. The report shall be due on or before the twentieth day of the month following the close of
the quarter on a form prescribed by the City. The report shall also identify the estimated weight of each type of recyclable collected, distinguish
domestic collection tonnage from commercial/business tonnage, and describe how the weights were calculated.
E. Source Separation:
1. Precollection: All persons who are owners, lessees, and occupants of any building, commercial or residential, within the City that generates mixed
Municipal solid waste shall separate from all solid waste the following designated recyclable materials before disposal, removal or collection:
a. Paper Recyclables: Paper recyclables shall be bundled separately and/or secured in such a manner as to prevent them from being blown or
scattered, and shall be maintained in a dry condition free of any other substance and shall not be placed in plastic bags.
b. Aluminum Recyclables: Aluminum recyclables shall be clean of all contents and shall not be placed in plastic bags.
c. Glass Recyclables: Glass recyclables shall be clean of all contents with caps, lids and all metal removed prior to collection and shall not be placed
in plastic bags.
d. Nonaluminum Can Recyclables: Nonaluminum can recyclables shall be clean of all contents and shall not be placed in plastic bags.
e. Plastic Recyclables: Plastic recyclables shall be designated by resolution of the City Council and shall be clean of all contents with caps, lids and
all metal removed prior to collection. (Prior Code § 7-8-6)
f. Other: Any material other than those described above and designated as a source separated recyclable material by resolution of the City Council
may be recycled. These materials shall be packaged for collection as directed in the City Council's resolution. (Prior Code § 7-8-6; amd. 2018
Code)
2. Containers: All source separated recyclable materials shall be placed into containers and not mixed with other forms of solid waste or mixed
Municipal solid waste. Containers shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition in accordance with all pertinent health statutes, ordinances,
rules and regulations. The style, type and construction material for the containers may be designated by the collector as long as the designated
container is in accordance with this chapter and is adequate and substantial enough to contain the recyclables therein. Further specifications for
containers may be adopted by the City Council by resolution.
F. Contract For Collection And Disposal: The collection, removal and disposal of recyclable material shall be by contract with a collector duly licensed to
perform such collection by the agency and the County and holding a City collector's license. It shall be unlawful for any person other than a contracted
collector, a City employee acting with authority, or any other authorized person to distribute, collect, remove, disturb, or dispose of recyclable materials
after said materials have been placed or deposited for collection.
G. Disposition Of Recyclable Materials:
1. Any source separated recyclable materials shall be delivered for reuse in their original form or for use in a manufacturing process that does not
cause the destruction of recyclable materials in a manner that precludes further use.
2. Disposal of source separated recyclable material in any manner other than stated in section 5-3-8 of this chapter shall operate to void the exemption
from mixed Municipal solid waste as to that material and brings that material within the full scope of this chapter.
3. The collector of the material in question shall be liable for all costs and charges relating to the proper disposal of the material after the exemption is
void and the collector's City collection license may be revoked for any such improper disposal.
H. Right To Individual Disposal Of Recyclable Materials: Nothing in this chapter shall abridge the right of any person to give or sell their recyclable
materials to any recycling program lawfully operated for profit, nonprofit, or charitable purposes. (Prior Code § 7-8-6)
5-3-8: WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITIES AND METHODS:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 125/497
The following provisions control the location, use and operation of waste disposal facilities located within the corporate limits of the City. These provisions
are intended to complement, conform to, and operate in conjunction with the City zoning ordinance and the City Comprehensive Plan.
A. Floodplain And Wetland Prohibition: No waste disposal facility of any type or kind shall be located in, on, or within three hundred feet (300') of a
floodplain or a wetland. This prohibition is not waiverable in reference to any facility and overrides any and all waivers or conditional uses allowed.
B. Waste Disposal Facilities:
1. Prohibited Locations: Location of any waste disposal facility, including, but not limited to, a landspreading facility for other than yard waste, a
construction debris disposal facility, a mixed Municipal solid waste disposal facility, an industrial waste disposal facility, a hazardous waste disposal
facility, an infectious waste disposal facility or any waste incineration facility within the corporate limits of the City is prohibited except as allowed in
this subsection B. This prohibition is based on the City Council's finding that the soil types and subsurface material within the City and the City's
proximity to a major surface watercourse generally preclude the location of these types of facilities within the City.
2. Backyard Yard Waste Composting Facilities: Backyard yard waste composting facilities are exempt from this chapter to the extent that they do not
have any deleterious effect on the public health, environment, surface water or groundwater. This exemption shall be void if it is found that a
deleterious effect has resulted or is resulting from the disposal, and upon such a finding, such waste shall come within all of the terms of this chapter.
Proof of the lack of deleterious effect is the burden of the generator.
3. Individual Waste Disposal Facilities: Where regular collection services are not available, mixed Municipal solid waste resulting from a single family's
property is exempt from this chapter to the extent that it does not have any deleterious effect on the public health, environment, surface water or
groundwater. This exemption shall be void if it is found that a deleterious effect has resulted or is resulting from the disposal, and upon such a
finding, such waste shall come within all of the terms of this chapter. Proof of the lack of deleterious effect is the burden of the generator.
4. Waiver: It is within the discretion of the City Council to waive the prohibition on waste disposal facilities on a site specific basis. This discretionary
waiver of the prohibition shall be preceded by submission of facts and plans by the proposed operator and owner of the facility, a public hearing and
issuance of a decision by the City Council. If allowed by the City Council, the facility must, at a minimum, conform to the rules promulgated by the
agency for the type of waste facility allowed.
a. Facts And Plans: Facts and plans shall contain the following materials, at a minimum, and any other materials requested by the City Council:
(1) Name of the site owner.
(2) Name of the site operator.
(3) Address of a contact person for the facility operation.
(4) A telephone number for the contact person.
(5) Location of the site.
(6) An environmental impact statement or environmental assessment worksheet, as applicable, including, but not limited to, an assessment of the
potential impact on surface and groundwater, the potential for litter, the potential for particulate air pollution, the potential for runoff, the potential
for leachate formation and the potential for excessive or offensive odors.
(7) A description of any processing of the waste.
(8) The plan for acceptance and disposal of the waste.
(9) The end product of the process and its planned disposition if the waste is processed.
(10) A description of steps to be taken to abate, ameliorate or negate the potential environmental hazards.
(11) Any preliminary information or indications from the agency or any other governmental or private organization relative to the potential hazards
or problems with the site.
b. Notice Of Hearing: Notice of the public hearing shall be given thirty (30) days prior to the hearing. Notice shall be published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City, and mailed notice shall be provided to landowners adjacent to the proposed site. The notice shall indicate the type of
facility proposed, its location, the time and date of the public hearing and shall state the fact that the plans and facts relevant to the proposal are
available for public review in the City offices. The facts and plans submitted by the operator shall be made available to the public during the notice
period, during normal business hours, at the City offices.
c. Public Hearing(s): Public hearing(s) shall be held by the City Council, and all interested parties who request time to present information shall be
given such time. Time to present information shall be allotted at the discretion of the City Council but shall be reasonable and equitable in amount.
Written comments and objections may be submitted for the City Council's information and review. Records of the hearing shall be kept and such
records shall consist of copies of all written materials and transcripts or recordings of the hearing(s).
d. City Council Decision: The City Council shall render a decision within sixty (60) days of the final public hearing. A decision to allow the facility
constitutes a conditional use permit, and the City Council may attach such conditions as it feels are appropriate to protect the public health, safety
and welfare and the environment. A negative decision must be accompanied by the reasons for the decision. Any decision is appealable as
allowed by law.
5. Sludge Disposal Sites: Sites designated by the City Council for disposal of sludge generated by Municipal wastewater treatment plants owned and
operated by the City shall be exempt from the prohibition established by subsection B1 of this section.
C. Yard Waste Composting Facilities:
1. Licensing Requirements:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 126/497
a. License Required: Operation of a yard waste composting facility requires licenses provided by the agency, the County, and a City yard waste
composting facility license.
b. Application For License: The City yard waste composting facility license application shall contain, at a minimum, the following materials, and any
other materials requested by the City Council:
(1) Name of the site owner.
(2) Name of the site operator.
(3) Address of a contact person for the operator.
(4) A telephone number for the contact person.
(5) Location of the site.
(6) An assessment of the possible environmental hazards including, but not limited to, the potential impact on surface water and groundwater, the
potential for litter, the potential for particulate air pollution, and the potential for excessive or offensive odors.
(7) A description of the process.
(8) The end product of the process and its projected disposition.
(9) A description of steps to be taken to abate, ameliorate or negate the potential environmental hazards.
c. Insurance And Bond Requirements:
(1) Insurance: City yard waste composting facility license applicants shall furnish the City with certificates of insurance containing a thirty (30) day
cancellation notice issued by insurers duly licensed by the State of Minnesota. Insurance must include commercial general liability insurance
covering all operations of the facility with limits not less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) per person and five hundred
thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence for bodily and personal injury. If the liability policy includes an aggregate limit, the collector shall
insure that the unencumbered aggregate remains not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00).
(2) Bond: The operator of any yard waste facility located within the City shall post a bond payable to the City of Otsego prior to issuance of the City
license. The amount of the required bond shall be set by resolution of the City Council. The bond posted as a license requirement is intended to
provide indemnification to the City in the event of any violation of this chapter or of conditions stipulated in the City license. The posting of this
bond does not relieve the facility of any liability for any violations of this chapter or any stipulated conditions in the license. In the event that the
City is caused to respond, the bond will be forfeited to the extent of the City's response costs. If the response costs exceed the bond amount,
the facility shall remain liable to the City for costs in excess of the bond amount. (Prior Code § 7-8-7)
d. License Fee: The fee for the issuance of the license and conditional use permit shall be as provided in section 3-1-2 of this Code. (Prior Code § 7-
8-7; amd. 2018 Code)
e. Issuance Or Denial Of License: The City yard waste composting facility license shall be issued or denied by the City Council after a public hearing
to consider application materials submitted by the proposed facility owner and the operator and to solicit public comment. The public hearing shall
be preceded by thirty (30) days' notice in a newspaper of general circulation. Mailed notice shall be provided to owners of land adjacent to the
proposed site. During the notice period, the application materials shall be available for public review at the City offices, and this shall be stated in
the public notice. The application will be approved or denied within sixty (60) days of the public hearing. In the event the license is denied, the City
Council shall provide the reason for the denial. (Prior Code § 7-8-7)
f. Term Of License; Renewals: City yard waste composting facility licenses shall be valid for one year with renewal conditional on City Council
approval. Matters to be considered on renewal include, but are not limited to, conformance with all license requirements and any other statutes,
ordinances, rules and regulations promulgated by any Governing Body with legal authority to regulate the facility. Renewal shall be by resolution of
the City Council. The renewal fee shall be as provided in section 3-1-2 of this Code. Public notice of the renewal shall be provided in a newspaper
of general circulation in the City. (Prior Code § 7-8-7; amd. 2018 Code)
2. Facility Requirements:
a. Acceptable Materials: The only material acceptable at a yard waste composting facility is yard waste. Any other waste shall be considered
unacceptable and acceptance of unacceptable waste at the facility constitutes grounds for revocation of the City license.
b. Environmental Damage Limits: The facility shall incorporate methodology designed to:
(1) Limit or eliminate surface runoff.
(2) Limit or eliminate obnoxious or offensive odors and remain within the limits of the rules promulgated by the agency concerning odors.
(3) Limit or eliminate any dispersal of material off of the site.
(4) Measure any leachate production and limit its entry into the groundwater.
(5) Meet any other requirements imposed as a condition of granting the license.
3. Performance Standards:
a. The facility must meet MPCA requirements for a yard waste compost facility as specified in Minnesota Rules 7035.2835.
b. The facility must not abut a property planned, used, or zoned for residential or public use.
c. The facility must be screened from the public right-of-way by operating in an enclosed building or, if outdoors:
(1) Within an area enclosed by an opaque fence at least six feet (6') in height with landscaping; and
(2) At least one hundred fifty feet (150') from property planned, used, or zoned for residential or public use.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 127/497
d. Other setback and landscape requirements shall be the same as those for the zoning district in which the facility will be located; except, that all
nonimpervious surfaces other than planting beds shall be sodded and irrigated.
e. The site shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials, and will be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis; covered
containers shall be provided for bags, boxes, and other litter left by patrons.
f. Space shall be provided on site for a minimum of five (5) customers, or the anticipated peak customer load, whichever is higher, to circulate, park
and deposit yard waste materials, except where the Zoning Administrator determines that allowing overflow traffic above five (5) vehicles is
compatible with surrounding businesses and public safety.
g. One off street parking space shall be provided for each commercial vehicle operated by the yard waste compost facility. Parking requirements will
otherwise be as mandated by the zoning district in which the facility is located; except, that parking spaces for employees may be reduced when it
can be shown that parking spaces are not necessary if employees are transported in a company vehicle to the site.
h. All inbound and outbound trucks and equipment, except for personal vehicles, shall be restricted to designated routes established by the City.
i. Noise levels shall not exceed sixty (60) decibels as measured at the property line of property zoned for residential or public use. Otherwise, noise
levels shall not exceed seventy (70) decibels.
j. If the facility is located within five hundred feet (500') of property planned, zoned or used for residential use, it shall only be in operation between
nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.
k. A pest control plan shall be submitted that is acceptable to the local sanitarian or other appropriate official including, but not limited to, a contract
with a licensed pest control operator or regular service. (Prior Code § 7-8-7)
l. Sign requirements shall be those provided in the zoning district in which the facility is located or as provided by Minnesota Statutes section
173.086. The facility shall be clearly marked with the name and telephone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation. (Prior Code
§ 7-8-7; amd. 2018 Code)
m. Power driven processing necessary for efficient temporary storage and shipment of material may be approved if the facility meets noise and other
considerations listed above.
n. The operation of the facility shall comply with a regular inspection scheduled as approved by the sanitarian or other appropriate local official.
o. If required, an environmental impact statement or environmental assessment worksheet must be completed prior to granting approval for any yard
waste compost facility.
4. Waste Acceptance:
a. Inspection And Acceptance: Each load arriving at the facility shall be inspected and acceptance shall be noted on a permanent record. This record
shall include the date, transporter name, point of origin and type of waste. This form shall be maintained at all times and shall be available for
inspection. Completed acceptance forms shall be held for inspection for four (4) years.
b. Unacceptable Waste: In the event that unacceptable waste is delivered to the facility and discovered before acceptance, it shall be the collector's
or transporter's responsibility to remove the unacceptable waste within twenty four (24) hours of receiving notice of its unacceptable status. It shall
be considered sufficient notice to inform the driver of the transporting vehicle that the waste is unacceptable; provided, that the reason for the
unacceptable status is provided to that driver in written form. A copy of this written notice shall be maintained in the waste acceptance records and
shall be available for inspection.
c. Ownership Of Waste: Ownership of the waste shall remain in the collector or transporter until the waste is inspected and accepted at the facility, at
which time, ownership shall vest in the facility owner and operator.
5. Facility Operation:
a. Process: The process employed shall be designed to reduce or alter the waste to provide an acceptable end use product.
b. Receipt Of Waste: Yard waste shall be received at the composting site in containerless bulk form and not in plastic or other bags or boxes.
Vehicles delivering yard waste must be enclosed. Yard waste may not be delivered, transferred or stored within three hundred feet (300') of any
residential building.
c. Processing Time: All yard waste accepted must begin processing within twenty (20) days of acceptance at the facility.
d. Storage: Adequate storage for one week's backlog of accepted waste shall be provided. This storage site must provide adequate measures to:
(1) Prevent the formation of leachate.
(2) Prevent the dispersal of the waste off of the facility.
e. Vehicles: All vehicles delivering yard waste must be in compliance with the weight limits of the roads utilized.
f. Extraneous Materials: All extraneous materials must be removed within twenty four (24) hours.
g. Nuisance Conditions: The composting operation, including delivery, storage, spreading, and composting, shall not generate off site nuisances.
Such off site nuisances include, but are not limited to, dust, odor and wind blown debris or yard waste. The operation shall be free of litter and
vermin.
h. Other Regulations: The composting shall be accomplished in accordance with the regulations and rules of all other agencies, organizations, or
entities having jurisdiction over such activity.
i. Termination: Composting activities shall be suspended if at any time it is determined that conditions exist constituting a fire hazard, or if there is a
threat to surface water or groundwater from runoff of leachate. The City may inspect the site at any time without prior notice to ensure compliance
with this chapter.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 128/497
j. Reports: The operator of the composting facility shall report annually to the City. The report shall state the tonnage of yard waste delivered, the
tonnage composted, the origin of the yard waste and shall distinguish any yard waste that originates within the City from that originating at other
locations. One copy of the annual report required to be submitted to the agency by the operator or owner shall be submitted to the City Council no
later than thirty (30) days after the report is due to be submitted to the agency. Failure to submit this report constitutes grounds for revocation of
the City yard waste composting facility license.
D. Landspreading Of Yard Waste:
1. License Required: Any person landspreading yard waste shall obtain a City yard waste composting license before beginning the process.
2. Location: Landspreading of yard waste shall be permitted only in those zones where a yard waste composting facility is allowable.
3. Receipt Of Waste: Yard waste shall be received at the application site in containerless bulk form and not in plastic or other bags or boxes. Vehicles
delivering yard waste must be enclosed.
4. Ownership Of Waste: Ownership of the waste shall remain in the collector or transporter until the waste is inspected and accepted at the facility, at
which time, ownership shall vest in the facility owner and operator.
5. Handling: Yard waste may not be delivered, transferred or stored within three hundred feet (300') of any dwelling except the dwelling of the
landowner. Yard waste may not be stored within three hundred feet (300'), nor spread within one hundred feet (100'), of any wetland or floodplain.
6. Application Requirements: Yard waste may be applied within any twelve (12) month period at a rate not to exceed three inches (3") in depth or such
lesser amount as may be necessary to allow complete incorporation.
7. Processing: Yard waste must be spread within three (3) days of receipt and incorporated within fifteen (15) days of receipt. Yard waste received after
a one inch (1") deep ground freeze must be incorporated by the following May 15.
8. Vehicles: All vehicles delivering yard waste must be in compliance with the weight limits of the roads utilized.
9. Extraneous Materials: All extraneous materials must be removed within twenty four (24) hours.
10. Nuisance Conditions: The landspreading operation, including delivery, storage, spreading and incorporation, shall not generate off site nuisances of
a greater amount or different type than is typically associated with farming. Such off site nuisances include, but are not limited to, dust, odor and wind
blown debris or yard waste. The operation shall be free of litter and vermin.
11. Other Regulations: The landspreading shall be accomplished in accordance with the regulations and rules of all other agencies, organizations or
entities having jurisdiction over such activity.
12. Suspension Of Activities: Landspreading activities shall be suspended if at any time it is determined that conditions exist constituting a fire hazard,
or if there is a threat to surface water or groundwater from runoff or leachate. The City may inspect the site at any time without prior notice to ensure
compliance with this chapter.
13. Rented Land: On rented or leased land, no landspreading shall take place without the permission of the landowners.
14. Reports: The operator of the landspreading facility shall report annually to the City. The report shall state the tonnage of yard waste delivered, the
tonnage incorporated, the origin of the yard waste and shall distinguish any yard waste that originates within the City from that originating at other
locations. Failure to submit this report constitutes grounds for revocation of the City yard waste composting facility license.
E. Agricultural Waste: No part of this chapter is intended to limit the incorporation into soil of agricultural waste originating on the property on which it is
incorporated. That agricultural practice shall not be considered waste or yard waste composting and shall be allowable without any license or permit
from the City. (Prior Code § 7-8-7)
5-3-9: LIABILITY AND INDEMNIFICATION:
A. Liability: Compliance with this chapter does not act to shift any liability legally accruing to the generator, collector or facility owner or operator to the City.
The City functions as a regulator only and is not participating in the management of any waste generation, collection or facility operation other than its
own waste generation and disposal processes.
B. Generator's Indemnification: Each generator of waste residing within the City shall take all reasonable precautions necessary to protect the public from
injury and shall defend, indemnify and save the City harmless from any liability, claims, damages, costs, judgments, expenses and claims of damages
that may arise by reason of any tort claim for bodily or personal injury, disease, death or damage to property resulting directly or indirectly from an act
or omission of the generator including any generator acting as a collector and self transporter by transporting that generator's own waste to a facility.
C. Collector's Indemnification: Each collector of waste operating within the City shall take all reasonable precautions necessary to protect the public from
injury and shall defend, indemnify and save the City harmless from any liability, claims, damages, costs, judgments, expenses and claims of damages
that may arise by reason of any tort claim for bodily or personal injury, disease, death or damage to property resulting directly or indirectly from an act
or omission of the collector, its agents, employees, or independent contractors, or anyone for whom any of them may be liable.
D. Facility Indemnification: Each facility of any type located within the City shall take all reasonable precautions necessary to protect the public from injury
and shall defend, indemnify and save the City harmless from any liability, claims, damages, costs, judgments, expense and claims of damages that
may arise by reason of any tort claim for bodily or personal injury, disease, death or damage to property resulting directly or indirectly from an act or
omission of the facility owner or operator, their agents, employees, or independent contractors, or anyone for whom any of them may be liable. (Prior
Code § 7-8-9)
5-3-10: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 129/497
A. Criminal Penalties: Any person who fails to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be deemed to have committed a penal violation. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during on or which a violation occurs or continues. The penalty for such violation shall be a
misdemeanor per Minnesota Statutes section 412.231, or as later amended, plus the costs of prosecution.
B. Injunctive Relief: In the event of a violation or a threatened violation of this chapter, the City may institute appropriate actions or proceedings, including
requesting injunctive relief to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such violations or threatened violations.
C. Civil Action Or Cost As A Special Tax: If any person fails to comply with any provision of this chapter, the City may recover costs incurred for corrective
action in a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction, or at the discretion of the City Council, the costs may be certified to the City Clerk as a
special tax against the real property involved to the extent allowed by law. (Prior Code § 7-8-8)
5-3-11: PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE:
The provisions of this chapter are cumulative and are additional limitations upon all other laws and ordinances covering any subject matter in this chapter.
(Prior Code § 7-8-11)
Chapter 4
OPEN BURNING
5-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
BURNING PERMIT: A written permit issued by the City Fire Marshal authorizing fires exempted from the general provisions hereof, and setting conditions
therefor.
CONTROL EQUIPMENT: Any device, approved by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, which has the function of controlling or abating the emission of
air contaminants to the atmosphere.
FIRE MARSHAL: The Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, and Assistant Fire Marshals of the Fire Department which provides fire protection services to the City or
other contracted person providing services to the City.
OPEN BURNING: Burning any matter whereby the resultant combustion products are emitted directly to the open atmosphere without passing through any
adequate control equipment.
PERSON: Defined in Minnesota Statutes section 116.06, subdivision 17.
RECREATIONAL FIRE: A fire set with approved starter fuel no more than three feet (3') in height, contained within the border of a recreational fire site
using dry, clean wood; producing little detectable smoke, odor or soot beyond the property line; conducted with an adult tending the fire at all times; for
recreational, ceremonial, and food preparation for social purposes; extinguished completely before quitting the occasion; and respecting weather
conditions, neighbors, burning bans, and air quality so that nuisance, health or safety hazards will not be created. No more than one recreational fire is
allowed on any property at one time.
RECREATIONAL FIRE SITE: An area of no more than a three foot (3') diameter circle (measured from the inside of the fire ring or border); completely
surrounded by noncombustible and nonsmoke or odor producing material, either of natural rock, cement, brick, tile or blocks or ferrous metal only and
which area is depressed below ground, on the ground, or on a raised bed. Included are permanent outdoor wood burning fireplaces. Burning barrels are
not a "recreational fire site" as defined herein. (Prior Code § 5-4-1; amd. 2018 Code)
5-4-2: FIRE MARSHAL AND DEPUTIES:
The Fire Marshal and one or more Deputy Fire Marshals may be appointed by the City Council and shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council and
subject to its direction and control. (Prior Code § 5-4-4)
5-4-3: OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
From and after the effective date hereof, except as herein otherwise provided, open burning shall be prohibited within the City. Open burning of the types
and subject to the conditions, as hereinafter stated, shall be exempt from the prohibition of this section:
A. Recreational fires subject to the following:
1. Recreational fire sites shall not be located closer than twenty feet (20') to any structure.
2. Recreational fires shall be limited to the burning of the following materials:
a. Dry, untreated, unpainted, kindling, branches, cardboard or charcoal fire starter may be used as starter fuels. Paraffin candles and alcohols are
permitted as starter fuels and as aids to ignition only. Propane gas torches or other clean gas burning devices causing minimal pollution must be
used to start an open burn.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 130/497
b. Dry, clean wood only such as twigs, branches, limbs, "presto logs", charcoal, cord wood or untreated dimensional lumber but does not include
wood that is green with leaves or needles, rotten, wet, oil soaked, or treated with paint, glue or preservatives. Clean pallets may be used for
recreational fires when cut into lengths of not more than three feet (3').
B. Fires under managed supervision for which a written burning permit has been first obtained from the City Fire Marshal, where necessary, but limited to
the following:
1. Fires purposely set for the instruction and training of public and industrial firefighting personnel.
2. Fires set for the elimination of a fire hazard which cannot be abated by any other practicable means.
3. Fires purposely set for forest and game management purposes.
4. The burning of trees, brush, grass and other vegetable matter in the clearing of land, the maintenance of street, road and highway right-of-way, and
in accepted agricultural land management practices.
5. Any exemption hereafter adopted by the Pollution Control Agency.
Exemption to conduct fire under this section does not excuse a person from the consequences, damages or injuries which may result therefrom nor
does it exempt any person from regulations promulgated by the governmental unit exercising jurisdiction in matters of pollution in accordance with
section 5-4-6 of this chapter. (Prior Code §§ 5-4-2, 5-4-3)
5-4-4: BURNING PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required; Exemption: No person shall start or allow any open burning on any property in the City without first having obtained an open burn
permit; except, that a permit is not required for any fire which is a recreational fire as defined in subsection 5-4-3A of this chapter.
B. Application For Permit: Applications for a burning permit under this chapter shall be processed in accordance with Minnesota Statutes section 88.17, as
amended.
C. Denial Of Permit: If established criteria for the issuance of an open burning permit are not met during review of the application, it is determined that a
practical alternative method for disposal of the material exists, or a pollution or nuisance condition would result, or if a burn event safety plan cannot be
drafted to the satisfaction of the Fire Marshal, these officers may deny the application for the open burn permit.
D. Permit Required At Site: It is the responsibility of the permit holder to have a valid permit, as required by this section, available for inspection on the site
by the Wright County Sheriff's Office, Fire Department, MPCA representative or DNR Forest Officer.
E. Revocation Of Permit: The open burning permit is subject to revocation at the discretion of DNR Forest Officer, Fire Marshal, Wright County Sheriff's
Office or Fire Warden for reasons including, but not limited to, a fire hazard existing or developing during the course of the burn, any of the conditions of
the permit being violated during the course of the burn, pollution or nuisance conditions developing during the course of the burn, or a fire smoldering
with no flame present. (Prior Code § 5-4-5)
5-4-5: PROHIBITED MATERIALS:
A. No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of oils, petro fuels, rubber, plastics, chemically treated materials, or other materials which
produce excessive or noxious smoke such as tires, railroad ties, treated, painted or glued wood, composite shingles, tar paper, insulation, composition
board, sheetrock, wiring, paint or paint fillers.
B. No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of hazardous waste or salvage operations, open burning of solid waste generated from an
industrial or manufacturing process or from a service or commercial establishment or building material generated from demolition of commercial or
institutional structures.
C. No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of discarded material resulting from the handling, processing, storage, preparation, serving or
consumption of food. (Prior Code § 5-4-6)
5-4-6: RESPONSIBILITY FOR OPEN BURN:
Those starting an open burn or recreational fire allowed under this chapter shall be responsible for:
A. Prior to starting an open burn or recreational fire, confirmation is required that no burning ban or air quality alert is in effect. Every open burn or
recreational fire event shall be constantly attended by the burning permit holder, the person starting the recreational fire or their competent
representative.
B. The open burn or recreational fire shall be completely extinguished before the burning permit holder or the person starting the recreational fire or his
representative leaves the site. No fire may be allowed to smolder with no person present. (Prior Code § 5-4-7)
5-4-7: PENALTY:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 131/497
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as defined by State law or this Code. (Prior Code § 5-4-8)
Title 6
PUBLIC SAFETY
Chapter 1
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
6-1-1: POLICY AND PURPOSE:
Tornadoes, floods, blizzards, and other natural disasters can affect the City. In addition, major disasters such as train wrecks, plane crashes, explosions,
accidental releases of hazardous materials, pipeline leaks, and enemy attack pose a potential threat to public health and safety in Otsego. In recognition of
these threats, it is necessary to ensure that preparations of the City will be adequate to deal with the disasters and to provide for basic health and security,
and preserve the lives and property of the people of the City, it is declared necessary:
A. To establish a City emergency management organization, whose responsibility it is to plan and prepare for emergency government operations in time of
disaster.
B. To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during emergencies and disaster.
C. To provide for the exercise of mutual aid between the City and other political subdivisions with the goal of carrying out emergency preparedness
functions.
D. To comply with the provisions of Minnesota Statutes chapter 12.
E. To participate as policing district of Wright County and a fire protection jurisdiction of the cities of Albertville, Monticello, Elk River, and Rogers, and
review and accept their emergency plans as the City's basic plan for responses to emergencies, disasters, mutual aid, and other projects, as
prescribed within this chapter and Minnesota Statutes chapter 12. (Prior Code § 5-9-1)
6-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
DISASTER: A situation that creates an actual or imminent serious threat to the health and safety of persons, or a situation that has resulted or is likely to
result in catastrophic loss to property or the environment, and for which traditional sources of relief and assistance within the affected area are unable to
repair or prevent the injury or loss.
EMERGENCY: An unforeseen combination of circumstances that calls for immediate action to prevent a disaster from developing or occurring.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT: The preparation for and the carrying out of emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are
primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters, from acute shortages of energy, or from incidents that
pose radiological or other health hazards. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, medical and health services,
rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, radiological, chemical and other special weapons defense, evacuation of persons from stricken
areas, emergency human services, emergency transportation, existing or properly assigned functions of plant protection, temporary restoration of public
utility services, implementation of energy supply emergency conservation and allocation measures, and other functions related to civilian protection,
together with all other activities necessary or incidental to preparing for and carrying out these functions.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT MUTUAL AID: Any disaster which requires the dispatching of City personnel, equipment or other necessary resources
within or without the City limits.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION: The staff element responsible for coordinating City level planning and preparation for disaster response.
This organization provides coordination with Federal, State and local jurisdictions relative to disaster preparedness activities, disasters, mutual aid and
other projects consistent with Minnesota Statutes chapter 12 and assures implementation of Federal, State, County and other program requirements.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE PERSONNEL: An individual, organization, or team authorized by the State to supplement State or local resources for
emergency response in a stricken area.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION: A county, city, town, or commission organized and existing under Minnesota Statutes sections 473.601 to 473.679. (Prior Code
§ 5-9-2)
6-1-3: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION CREATED:
A. There is created within the City government an emergency management organization which shall be under the supervision of the Emergency
Management Director, herein referred to as "the Director". The Director shall be appointed to this position by the City Council for an indefinite term and
may be removed by the Mayor and City Council at any time. The Director shall have, in addition to his/her other position responsibilities, direct
responsibility for the organization, administration, and operation of the emergency management organization.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 132/497
B. Membership of the emergency management organization shall consist of any and all whom the Director, Mayor and City Council deem necessary. It
shall include, but not be limited to: employees of the City, representatives from each of the contracted Fire Departments, representatives from the
Wright County Sheriff's Office, representatives of related emergency management organizations or entities, and at least one at large community
member. (Prior Code § 5-9-3)
6-1-4: DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT:
A. City Administrator Serve As: The City Administrator, in his/her role as supervisor of the emergency management organization, shall serve as
Emergency Management Director.
B. Powers And Duties:
1. The Director shall represent the City at regional or State conferences for emergency management. The Director may develop additional mutual aid
agreements with other political subdivisions of the State for reciprocal emergency management aid and assistance in an emergency too great to be
dealt with unassisted and shall present an agreement to the City Council for its action. The arrangements shall be consistent with the emergency
operations plan. The Director shall also be the City's representative to emergency management committees in which the City has a current contract
for services.
2. The Director shall make assessments of personnel, business and industries, resources and facilities of the City as deemed necessary to determine
their adequacy for emergency management and to plan for their most efficient use in time of an emergency or disaster.
3. The Director shall work with the City Clerk and department heads in preparing a comprehensive emergency plan for the emergency management of
the City Hall and shall present the plan to the City Council for its approval. When the Council has approved the plan by resolution, it shall be the duty
of all City departments and emergency management forces of the City to perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved. The
plan may be modified in like manner when necessary. The Director shall coordinate the basic emergency management activities of the City to the
end that they shall be consistent and complimentary with the emergency operations plans of participating political subdivisions and State and Federal
governments.
4. In accordance with State and City emergency plans, the Director shall institute training programs, public information programs, and conduct practice
warning alerts and emergency exercises as may be necessary to assure prompt and effective operation of the emergency plan when a disaster or
mutual aid occurs, Minnesota Statutes section 12.25.
5. During an emergency, disaster, or mutual aid, the Director shall utilize the personnel, services, equipment, supplies and facilities of existing
departments of the City to the maximum extent practicable. The officers and personnel of every department shall be cooperative with and extend
services and facilities to the emergency management organization. The head of every department in cooperation with the Director shall be
responsible for the planning and programming of the emergency activities as will involve the utilization of the facilities of the department.
6. The Director shall, in cooperation with existing City departments affected, assist in the organizing, recruiting, and training of such emergency
management personnel that may be required on a volunteer basis to carry out the emergency plans of the City and State. To the extent that such
emergency personnel are recruited to augment a regular City department for emergencies, they shall be assigned to such departments and shall be
under the administration and control of said department.
7. The Director shall carry out all orders, rules, and regulations issued by the City Council pertaining to emergency management.
8. The Mayor shall authorize, and the Director shall carry out, all orders, rules and regulations issued by the Governor with reference to emergency
management.
9. The Director shall direct and control general operations of all local emergency management forces during an emergency in conformity with
controlling regulations and instructions of State emergency management authorities. The heads of departments shall be governed by the Director's
orders in respect thereto.
10. The Director shall prepare and submit such reports on emergency management activities as may be requested by the City Council. (Prior Code
§ 5-9-4)
11. If, during time of a declared emergency, the Director shall find that civil courts within the police jurisdiction of the City are unable to perform their
lawful duties, he shall inform the Mayor, and the Mayor shall inform the Governor of his findings and may recommend to him that a state of
emergency be declared in accordance with Minnesota Statutes section 12.31, subdivision 2. (Prior Code § 5-9-4; amd. 2018 Code)
6-1-5: LOCAL EMERGENCIES:
A. A local emergency may be declared only by the Mayor of the City or his legal successor(s). It shall not be continued for a period in excess of three (3)
days except by or with consent of the City Council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local emergency shall be given
prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly by the City Clerk. The declaration shall invoke the City emergency operations plan and other
interjurisdictional emergency plans, and may authorize the request for aid and assistance from surrounding political subdivisions.
B. No other City official or agency may declare a local emergency unless expressly authorized by the agreement under which the agency functions (i.e.,
mutual aid agreement or contract). However, an interjurisdictional disaster agency shall provide aid and services in accordance with the agreement
under which it functions. (Prior Code § 5-9-5)
6-1-6: EMERGENCY REGULATIONS:
A. Council Authority: Whenever necessary to meet a declared emergency or to prepare for such an emergency for which adequate regulations have not
been adopted by the State or the City Council, the Council may, by resolution, promulgate regulations, consistent with applicable Federal and State law
or regulation, respecting: the conduct of persons and the use of property during emergencies; the repair, maintenance, and safeguarding of essential
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 133/497
public services, emergency health, fire, and safety regulation, drills, or practice periods required for preliminary training; and all other matters which are
required to protect public safety, health, and welfare in declared emergencies.
B. Resolution Of Emergency Regulations:
1. Every resolution of emergency regulations shall be in writing, shall be dated, shall refer to the particular emergency to which it pertains, if so limited,
and shall be filed with the City Clerk, and shall be kept posted and available for public inspection during business hours. Notice of the existence of
such regulations and their availability for inspection shall be conspicuously posted at the front of the City Hall or other headquarters of the City or at
other places in the affected area as the Council shall designate in the resolution. By like resolution, the Council may modify or rescind any such
regulation.
2. The City Council may rescind any such regulation by resolution at any time. If not sooner rescinded, every such regulation shall expire at the end of
thirty (30) days after its effective date or at the end of the emergency, whichever comes first. Any resolution, rule, or regulation inconsistent with an
emergency regulation promulgated by the Council shall be suspended during the period of time and to the extent such conflict exists.
C. City Powers During Emergency: During a declared emergency, the City is, notwithstanding any statutory or charter provision to the contrary,
empowered, through the City Council acting within or without the corporate limits of the City, to enter into contracts and incur obligations necessary to
combat such disaster by protecting the health and safety of persons and property and providing emergency assistance to the victims of such disaster.
The City may exercise such powers in light of exigencies of the disaster without compliance with the time consuming procedures and formalities
prescribed by law pertaining to the performance of public work, entering rental equipment agreements, purchase of supplies and materials, limitations
upon tax levies, and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds including, but not limited to, publication of resolutions, publication of call for bids,
provisions of personnel laws and rules, provisions relating to low bids, and requirement for budgets. (Prior Code § 5-9-6)
6-1-7: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT A GOVERNMENT FUNCTION:
All functions thereunder and all other activities relating to emergency management are hereby declared to be City governmental functions. The provisions
of this section shall not affect the right of any person to receive benefits to which he would otherwise be entitled under this resolution or under the Workers'
Compensation Law, or under any Pension Law, nor the right of such person to receive any benefits or compensation under any act of Congress. (Prior
Code § 5-9-7)
6-1-8: PARTICIPATION IN LABOR DISPUTES OR POLITICS PROHIBITED:
The emergency management organization shall not participate in any form of political activity, nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for political
purposes, nor shall it be employed in a labor dispute. (Prior Code § 5-9-9)
6-1-9: COOPERATION WITH OTHER AGENCIES:
A. Every officer and agency of the City shall cooperate with Federal and State authorities and with authorized agencies engaged in emergency
management and emergency measures to the fullest possible extent consistent with the performance of their other duties. The provisions of this
chapter and of all regulations made hereunder shall be subject to all applicable and controlling provisions of Federal and State laws and of regulations
and orders issued thereunder and shall be deemed to be suspended and inoperative so far as there is any conflict therewith.
B. The County Sheriff may appoint any qualified person holding a position in any agency created under Federal or State authority for emergency
management purposes as a special policing officer of the City, with such powers and duties within the City incident to the functions of the Sheriff's or
deputy's position, not exceeding those of a regular Sheriff or deputy, as may be prescribed in the appointment. Every such police officer shall be
subject to the supervision and control of the Sheriff and such other deputies of the County as the Sheriff may designate. (Prior Code § 5-9-8)
6-1-10: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
A. During the period of a declared local emergency, no person may:
1. Enter or remain on the premises of an establishment that is not open for business to the general public, unless the person is the owner of the
establishment or the owner's agent;
2. Violate an order or regulation properly issued by the Mayor or the City Council, or a directive issued by the Director or the Director's authorized
agent; or
3. Wilfully obstruct, hinder, or delay a person who is authorized to enforce this chapter while that person is exercising those duties or enforcing an order
or regulation issued under authority of this chapter.
B. A person who violates this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. A violation of this chapter is subject to the penalties and provisions of title 1, chapter 5 of
this Code. (Prior Code § 5-9-11)
6-1-11: ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS:
The members of the Wright County Sheriff's Department, Elk River Fire Department, Monticello Fire Department, Albertville Fire Department, Rogers Fire
Department, and all other law enforcement agencies having jurisdiction in the City, and other people authorized by the Mayor, City Council, or Director are
authorized and directed to enforce this chapter and the orders and regulations made pursuant to this chapter. (Prior Code § 5-9-10)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 134/497
Chapter 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
6-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following words shall have the following meanings:
ANIMAL: Any mammal, reptile, amphibian, fish, bird (including all fowl and poultry) or other members commonly accepted as part of the animal kingdom.
Animals shall be classified as follows:
Domestic Animals: Those animals commonly accepted as domestic household pets. Unless otherwise defined, such animals shall include dogs,
cats, caged birds, gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, domesticated rabbits, fish, nonpoisonous, nonvenomous and nonconstricting reptiles or
amphibians, and other similar animals.
Nondomestic Animals: Those animals commonly considered to be naturally and not usually trained or domesticated, or which are commonly
considered to be inherently dangerous to the health, safety and welfare of people. Unless otherwise defined, such animals shall include:
A. Any member of the large cat family (family Felidea) including lions, tigers, cougars, bobcats, leopards and jaguars, but excluding commonly
accepted domesticated house cats.
B. Any naturally wild member of the canine family (family Canidae) including wolves, foxes, coyotes, dingoes, and jackals, but excluding commonly
accepted domesticated dogs.
C. Any crossbreeds such as the crossbreed between a wolf and a dog, unless the crossbreed is commonly accepted as a domesticated house pet.
D. Any member or relative of the rodent family including any skunk (whether or not descented), raccoon, or squirrel, but excluding those members
otherwise defined or commonly accepted as domesticated pets.
E. Any poisonous, venomous, constricting, or inherently dangerous member of the reptile or amphibian families including rattlesnakes, boa
constrictors, pit vipers, crocodiles and alligators.
F. Any other animal which is not explicitly listed above but which can be reasonably defined by the terms of this definition, including, but not limited
to, bears, deer, monkeys and game fish, unless explicitly allowed under State law.
ANIMAL RELEASE PERMIT: A permit issued by the Animal Warden for the release of any animal confined. A release permit may be obtained upon
payment of a fee as set out in section 3-1-2 of this Code, payment of the license fee for the animal if unlicensed, as well as payment of all costs incurred
by the City in capturing, impounding and harboring the animal. The release fee shall be as set out in section 3-1-2 of this Code.
ANIMALS AT LARGE: Off the premises (i.e., legal description of record) of the owner and not under the custody and control of the owner or other person,
either by leash, cord, chain, or otherwise restrained or confined.
CAT: Both the male and female of the Felidae species, commonly accepted as household pets.
DOG: Both the male and female of the canine species, commonly accepted as domesticated household pets, and other domesticated animals of a dog
kind.
FARM ANIMALS: Those animals commonly associated with a farm or performing work in an agricultural setting. Unless otherwise defined, such animals
shall include members of the equestrian family (horses, mules), bovine family (cows, bulls), sheep, poultry (chickens, turkeys), fowl (ducks, geese), swine
(including Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs), goats, bees, and other animals associated with a farm, ranch, or stable.
OWNER: Any person or persons, firm, company, corporation, association or other entity owning, keeping, or harboring an animal. (Prior Code § 5-1-2;
amd. 2018 Code)
6-2-2: DOGS AND CATS:
A. Application Of Provisions To Cats: Cats shall be included as within the controls established within this section insofar as running at large, pick up,
impounding, boarding, and proof of antirabies vaccine is concerned. All other provisions of this chapter shall also apply to cats unless otherwise
indicated.
B. Running At Large Prohibited; Restraint Requirements:
1. It shall be unlawful for the dog or cat of any person who owns, harbors, or keeps a dog or cat, or the parents or guardians of any such person under
eighteen (18) years of age, to run at large.
2. Dogs or cats physically restrained on a leash or using an electronic remote collar and accompanied by and under the control and direction of a
responsible person shall be permitted in streets or on public land unless the City has posted an area with signs reading "Dogs or Cats Prohibited".
C. Rabies Vaccination Requirements:
1. All dogs and cats kept, harbored, maintained, or transported within the City shall have current vaccinations given by a licensed veterinarian for rabies
(with a live modified vaccine).
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 135/497
2. A certificate of vaccination must be kept on which is stated the date of vaccination, owner's name and address, the animal's name (if applicable),
sex, description and weight, the type of vaccine, and the veterinarian's signature. Upon demand made by the City Clerk or Sheriff's deputy, the owner
shall present for examination the required certificates of vaccination for the animals. In cases where certificates are not presented, the owner or
keeper of the animals shall have seven (7) days in which to present the certificates to the City Clerk or other designee or Sheriff's deputy. Failure to
do so shall be deemed to be a violation of this subsection C. (Prior Code § 5-1-3)
6-2-3: NONDOMESTIC ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
It shall be illegal for any person to own, possess, harbor, or offer for sale any nondomestic animal within the City limits. Any owner of such an animal at the
effective date hereof shall have thirty (30) days from that date in which to remove the animal from the City, after which time, the City may impound as
provided in this chapter. An exception shall be made to this prohibition for animals specifically trained for and actually providing assistance to persons with
disabilities, and for those animals brought into the City as part of an operating zoo, veterinarian clinic, scientific research laboratory, or licensed show or
exhibition. (Prior Code § 5-1-4; amd. 2018 Code)
6-2-4: FARM ANIMALS:
Farm animals shall only be kept in agricultural districts of the City or other districts as allowed in the City zoning ordinance and pursuant to restrictions set
forth in the zoning ordinance. An exception shall be made to this section for those farm animals brought into the City as part of an operating zoo,
veterinarian clinic, scientific research laboratory, or licensed show or exhibition. (Prior Code § 5-1-5)
6-2-5: NUISANCE ANIMALS:
A. Noise:
1. The owner or keeper of a dog shall not allow such animal to make noise, including barking and/or crying, so as to cause unreasonable annoyance or
disturbance to any person.
2. The noise shall be a violation of this section if:
a. The noise can be heard from a location outside of the boundaries of the property where the animal is being kept.
b. The noise occurs repeatedly over a period of at least five (5) minutes without interruption of less than one minute, or at least twenty (20) minutes
where the interruption between such noises is less than five (5) minutes.
3. The noise shall not be a violation of this section if it occurs due to harassment or injury to the animal by something or someone other than the owner
or keeper of the dog, or due to trespass upon the property where the animal is located. (Ord. 2018-10, 10-22-2018)
B. Damage To Property: It shall be unlawful for any person's dog or other animal to substantially damage any lawn, garden or other property (including
animals), whether or not the owner has knowledge of the damage. Any animal causing damage to property may be impounded as provided in this
chapter, or a complaint may be issued by any party aggrieved by an animal under this chapter against the owner of the animal for prosecution under
this chapter.
C. Excrement: The owner of any animal or person having the custody or the control of any animal shall be responsible for cleaning up any feces of the
animal and disposing of such feces in a sanitary manner whether on their own property, on the property of others or on public property.
D. Impoundment Of Animal Violators: Any animals kept contrary to this section are subject to impoundment. (Prior Code § 5-1-8)
6-2-6: DOG KENNELS AND CAT SHELTERS:
A. Determination Of Dog Kennel Or Cat Shelter: The keeping of three (3) or more dogs and/or cats over six (6) months of age on the same premises,
whether owned by the same person or not and for whatever purpose kept, shall constitute a "dog kennel" or a "cat shelter".
B. Nuisance Declared: Because the keeping of three (3) or more cats or dogs on the same premises is subject to great abuse, causing discomfort to
people in the area by way of smell, noise, hazard and general aesthetic depreciation, the keeping of three (3) or more cats and/or dogs on the
premises without obtaining a kennel license pursuant to applicable ordinances and the City zoning ordinance is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and
no person shall keep or maintain a dog kennel or cat shelter within the City without proper City authorization. (Prior Code § 5-1-7)
6-2-7: DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
If, in the reasonable belief of a deputy, officer or designee, an animal presents an immediate danger to the health and safety of any person including a
deputy, officer or designee, or the animal is threatening imminent harm to any person, or the animal is in the process of attacking any person, the officer
may destroy the animal in a proper and humane manner. Otherwise, the deputy, officer or designee may apprehend the animal and deliver it to the pound
for confinement. If the animal is later determined to be no longer a danger to the health, safety and welfare of the City, it may be released to its owner.
(Prior Code § 5-1-10)
6-2-8: DISEASED ANIMALS:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 136/497
A. At Large: No person shall keep or allow to be kept on his or her premises, or on premises occupied by him or her, nor permit to run at large in the City,
any animal which is diseased so as to be a danger to the health and safety of the City.
B. Confinement: Any animal reasonably suspected of being diseased and presenting a threat to the health and safety of the public may be apprehended
and confined in the pound by any deputy, officer or designee. The deputy, officer or designee shall have a qualified veterinarian examine the animal. If
the animal is found to be diseased in such a manner so as to be a danger to the health and safety of the City, the deputy, officer or designee shall
cause such animal to be painlessly killed and shall properly dispose of the remains. The owner or keeper of the animal killed under this section shall be
liable for all costs related to the apprehension, maintenance and disposal of the animal, plus the costs of any veterinarian examinations.
C. Release: If the animal, upon examination, is not found to be diseased within the meaning of this chapter, the animal shall be released to the owner or
keeper free of charge. (Prior Code § 5-1-11)
6-2-9: BASIC CARE AND TREATMENT:
All animals shall receive from their owners or keepers kind treatment, housing in the winter, and sufficient food and water for their comfort. Any person not
treating his pet in such a humane manner will be subject to the penalties provided in this chapter. (Prior Code § 5-1-12)
6-2-10: FEMALE DOGS AND CATS IN HEAT:
Every female dog or female cat in heat shall be confined in a building or other enclosure in such manner that it cannot come in contact with another dog or
cat except for planned breeding. Upon capture and failure to reclaim the animal, every dog or cat shall be neutered or spayed prior to being transferred to
a new owner. (Prior Code § 5-1-13)
6-2-11: IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION PROVISIONS:
A. Official Pound: From time to time the City Council shall designate an official pound to which animals found in violation of this chapter shall be taken for
safe treatment, and if necessary, for destruction. (Prior Code § 5-1-15)
B. Impoundment For Certain Violations:
1. Running At Large: Any animal running at large is hereby declared a public nuisance. Any Sheriff's deputy or authorized police officer may impound
any dog or other animal found running at large and shall give notice of the impounding to the owner of such dog or other animal, if known. In case
the owner is unknown, the officer shall post notice at the City Hall that if the dog or other animal is not claimed within the time period set forth in this
chapter, it will be sold or otherwise disposed of. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful to kill, destroy, or otherwise cause
injury to any animal, including dogs and cats, running at large.
2. Animals That Bite: Any animal that has not been inoculated by a live modified rabies vaccine and which has bitten any person, wherein the skin has
been punctured or the services of a doctor are required, shall be confined in the City pound for a period of not less than ten (10) days, at the expense
of the owner. The animal may be released at the end of such time if healthy and free from symptoms of rabies, and by payment of all costs by the
owner. However, if the owner of the animal shall elect immediately upon receipt of notice of need for such confinement by the officer to voluntarily
and immediately confine the animal for the required period of time in a veterinary hospital of the owner's choosing, not outside of Wright County, and
provide immediate proof of such confinement in such a manner as may be required, the owner may do so. If, however, the animal has been
inoculated with a live modified rabies vaccine and the owner has proof of the vaccination by a certificate from a licensed veterinarian, the owner may
confine the dog or other animal to the owner's property.
C. Reclamation Of Animals: All animals conveyed to the City pound shall be kept, with humane treatment and sufficient food and water for their comfort, at
least fourteen (14) days. In case the owner or keeper shall desire to reclaim the animal from the pound, the payment of any and all maintenance costs
for the animal, per day or any part of a day while the animal is in said pound, shall be required.
D. Unclaimed Animals: At the expiration of the times established in subsection C of this section, if the animal has not been reclaimed in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter, the City's designee may let any person claim the animal by complying with all provisions of this chapter, or cause the
animal to be destroyed in a proper and humane manner and shall properly dispose of the remains. (Prior Code § 5-1-6)
E. Interference With Officers; Breaking Open Pound: No person shall in any manner molest, hinder, or interfere with any person authorized by the City
Council to capture dogs, cats or other animals and convey them to the pound while engaged in such operation; nor shall any unauthorized person
break open the pound, or attempt to do so, or take or attempt to take from any agent any animal taken up by him or her in compliance with this chapter,
or in any other manner to interfere with or hinder such officer in the discharge of his or her duties under this chapter. (Prior Code § 5-1-16)
6-2-12: SEIZURE OF ANIMALS:
Any Sheriff's deputy, animal control officer or City designee may enter upon private property and seize any offending animal; provided, that any of the
following exist:
A. There is an identified complainant other than the deputy, officer or designee making a contemporaneous complaint about the animal;
B. The deputy, officer or designee reasonably believes that the animal meets the criteria for a barking dog, cruelty, or for an animal at large as set forth in
this chapter;
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 137/497
C. The deputy, officer or designee can demonstrate that there has been at least one previous complaint of a barking dog, inhumane treatment of an
animal, or that the animal was at large at this address on a prior date;
D. The deputy, officer or designee has made a reasonable attempt to contact the owner of the property and those attempts have either failed or have been
ignored;
E. The seizure will not involve the forced entry into a private residence. Use of a pass key obtained from a property manager, landlord, innkeeper, or other
person authorized to have such key shall not be considered unauthorized entry;
F. Written notice of the seizure is left in a conspicuous place if personal contact with the owner of the dog is not possible. (Prior Code § 5-1-9)
6-2-13: ENFORCEMENT OFFICER:
The City Council is hereby authorized to appoint an officer or designee to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The officer may be a Deputy Sheriff. In the
officer's duty of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, he or she may from time to time, with the consent of the City Council, designate assistants. (Prior
Code § 5-1-14)
6-2-14: MISDEMEANOR VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
A. Misdemeanor: Unless otherwise provided, violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as established in section 1-4-1 of this
Code. (Prior Code § 5-1-17; amd. 2018 Code)
B. Petty Misdemeanor: Violations of section 6-2-2 and subsections 6-2-5A and C of this chapter are petty misdemeanors punishable by a fine of up to
three hundred dollars ($300.00) per violation. In the event that an owner commits three (3) of the same or similar petty misdemeanor violations within a
period of one year, the third violation shall be considered a misdemeanor.
C. Separate Offenses: Each day a violation of this chapter is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such under this chapter. (Prior Code § 5-1-17)
Chapter 3
WEAPONS CONTROL
6-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
ARCHERY EQUIPMENT: A bow and arrow used for hunting only as allowed by Minnesota Statutes section 97B.035, as amended.
CARRY: The handling or transportation of a firearm concealed or otherwise outside a person's domicile.
DANGEROUS WEAPONS: Slingshot, clubs, blackjacks, spring guns, brass or metal knuckles or any knife with a switchblade which opens automatically
under spring pressure with a button or release mechanism or by any other mechanical contrivance.
DISCHARGE: The firing or shooting of any firearm.
DISMANTLED FIREARM: Any unloaded firearm or bow which is dismantled in such a manner so as to prevent discharge.
ENCASED FIREARM: Any unloaded firearm or bow, placed in a case which is tied or otherwise secured in the manner provided.
FINE SHOT: Shot sizes F through no. 12 inclusive.
FIREARM: Any device from which may be fired or ejected, one or more solid projectiles by means of a cartridge or shell or by the action of an explosive
substance; or for which the propelling force is a spring, elastic band, carbon dioxide, air or other gas or vapor and including archery equipment.
LANDOWNER: Any person, group, firm or corporation owning, leasing or legally controlling any lands within the territorial limits of the City.
SINGLE PROJECTILE: Any single projectile, whether contained in a metallic, paper, plastic or other cartridge including any method of loading a muzzle
loader which results in a single projectile being discharged.
SUITABLE BACKSTOP: Any natural or manmade barrier of sufficient mass, size, or construction to wholly contain the projectile being discharged.
WRITTEN PERMISSION: The following information must be included: the full name, address, date of birth, and signature of the person authorized to hunt
or discharge a firearm; the full name, address, and signature of the landowner. (Prior Code § 5-2-2)
6-3-2: DESIGNATED NO DISCHARGE ZONE:
The City Council shall cause to be published a map designating the areas within the City where no discharge is allowed as regulated by section 6-3-3 of
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 138/497
this chapter. Updates to this map shall be published no later than September 1 of each year or the prior map approved by the City Council and published
shall remain in full force and effect. The City Council may approve by resolution reasonable modifications of the No Discharge Map, but in no case shall
any discharge be allowed until the revised map has been published. Discharge in areas not designated on this map as within the no discharge zone is
regulated by sections 6-3-3 and 6-3-5 of this chapter. (Prior Code § 5-2-7)
6-3-3: PERMITTED USE OF FIREARMS WITHIN NO DISCHARGE ZONE:
The discharge or carrying of firearms that are not encased or dismantled is permitted within the no discharge zone under the following circumstances so
long as no innocent party is endangered unless otherwise prohibited by State or Federal law: (Prior Code § 5-2-3; amd. 2018 Code)
A. By law enforcement officers in the line of duty or military personnel in the line of duty or persons with a lawfully issued and currently valid permit to carry
a pistol as defined by Minnesota Statutes section 624.714.
B. By any person to resist or prevent an offense which that person reasonably believes exposes himself or another to great bodily harm or death.
C. By a certified firearms safety training instructor while participating in a Department of Natural Resources approved firearms safety program.
D. By any person while participating in a Department of Natural Resources approved firearm safety program.
E. By any person for the destruction of diseased, injured farm animals or dangerous birds, animals and reptiles upon property defined as a farm by the
zoning ordinance.
F. By any person on a rifle, trap, archery or target range established in accordance with the City's zoning ordinance or as part of a City sponsored activity.
G. By any person possessing, transporting or carrying handguns as specifically allowed by State law.
H. By any person slaughtering farm animals which they own or with the permission of the owner.
I. By any person target practicing with a bow and arrow with target tips only, BB or pellet gun with parental supervision under the age of eighteen (18),
against a suitable backstop, at least two hundred feet (200') from all buildings, unless the buildings are owned by them or unless they have the owner's
permission carried on their person. Bow and arrow target practice may also take place within the confines of a building if a suitable backstop is used.
J. By any person participating in a special hunting season, which season may not conflict with State law or regulations, established by the City Council for
the purpose of wildlife management. The season shall be established by the City Council when, based upon competent professional advice such as a
Conservation Office, a season is needed to reduce an animal population. The Council may authorize the use of single projectiles as part of the special
hunt regulations set forth in the resolution.
K. By any person engaged in a City approved event reenacting a historic military engagement, or engaged in a periodic ceremony such as a funeral or
Memorial Day observances where firearms have traditionally been discharged; provided, that only blank cartridges or shells are used which make
noise similar to the discharge of a firearm without the firing or ejection of solid projectiles. In the case of a historical military reenactment, the owner of
the property upon which the reenactment is to occur shall notify both the City and the Wright County Sheriff of the date, time and duration of the
planned reenactment at least two (2) weeks prior to the proposed event. The City may approve or disapprove the planned event at its sole discretion,
or may require the owner to comply with certain provisions as conditions of approval.
L. By any person issued an annual administrative archery permit to hunt specific property identified on the permit using archery equipment as allowed by
State law and regulations subject to the following provisions:
1. The parcel or contiguous parcels owned by the person or with the owner's written permission carried on the person on which the hunt occurs shall
not be less than ten (10) acres in area.
2. The property shall not be zoned R-4, R-4A, R-5, R-6 or R-7 District on the zoning map.
3. No person shall discharge an arrow within two hundred feet (200') of any public right-of-way, property owned by the City of Otsego, and all buildings
unless owned by the person or with the owner's written permission carried on the person. (Prior Code § 5-2-3)
6-3-4: PERMITTED USE OF FIREARMS OUTSIDE NO DISCHARGE ZONE:
In addition to the conditions set forth in section 6-3-3 of this chapter, the discharge or carrying of firearms is permitted outside the no discharge zone under
the following circumstances so long as no innocent party is endangered unless otherwise prohibited by State or Federal law: (Prior Code § 5-2-4; amd.
2018 Code)
A. By any person using projectiles (other than archery equipment) for target practice; provided, that the projectiles are stopped by a suitable backstop; and
provided, further, that the discharge occurs at least five hundred feet (500') from all buildings, unless owned by the person or with the owner's written
permission carried on the person.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 139/497
B. By any person hunting with a single projectile (other than archery equipment) in accordance with State and Federal regulations; and provided, further,
that the discharge occurs at least five hundred feet (500') from all buildings, unless owned by the person or with the owner's written permission carried
on the person.
C. By any person hunting or target shooting with a shotgun using fine shot at least five feet (5') from all buildings, unless owned by the person or with the
owner's written permission carried on the person.
D. By any person using projectiles (other than archery equipment) for target practice or hunting; provided, that the discharge occurs at least five hundred
feet (500') from properties where farm animals are pastured or kept in an open feedlot, unless owned by the person or with the owner's written
permission carried on the person.
E. By any person using projectiles (other than archery equipment) for target practice or hunting; provided, that the discharge occurs at least five hundred
feet (500') from property lines abutting an arterial or collector street designated by the Comprehensive Plan including, but not limited to, the following
roadways:
1. Interstate 94.
2. Trunk Highway 101.
3. CSAH 39.
4. CSAH 42.
5. CSAH 37.
6. CSAH 36.
7. CSAH 19.
8. Odean Avenue north of 70th Street (CSAH 37).
9. Mason Avenue between CSAH 39 and 83rd Street.
10. 83rd Street between Mason Avenue and Marlowe Avenue.
11. Marlowe Avenue between 83rd Street and 80th Street.
12. 80th Street between CSAH 19 and Marlowe Avenue.
F. By any person using projectiles (other than archery equipment) for target practice or hunting; provided, that the discharge occurs at least five hundred
feet (500') from any property line abutting public park property (not including wildlife management areas or other State owned land on which hunting is
allowed).
G. By any person using archery equipment for hunting or target practice; provided, that the discharge occurs two hundred feet (200') from:
1. All buildings unless owned by the person or with the owner's written permission carried on the person.
2. Properties where farm animals are pastured or kept in an open feedlot unless owned by the person or with the owner's written permission carried on
the person.
3. Any property abutting public park property (not including wildlife management areas or other State owned land on which hunting is allowed).
4. Any roadway designated as an arterial or collector street by the Comprehensive Plan.
H. By any person using projectiles for hunting during an established season from the water or from State public land that is within five hundred feet (500')
of any building or a corral confining livestock; provided, that the discharge is not in the direction of said building or corral. (Prior Code § 5-2-4)
6-3-5: PROHIBITIONS:
Except as specifically allowed in sections 6-3-3 and 6-3-4 of this chapter:
A. The discharge of a firearm is prohibited.
B. Hunting using a firearm with a single projectile or with a BB gun is prohibited.
C. Carrying or discharge of a firearm by any person under the age of fourteen (14) is prohibited except when accompanied by a parent, adult guardian, or
certified safety training instructor.
D. The aiming of any firearm, whether loaded or not, at or towards any human being is hereby prohibited.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 140/497
E. The carrying of an uncased firearm in a motor vehicle, in a place or area open to the public, or in any private place or area unless that private place or
area is owned by the person carrying the firearm or with the owner's permission is prohibited.
F. No person shall discharge a firearm while traveling on or using a wild, scenic, or recreational river, except for the purpose of hunting during those times
and in those areas in which hunting for protected animals is allowed. (Prior Code § 5-2-5)
6-3-6: DANGEROUS WEAPONS:
A. Prohibitions: No minor under the age of eighteen (18) shall wear under his clothes, conceal about his person, or within a motor vehicle, display in a
threatening manner or sell, offer for sale or carry or use any dangerous weapon.
B. Exceptions: The prohibition of this section shall not be construed to forbid any law enforcement officer from carrying or using dangerous weapons in the
proper discharge of his or her duties. (Prior Code § 5-2-6)
6-3-7: MISDEMEANOR VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable in accordance
with the provision for misdemeanor penalty under State law, as amended, plus costs of prosecution, for each offense. (Prior Code § 5-2-7)
Chapter 4
JUVENILES
6-4-1: CURFEW REGULATIONS:
A. Findings And Purpose:
1. The City Council has determined that there has been an increase in juvenile crime by persons under the age of eighteen (18).
2. The increase in juvenile crime poses a danger to the health, safety and general welfare of the juveniles and the general public.
3. Juveniles are particularly vulnerable at nighttime hours to become victims of crime due to their inability to make critical decisions in a mature and
experienced manner.
4. While parents or guardians have the primary responsibility to provide for the health, safety and welfare of juveniles, the City also has a substantial
interest in the safety and welfare of juveniles. Moreover, the City has an interest in preventing juvenile crime, promoting parental supervision and
providing for the well being of the general public.
5. A juvenile curfew seeks to regulate juvenile activities carried out at nighttime hours upon the streets and in public places and establishments where
the risk of danger to juveniles can be the greatest.
6. A curfew for those under the age of eighteen (18) will be in the interest of the public health, safety and general welfare and will aid in attaining the
foregoing objectives and to diminish the undesirable impact of such conduct on the citizens of the City. (Prior Code § 5-3-1)
B. Definitions: As used in this section, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
EMERGENCY: A circumstance or combination of circumstances requiring immediate action to prevent property damage, serious bodily injury or loss of
life.
ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of
amusement or entertainment.
GUARDIAN: A legal guardian of a person under age eighteen (18) or a person eighteen (18) or older who has been authorized by the legal guardian or
parent to supervise the person under age eighteen (18).
JUVENILE: A minor person under the age of eighteen (18). The term does not include persons under eighteen (18) who are married or have been
legally emancipated.
MINOR: Any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
PARENT: A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person.
PROPRIETOR: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes
the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops.
REMAIN: To loiter, linger, or stay or to fail to leave the premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in
control of the premises.
SERIOUS BODILY INJURY: A bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted
loss or impairment of the function of any body part or organ. (Prior Code § 5-3-2; amd. 2018 Code)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 141/497
C. Age And Hour Restrictions:
1. Under Sixteen: It is unlawful for a juvenile under the age of sixteen (16) years to be present in any public place or establishment within the City at
any time between ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on each day of the week and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of the following day. (Prior Code § 5-3-3)
2. Age Sixteen Or Seventeen: It is unlawful for a juvenile age sixteen (16) or seventeen (17) years to be present in any public place or establishment
within the City: (Prior Code § 5-3-3; amd. 2018 Code)
a. Any time between ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of the following
day.
b. Any time between twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on any Friday or Saturday and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. on the following day. (Prior Code § 5-3-3)
D. Prohibitions: It shall be unlawful for:
1. Any minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City during curfew hours unless accompanied by a parent
or legal guardian.
2. Any parent or guardian to permit or allow, either knowingly or by insufficient control, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any
establishment within the City during curfew hours unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian.
3. A proprietor or any employee of an establishment to knowingly allow a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours
unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. (Prior Code § 5-3-4)
E. Exceptions:
1. Juveniles shall be exempt from the restrictions established by subsection D of this section when the juvenile can demonstrate that:
a. The juvenile was accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or other responsible adult.
b. The juvenile was engaged in a lawful employment activity or was going to or returning home from his or her place of employment.
c. The juvenile was involved in an emergency situation.
d. The juvenile was going to, attending, or returning home from an official school, religious, or other recreational activity sponsored and/or supervised
by a public entity or a civic organization.
e. The juvenile was on an errand at the direction of a parent or guardian.
f. The juvenile was engaged in interstate travel.
g. The juvenile was on the public right-of-way boulevard or sidewalk abutting the property containing the juvenile's residence or abutting the
neighboring property, structure, or residence.
h. The juvenile was exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution or article I of the Constitution of the State of
Minnesota.
2. A proprietor or employee shall be exempt from the restrictions established by subsection D3 of this section when the proprietor or employee can
demonstrate that:
a. The proprietor or employee reasonably and in good faith relied upon a juvenile's representations of proof of age. Proof of age may be established
pursuant to Minnesota Statutes section 340A.503, subdivision 6, or other verifiable means, including, but not limited to, school identification cards
and birth certificates.
b. The proprietor or employee promptly notified the responsible law enforcement agency that a juvenile was present on the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours. (Prior Code § 5-3-5)
F. Enforcement:
1. A law enforcement officer may not issue a citation, detain a juvenile or take a juvenile into custody based on a violation of subsection E of this
section unless the law enforcement officer, after speaking with the juvenile and considering the facts and surrounding circumstances:
a. Reasonably believes that the juvenile has violated subsection E of this section; and
b. Reasonably believes that none of the exceptions in subsection E of this section apply.
2. Any juvenile apprehended while violating any of the restrictions of subsection D of this section shall be escorted home and placed in the custody of
the juvenile's parent or guardian. (Prior Code § 5-3-6)
G. Penalties:
1. A violation of subsection D1 of this section will be prosecuted pursuant to Minnesota Statutes section 260B.235 and will be subject to the penalties
therein.
2. A violation of subsection D2 or D3 of this section is a misdemeanor and will be subject to the penalty set forth in Minnesota Statutes section 609.03.
(Prior Code § 5-3-7)
6-4-2: SOCIAL HOSTING:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 142/497
A. Purpose And Findings: The City Council intends to discourage underage possession and consumption of alcohol, even if done within the confines of a
private residence, and intends to hold persons criminally responsible who host events or gatherings where persons under twenty one (21) years of age
possess or consume alcohol regardless of whether the person hosting the event or gathering supplied the alcohol based on the following findings:
1. Events and gatherings held on private or public property where alcohol is possessed or consumed by persons under the age of twenty one (21) are
harmful to those persons and constitute a potential threat to public health requiring prevention or abatement.
2. Prohibiting underage consumption acts to protect underage persons, as well as the general public, from injuries related to alcohol consumption, such
as alcohol overdose or alcohol related traffic accidents.
3. Alcohol is an addictive drug which, if used irresponsibly, could have drastic effects on those who use it as well as those who are affected by the
actions of an irresponsible user.
4. Often, events or gatherings involving underage possession and consumption occur outside the presence of parents. However, there are times when
the parent(s) is/are present and condone the activity, and in some circumstances provide the alcohol.
5. Even though giving or furnishing alcohol to an underage person is a crime, it is difficult to prove, and an ordinance is necessary to help further
combat underage consumption.
6. A deterrent effect will be created by holding a person criminally responsible for hosting an event or gathering where underage possession or
consumption occurs. (Prior Code § 5-10-1)
B. Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following terms have the following meanings:
ALCOHOL: Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits including dilutions and
mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains onehalf
of one percent (0.5%) or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with
other substances.
EVENT OR GATHERING: Any group of three (3) or more persons who have assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.
HOST OR ALLOW: To aid, conduct, entertain, organize, supervise, control, or permit a gathering or event.
PARENT: Any person having legal custody of a juvenile as a natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent; as a legal guardian; or as a person to
whom legal custody has been given by order of the court.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, corporation, or any association of one or more individuals. A person does not include any City,
County, or State agency.
RESIDENCE, PREMISES OR PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or
other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting room, park, or any other place of assembly, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether
occupied as a dwelling or specifically for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without permission or
compensation.
UNDERAGE PERSON: Any individual under twenty one (21) years of age. (Prior Code § 5-10-2)
C. Prohibited Acts; Responsibility For Acts:
1. It is unlawful for any person(s) to host or allow an event or gathering at any residence, premises, or on any other private or public property where
alcohol or alcoholic beverages are present when the person knows that an underage person will or does:
a. Consume any alcohol or alcoholic beverage; or
b. Possess any alcohol or alcoholic beverage with the intent to consume it, and the person fails to take reasonable steps to prevent possession or
consumption by the underage person(s).
2. A person is criminally responsible for violating subsection C1 of this section if the person intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels, or conspires
with or otherwise procures another to commit the prohibited act.
3. A person who hosts an event or gathering does not have to be present at the event or gathering to be criminally responsible. (Prior Code § 5-10-3)
D. Exceptions:
1. This section does not apply to conduct solely between an underage person and his or her parents while present in the parent's household.
2. This section does not apply to legally protected religious observances.
3. This section does not apply to retail intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor licensees, Municipal liquor stores, or bottle club permit holders who
are regulated by Minnesota Statutes section 340A.503, subdivision 1(a)(1).
4. This section does not apply to situations where underage persons are lawfully in possession of alcohol or alcoholic beverages during the course and
scope of employment. (Prior Code § 5-10-4)
Chapter 5
SEXUAL OFFENDERS AND SEXUAL PREDATORS
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 143/497
6-5-1: FINDINGS AND INTENT:
A. Findings: Repeat sexual offenders, sexual offenders who use physical violence, and sexual offenders who prey on children are sexual predators who
present an extreme threat to the public safety. Current information indicates that sexual offenders are extremely likely to use physical violence and to
repeat their offenses, and most sexual offenders commit many offenses, have many more victims than are even reported, and are prosecuted for only
a fraction of their crimes. This makes the cost of sexual offender victimization to society at large and specifically to the City of Otsego ("City"), while
incalculable, clearly exorbitant.
B. Intent: It is the intent of this chapter to serve the City's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens
of the City by creating areas around locations where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers wherein certain sexual offenders and
sexual predators are prohibited from establishing temporary or permanent residence. (Prior Code § 5-11-1)
6-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
DESIGNATED OFFENDER: Any person who has been convicted of a designated sexual offense, regardless of whether adjudication has been withheld, in
which the victim of the offense was less than eighteen (18) years of age, or has been categorized as a level III sex offender under Minnesota Statutes
section 244.052, or successor or amended statute.
DESIGNATED SEXUAL OFFENSE: A conviction, adjudication of delinquency, commitment under Minnesota Statutes chapter 253B, or admission of guilt
under oath without adjudication involving any of the following offenses: 609.342; 609.343; 609.344; 609.345; 609.352; 609.365; 617.23; 617.246; 617.247;
617.293; successor or amended statutes, or a similar offense from another state.
PERMANENT RESIDENCE: A place where the person abides, lodges, or resides for fourteen (14) or more consecutive days. Permanent residence does
not require an ownership interest by the person in such residence.
TEMPORARY RESIDENCE: A place where the person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of fourteen (14) or more days in the aggregate during any
calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where the person routinely abides, lodges, or resides for a period of four (4) or
more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence. (Prior Code § 5-11-2)
6-5-3: SEXUAL OFFENDER AND SEXUAL PREDATOR PROHIBITIONS:
A. Prohibitions:
1. Location Of Residence: It is unlawful for any designated offender to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within two thousand
feet (2,000') of any of the following places:
a. Designated public school bus stop.
b. Licensed daycare.
c. Place of worship which provides regular educational programs (i.e., Sunday school) or daycare services.
d. Public park.
e. Public or private school providing elementary school, middle school or high school education.
2. Activities: It is unlawful for any designated offender to participate in a holiday event involving children under eighteen (18) years of age, such as
distributing candy or other items to children on Halloween, wearing a Santa Claus costume on or preceding Christmas, or wearing an Easter bunny
costume on or preceding Easter. Holiday events in which the offender is the parent or guardian of the children involved, and no nonfamilial children
are present, are exempt from this subsection A2.
B. Measurement Of Distance:
1. For purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property
line of the permanent residence or temporary residence to the nearest outer property line of a school, designated public school bus stop, daycare
center, park, playground, place of worship, or other place where children regularly congregate.
2. The City Clerk shall maintain an official map showing prohibited locations as defined by this chapter. The City Clerk shall update the map at least
annually to reflect any changes in the location of prohibited zones. The map shall not be deemed conclusive or all encompassing since prohibited
zones change from time to time including, but not limited to, designated public school bus stops or other places where children are known to
congregate.
C. Exceptions: A designated offender residing within a prohibited area as described in subsection A of this section does not commit a violation of this
chapter if any of the following apply:
1. The person established the permanent residence or temporary residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to Minnesota Statutes
section 243.166 or 243.167, or successor statute, prior to June 22, 2009.
2. The person was a minor when he/she committed the offense and was not convicted as an adult.
3. The person is a minor.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 144/497
4. The school, designated public school bus stop or daycare center within two thousand feet (2,000') of the person's permanent residence was opened
after the person established the permanent residence or temporary residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to Minnesota
Statutes section 243.166 or 243.167.
5. The residence is also the primary residence of the person's parents, grandparents, siblings, spouse, or children.
6. The residence is a property owned or leased by the Minnesota Department of Corrections.
D. Penalties: A person who violates this section shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by confinement for a term
not exceeding ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and confinement. Each day a person maintains a residence in violation of this section constitutes a
separate violation. (Prior Code § 5-11-3)
6-5-4: RENTING PROPERTY TO OFFENDERS AND PREDATORS:
A. It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other conveyance, with the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent
residence or temporary residence by any person prohibited from establishing such permanent residence or temporary residence pursuant to this
chapter, if such place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other conveyance is located within a prohibited location zone described in subsection 6-5-3A1
of this chapter.
B. If a property owner discovers or is informed that a tenant is a designated offender after signing a lease or otherwise agreeing to let the offender reside
on the property, the owner or property manager may evict the offender.
C. A property owner's failure to comply with provisions of this section shall constitute a violation of this section, and shall subject the property owner to the
Code enforcement provisions and procedures as provided in title 1, chapter 5 of this Code, but shall not be exclusive of any other remedies available
under any applicable Federal, State or local law and it is within the discretion of the City to seek cumulative remedies. (Prior Code § 5-11-4)
Title 7
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
MOTOR VEHICLE OPERATION
7-1-1: UNREASONABLE ACCELERATION:
A. Definition: Unreasonable acceleration of a motor vehicle is hereby defined as acceleration which unnecessarily breaks the traction between a tire or
tires of a motor vehicle and the driving surface, thereby causing squealing or screeching sounds by the motor vehicle's tire or tires or the unnecessary
throwing of sand or gravel by the tires of said vehicle, or both.
B. Prohibitions: No person shall start or accelerate any motor vehicle with an unnecessary exhibition of speed on any public highway, street, road, parking
lot, alley, or other public property, or upon any private street or road freely used by the general public. (Ord. 2019-04, 2-11-2019)
7-1-2: ERRATIC DRIVING:
No person shall drive a motor vehicle on a public highway, street, road, parking lot, alley or other public property, or upon a private street or road freely
used by the general public, in an erratic or irregular manner and changing speeds so as to create a hazard to themselves or other persons or property or
so as to interfere with other traffic in the area. (Ord. 2019-04, 2-11-2019)
7-1-3: ENGINE BRAKING:
It shall be unlawful within the City for the driver of any vehicle to use or operate or cause to be used or operated any engine brake, compression brake or
mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the braking or deceleration of any vehicle which results in the excessive, loud, unusual or explosive noise
from such vehicle. (Ord. 2019-04, 2-11-2019)
7-1-4: PETTY MISDEMEANOR VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable
by a fine not to exceed the maximum fine for a petty misdemeanor provided for by State law, plus costs of prosecution. (Ord. 2019-04, 2-11-2019)
Chapter 2
ON STREET PARKING REGULATIONS
7-2-1: FINDINGS; PURPOSE:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 145/497
The City Council finds that it is necessary to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Otsego and, to promote traffic flow, that restrictions
be placed upon the parking of certain vehicles upon City streets. (Prior Code § 8-3-1)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-11 - WINTER PARKING RESTRICTIONS. Go to new ordinance.
7-2-2: GENERAL PARKING PROHIBITIONS:
A. Designation Of Parking Zones And Fire Lanes:
1. The Council may, by resolution, designate streets, blocks or alleys, or portions thereof, as no parking zones, as fire lanes, or as five (5) minute, ten
(10) minute, fifteen (15) minute, thirty (30) minute, one hour, two (2) hour, or three (3) hour parking zones.
2. The Council may also, upon application by the Fire Marshal or an owner, lessee or operator of any building, which building generally attracts
numerous numbers of the public, designate and thus establish a fire lane upon private property. The application shall be reviewed and approved or
disapproved by the Fire Marshal prior to being presented to the City Council for approval. The designated area, when approved by the City Council,
shall effectively become a fire lane.
3. All designated zones pursuant to this subsection A shall be appropriately marked at the direction of the City, at the property owner's expense when
on private property, and the City's expense when on public property. Unless otherwise provided within the resolution or application approval, such
restrictions shall apply every day of the week, including Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays.
B. Maximum Time Limit: Parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited for more than eighteen (18) hours continuously on all public streets, boulevards, ditches,
and rights-of-way within the corporate limits of the City, with the exception of those streets or highways otherwise provided time limitations in
subsection A of this section.
C. Night Parking: No vehicle shall be parked upon any public streets, boulevards, ditches, and rights-of-way in the City between the hours of two o'clock
(2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., inclusive, between November and April, including, but not limited to, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
D. Snow Emergency: After a snowfall of at least two and one-half inches (21/2") in the City, parking is prohibited on any public streets, boulevards, ditches,
and rights-of-way until and after that particular public way has been plowed and the snow removed to the curb line. It is unlawful to deposit snow or ice
plowed or removed from private property onto the traveled portion of a street, alley or public way. (Prior Code § 8-3-2)
E. Obstructing Any Street Or Public Right-Of-Way: No vehicle shall be parked, permitted to stand, or obstruct any street or public right-of-way within the
City in any of the following places:
1. Within twenty feet (20') of an intersection;
2. Greater than five feet (5') from the curb or edge of a street unless legally designated and no portion of a parked vehicle may extend beyond ten feet
(10') from the curb or edge of street;
3. In a location that is not parallel to the curb or edge of street, unless legally designated;
4. On a sidewalk, trail, or crosswalk;
5. In front of or within five feet (5') of a public or private driveway on the same side of the street;
6. Within ten feet (10') of a fire hydrant;
7. Within ten feet (10') of a mailbox;
8. Those areas as specified by Minnesota Statutes 169.34. (Ord. 2019-04, 2-11-2019)
F. Obstructing Public Ways And Access: No vehicle shall be parked so as to obstruct a public sidewalk or trail or block access to a driveway or block
access to a mailbox. (Prior Code § 8-3-2; amd. Ord. 2019-04, 2-11-2019)
G. Trucks, Semi-Tractor/Trailers, Recreational Vehicles And Equipment, And Commercial Vehicles: Trucks, semi-tractor/trailers, recreational vehicles and
equipment, and commercial vehicles with a Class-4 rating or higher or an overall length greater than twenty five feet (25') shall not be parked on public
streets, boulevards, ditches and rights-of-way within the City. (Ord. 2018-05, 7-9-2018; amd. Ord. 2019-04, 2-11-2019)
H. Immobile Vehicles And Trailers: Vehicles and trailers incapable of movement under their own propulsion shall not be parked or stored on public streets,
boulevards, ditches, and rights-of-way within the City. (Prior Code § 8-3-2; amd. Ord. 2019-04, 2-11-2019)
7-2-3: EXCEPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to the following circumstances:
A. City vehicles parked in connection with official City business.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 146/497
B. Vehicles picking up or delivering products to residential customers, or providing a service to a residential customer. Even in the event of a pick up or
delivery, in no case shall any vehicle park for any period of time in any manner which tends to block a designated bike path.
C. Police, fire and medical emergency vehicles or public or private utility vehicles parked in connection with official duties. (Prior Code § 8-3-3)
7-2-4: IMPOUNDMENT OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES:
A vehicle in violation of this chapter may be ordered removed from a public street, boulevard, ditch, or right-of-way by a law enforcement officer. The
vehicle may be towed away to a garage, service station or other place of safekeeping as authorized by the City Council as soon as possible to facilitate
snow removal, street maintenance, the orderly flow of traffic, firefighting or other lawful purpose. The vehicle will be surrendered to the duly identified
owner thereof upon payment of the required fees for such towing and storage. Removal of a vehicle does not bar prosecution for a violation of traffic or
parking regulations. (Prior Code § 8-3-4)
7-2-5: MISDEMEANOR VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
A. Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by
penalty established by State Statute for a misdemeanor, as amended. Each day in which such violation occurs shall be deemed a separate offense.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the City as the
result of such violation, including court costs and reasonable attorney fees. (Prior Code § 8-3-5)
Chapter 3
SNOWMOBILES AND OTHER RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLES
7-3-1: INTENT:
It is the intent of this chapter to supplement Minnesota Statutes sections 84.81 through 84.88 and chapter 169 with respect to operation of snowmobiles,
and Minnesota Statutes sections 84.787 through 84.8045 and sections 84.92 through 84.928 with respect to recreational motor vehicles. (Prior Code § 8-
1-1; amd. 2018 Code)
7-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
BOULEVARD: The portion of the street right-of-way between the curb line and the property line.
DESIGNATED AREA: All areas of the City that are set forth in section 7-3-7 of this chapter, which may be amended by resolution of the City Council from
time to time.
OPERATE: To ride in or on and control the operation of a snowmobile or recreational motor vehicle.
OPERATOR: Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a snowmobile or recreational motor vehicle.
OWNER: A person, other than a lienholder, having the property in or title to a snowmobile or recreational motor vehicles.
PERSON: Includes an individual, partnership, corporation, the State and its agencies and subdivisions, and any body of persons, whether incorporated or
not.
RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLE: Trail bikes, amphibious vehicles and similar devices other than snowmobiles, used at least partially for travel on
natural terrain, but not "special mobile equipment" as defined in Minnesota Statutes Annotated section 168.002, subdivision 31, which is hereby
incorporated herein by reference; also including any self-propelled vehicle and any vehicle propelled or drawn by a self-propelled vehicle used for
recreational purposes, including, but not limited to, a motorized bicycle, all terrain vehicle, hovercraft or motor vehicle licensed for highway operation which
is being used for off road recreational purposes. This definition includes "off highway motorcycles" as defined in Minnesota Statutes section 84.787, "off
road vehicles" as defined in Minnesota Statutes section 84.797, and "all terrain vehicles" as defined in Minnesota Statutes section 84.92.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: The entire strip of land traversed by a highway or street in which the public owns the fee or an easement for roadway purposes or holds
prescriptive rights.
ROADWAY: That portion of a highway, improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
SNOWMOBILE: A self-propelled vehicle designated for travel on snow or ice steered by skis or runners.
STREET: A public thoroughfare, roadway, alley, or trail used for motor vehicle traffic which is not an interstate, trunk, County State aid road, or County
highway. (Prior Code § 8-1-2; amd. 2018 Code)
7-3-3: SNOWMOBILES:
7-3-3-1: OPERATION RESTRICTIONS GENERALLY:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 147/497
Except as herein otherwise provided, snowmobiles may be operated on City streets, and all City traffic ordinances shall apply to the operation of
snowmobiles upon the streets and highways, except for those relating to required equipment and except those which by their nature have not application.
The following operating restrictions shall also apply:
A. Stop, Yield Intersections: No snowmobile shall enter any intersection without making a complete stop. The operator shall then yield the right-of-way to
any vehicles or pedestrians at the intersection, or in such close proximity as to constitute an immediate hazard.
B. Minors:
1. No person under fourteen (14) years of age shall operate on streets or make a direct crossing of a City street as the operator of a snowmobile,
unless accompanied by someone eighteen (18) years of age or older.
2. A person fourteen (14) years of age or older, but less than eighteen (18) years of age, may operate a snowmobile on streets as permitted under this
chapter and make a direct crossing of such streets only if he or she has in his or her immediate possession a valid snowmobile safety certificate or
indicator. (Prior Code § 8-1-3)
7-3-3-2: PROHIBITED CONDITIONS AND OPERATIONS WITHIN DESIGNATED AREAS:
A. You may not operate a snowmobile on the inside slope (closest to the road), shoulder and roadway of State and County highways, or in the median of a
four (4) lane highway. You can operate a snowmobile in the bottom or outside slope of a ditch (farthest from the road, closest to the house) of a County
or State highway.
B. Operation of snowmobiles within that portion of CSAH 42 (Parrish Avenue) from the Mississippi River bridge southward to Park Avenue is prohibited.
C. You may operate a snowmobile on the portion of the right-of-way of any street, in single file, on the most right hand lane when available for traffic or as
close as practical to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when passing another vehicle stopped in that lane at a maximum speed of ten
(10) miles per hour. Where there are no curbs, snowmobiles must be operated on the right hand side of the street or highway and within six feet (6') of
the roadway surface; except, where an obstruction prevents passages within said distance of the roadway, the entire right-of-way may be used only to
bypass the obstruction.
D. You may not operate a snowmobile on a paved walkway or walkway used for pedestrian use.
E. You may not operate a snowmobile on boulevards within any public right-of-way.
F. You may not operate a snowmobile on private property of another without specific permission of the owner or person in control of said property.
G. You may not operate a snowmobile upon any school grounds except as written permission is obtained from responsible school authorities.
H. You may not operate a snowmobile on any other public place or grounds except as may be specifically permitted by other provisions of this Code.
I. You may not operate a snowmobile anywhere in a careless, reckless or negligent manner or heedlessly in disregard of the rights of safety to others, or in
a manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger or cause injury or damage to any person or property.
J. The maximum speed on the streets as permitted by this chapter shall not exceed ten (10) miles per hour in designated areas. See section 7-3-7 of this
chapter, for designated areas.
K. Snowmobiles are prohibited during the hours from eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) A.M., Sunday through Thursday, and one o'clock
(1:00) A.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on other days including days immediately previous to national holidays.
L. You may not operate a snowmobile closer than three hundred feet (300') from any residential area, except in coming and going from a residence to a
designated trail on the most direct route or you are on your own property or have the property owner's permission.
M. A rigid towbar is required when towing any person or thing with a snowmobile, except in an emergency or towing a disabled snowmobile. (Prior Code
§ 8-1-5)
N. You may not operate a snowmobile within one hundred feet (100') of any fisherman, pedestrian, skating rink, or sliding area where the operation would
conflict with use or endanger other persons or operation.
O. You may not operate a snowmobile in a manner so as to create a loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which disturbs, annoys or interferes with the
peace and quiet of other persons.
P. Chasing, running over, or killing any animal, wild or domestic is prohibited. (Prior Code § 8-1-5; amd. 2018 Code)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 148/497
7-3-3-3: PROHIBITED CONDITIONS AND OPERATIONS OUTSIDE DESIGNATED AREAS:
All Minnesota State laws regarding prohibited conditions and operations apply outside designated areas. (Prior Code § 8-1-6; amd. 2018 Code)
7-3-3-4: REQUIRED EQUIPMENT:
A. Compliance With State Law: Snowmobiles operated within the jurisdiction of the City shall be equipped in accordance with all applicable Minnesota
Statutes rules and regulations. (Prior Code § 8-1-4)
B. Lights: When operated between the hours of one-half (1/2) hour after sunset to one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise or at times of reduced visibility, at least
one clear lamp attached to the front, with sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a distance of at least one hundred feet (100') ahead
during the hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions is required. Such headlamp shall be so aided that glaring rays are not projected into
the eyes of an oncoming snowmobile operator.
C. Reflectors: Reflective material at least sixteen (16) square inches on each side, forward on the handlebars, so as to reflect lights at a ninety degree
(90°) angle is required.
D. Mufflers:
1. Standard mufflers which are properly attached and in constant operation, and which reduce the noise of operation of the motor to the minimum
necessary for operation are required. Mufflers shall comply with regulation CONS.55 which is hereby adopted by reference as it existed on
September 1, 1970. (Prior Code § 8-1-4; amd. 2018 Code)
2. No person shall use a muffler cut out, bypass, straight pipe, or similar device on a snowmobile, and the exhaust system shall not emit or produce a
sharp popping or crackling sound. (Prior Code § 8-1-4)
7-3-4: RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLES:
7-3-4-1: PROHIBITED CONDITIONS AND OPERATIONS WITHIN DESIGNATED AREAS:
Recreational motor vehicles may not be operated in designated areas except on private property with the owner's written permission between the hours of
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. (Prior Code § 8-1-8)
7-3-4-2: PROHIBITED CONDITIONS AND OPERATIONS OUTSIDE DESIGNATED AREAS:
All Minnesota State laws regarding prohibited conditions and operations apply to recreational motor vehicles used outside designated areas. (Prior Code
§ 8-1-9; amd. 2018 Code)
7-3-4-3: REQUIRED EQUIPMENT:
All Minnesota State safety and required equipment laws apply to recreational motor vehicles. (Prior Code § 8-1-7; amd. 2018 Code)
7-3-5: EXEMPTIONS:
A. Law enforcement officers shall be exempt from the restrictions of this chapter while operating a snowmobile or recreational motor vehicle in response to
an emergency situation or in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law. (Prior Code § 8-1-10)
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the County Sheriff's Office and City Council shall have the authority to supervise and regulate events or
programs conducted by the City or the City Park and Recreation Department in which snowmobiles or recreational motor vehicles are used. The City
Council shall have the authority to designate City park areas that shall be deemed available for such use. (Prior Code § 8-1-10; amd. 2018 Code)
7-3-6: PENALTY:
Every person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the fines and penalties provided by State Statute for a
misdemeanor, as amended, plus costs of prosecution. (Prior Code § 8-1-11)
7-3-7: SNOWMOBILE DESIGNATED AREAS:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 149/497
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 150/497
(Prior Code ch. 8 § 1 exhibit A)
Title 8
PUBLIC WAYS, PROPERTY AND UTILITIES
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2017-08 - BACKFLOW PREVENTER DEVICE . Go to new ordinance.
Chapter 1
MUNICIPAL UTILITIES GENERALLY
8-1-1: PURPOSES AND ESTABLISHMENT OF UTILITIES:
A. Purposes: The City Council has determined that in order to pay for the cost of construction, reconstruction, repair, enlargement, improvement,
maintenance, operation, and use of the City water, sanitary sewer and stormwater systems; the cost of State and Federal regulations; and the principal
and interest to become due on obligations issued or to be issued, it is necessary to impose just and equitable charges for the use and availability of the
City municipal water and sanitary sewer systems pursuant to Minnesota Statutes chapter 444. (Prior Code § 6-2-1)
B. Establishment Of Utilities: There is hereby established a Utilities Department. The water, sanitary sewer, and storm sewer and drainage systems as
they are now constituted or shall be hereafter enlarged or extended shall be operated and maintained under the provisions of this title subject to the
authority of the City Council at any time to amend, alter, change and repeal the same. The City Clerk shall have charged and management of the water,
sanitary sewer, and storm sewer and drainage systems subject to the direction of the City Council. The City Clerk may designate other City employees
to carry out duties and responsibilities under this title. (Prior Code § 6-1-1)
8-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings:
COMPANY, GRANTEE, AND FRANCHISEE: Any public utility system to which a franchise has been granted by the City.
CONSUMER AND CUSTOMER: Any user of a utility.
DOMESTIC USE: Water systems used for potable water or irrigation purposes but not including wells drilled for such purposes as dewatering,
groundwater monitoring, elevator borings or environmental boring holes.
HOOKUP: The original connection to the utility for that property.
MUNICIPAL UTILITY: Any City owned utility system, including, but not by way of limitation, water service, sanitary sewer service, and stormwater sewer
and/or drainage service.
PRIVATE SYSTEM: Any water, sewer or storm sewer utility system not owned, operated and maintained by the City of Otsego.
SERVICE: Providing a particular utility to a customer or consumer.
UTILITY: All utility services, whether the same be public City owned facilities or furnished by public utility companies. (Prior Code § 6-1-2)
8-1-3: MANDATORY CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SYSTEMS:
A. The City shall regulate connection to public water, sanitary sewer and stormwater utility systems pursuant to Minnesota Statutes section 412.221.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to install or hook up to a private water system to provide water for human consumption, irrigation or other domestic
use, install or hook up to a private sanitary sewer system, or to hook up to private stormwater sewer and/or drainage system in the City, except in
cases where the public water, sanitary sewer, or stormwater sewer and/or drainage systems are not accessible to the premises requesting installation
or hookup.
C. The City Engineer shall determine if the public water, sanitary sewer, or stormwater sewer and/or drainage systems are accessible to the premises
requesting installation or hookup to public systems.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 151/497
D. Capacity for sanitary sewer and water service shall be reserved upon payment of utility availability charges for a period of five (5) years. If, after five (5)
years, a user having paid utility availability charges has not paid the required utility connection charges applicable to the use and connected to the
Municipal utility system, there shall be no guarantee of adequate sanitary sewer or water utility capacity to serve a development of the property. (Prior
Code § 6-1-3)
8-1-4: ESTABLISHING RATES AND CHARGES; UTILITY RATE SCHEDULE:
A. Establishing Rates And Charges:
1. All rates and charges for Municipal utilities, including, but not by way of limitation, rates for service, rates for contribution to the system, permit fees,
deposit, hookup, meter testing fees, disconnection fees, reconnection fees, and penalty fees for delinquency, shall be set forth in section 3-1-2 of this
Code.
2. For the purpose of fixing rates and charges, the City Council may categorize and classify under various types of services, or by contribution to the
system; provided, that such categorization and classification is just and equitable and is included in the resolution authorized by this chapter.
3. Residential equivalent connections (RECs) will be established for nonresidential users, as follows:
a. The number of RECs for a specific use will be as per the current version of the Metropolitan Council Environmental Services Procedures Manual.
b. The City Council, at its discretion upon a finding that the Metropolitan Council Environmental Services Procedures Manual may not apply due to
circumstances unique to a particular user, may enter into an agreement to determine the number of RECs based on one of the following alternative
methods:
(1) Information is provided regarding actual water and sewer use by the same or substantially similar use that has been existing for a period of not
less than three (3) years.
(2) The user shall escrow the required fee(s) calculated in accordance with the Metropolitan Council Environmental Services Procedures Manual
and monitor actual water use for a period of three (3) years.
(A) If the actual water and sewer use during this period is less than the RECs estimated by the Metropolitan Council Environmental Services
Procedures Manual, the City will refund the difference without interest.
(B) If the actual water and sewer use during this period is greater than the RECs estimated by the Metropolitan Council Environmental Services
Procedures Manual, the user is not obligated to pay additional fees, and the escrow funds shall be released and deposited into the respective
Water Fund or Sewer Fund.
4. If an existing use connected to the Municipal utility systems is expanded or redeveloped so as to increase the number of RECs, additional water
connection charges and sewer connection charges shall be paid for the additional RECs at the current rate established by section 3-1-2 of this Code.
There shall be no refund of water connection charges or sewer connection charges already paid if the expansion or redevelopment results in a
reduction of the number of RECs. (Prior Code § 6-1-4)
B. Utility Rate Schedule:
1. The utility rate schedule for all properties subject to this chapter shall be adopted annually by ordinance of the City Council. The utility rate schedule
shall include, but not be limited to, the items set forth in subsection A of this section.
2. Base fees for utility services for residential and nonresidential properties shall be charged for each residential equivalent connection (REC) of the
user calculated in accordance with the current version of the Metropolitan Council Environmental Services Procedures Manual or as otherwise
determined by City Council decision. (Prior Code § 6-2-4)
8-1-5: WATER UTILITY CHARGES:
The City Council has determined that in order to pay for the cost of construction, reconstruction, repair, enlargement, improvement, maintenance,
operation, and use of the City water system; the cost of complying with State and Federal regulations; and the principal and interest to become due on
obligations issued or to be issued, it is necessary to impose just and equitable charges for the use and availability of the Municipal water system pursuant
to Minnesota Statutes section 444.075, subdivision 3.
A. User Rates: From and after hookup of any premises to the City water system, the owner or owners of said premises shall pay for such water services
and usage at rates set forth in section 3-1-2 of this Code.
B. Water Availability Charges (WAC):
1. The water availability charge for one REC shall be adopted by the City Council in section 3-1-2 of this Code and calculated by the City Engineer to
include those current and future costs related to the construction of the trunk distribution system for the Municipal water utility.
2. The water availability charge required to be paid for a specific use shall be calculated by multiplying the water availability charge set forth in section
3-1-2 of this Code by:
a. Single-family, two-family and townhouse residential uses: Actual RECs.
b. Multiple-family residential uses: 9.0 RECs per gross acre.
c. Commercial, industrial or institutional uses: 3.5 RECs per gross acre.
3. The water availability charge shall be paid at the time of final plat approval except as provided by subsection 8-1-6B4 of this chapter or as may be
allowed by an agreement entered into by the City Council at its discretion.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 152/497
4. For multiple-family residential, commercial, industrial and institutional uses to be constructed on lots of record existing as of February 25, 2013:
a. The water availability charge as provided by subsection B3 of this section shall be paid at the time of issuance of a building permit for the initial
construction.
b. The water availability charge required to be paid at the time building permit is issued shall be the current fee in effect as set forth by section 3-1-2
of this Code.
C. Water Connection Charges:
1. The water connection charge for one REC shall be adopted by the City Council in section 3-1-2 of this Code and calculated by the City Engineer to
include those current and future costs related to the construction of the Municipal water utility other than the facilities that comprise the distribution
system.
2. The calculation of the water connection charge required to be paid for a specific use shall be calculated by multiplying the water connection charge
set forth in section 3-1-2 of this Code by the number of RECs for that use.
3. For residential uses, the water connection charge shall be paid prior to issuance of a building permit, except as may be provided by an agreement
entered into by the City Council at its discretion, except: For the initial development of residential uses on lots of record final platted prior to August
13, 2012, the water connection charges to be paid prior to issuance of a building permit shall be calculated as one-half (1/2) the sum of the water
availability charge and the water connection charge as set forth in section 3-1-2 of this Code, multiplied by the number of RECs.
4. For commercial, industrial and institutional uses, the water connection charge applicable to the build out of the finished space within all or a portion
of a building shall be paid prior to issuance of a building permit for that construction.
D. Connection To Water System And Sewer System: No person shall connect to the City water system without also connecting to the City sanitary sewer
system, except by resolution of the City Council. (Prior Code § 6-1-5)
8-1-6: SEWER UTILITY CHARGES:
The City Council has determined that in order to pay for the cost of construction, reconstruction, repair, enlargement, improvement, maintenance,
operation, and use of the City sewer system; the cost of complying with State and Federal regulations; and the principal and interest to become due on
obligations issued or to be issued, it is necessary to impose just and equitable charges for the use and availability of the Municipal sewer system pursuant
to Minnesota Statutes section 444.075, subdivision 3.
A. Payment Required: From and after hookup of any premises to the City water system, the owner or owners of said premises shall pay for such sewer
services and usage at rates set forth in section 3-1-2 of this Code.
B. Sewer Availability Charges:
1. The sewer availability charge for one REC shall be adopted by the City Council in section 3-1-2 of this Code and calculated by the City Engineer to
include those current and future costs related to the construction of the trunk collection system for the Municipal sewer utility. (Prior Code § 6-1-6)
2. The calculation of the sewer availability charge required to be paid for a specific use shall be calculated by multiplying the sewer availability charge
set forth in section 3-1-2 of this Code by: (Prior Code § 6-1-6; amd. 2018 Code)
a. Single-family, two-family and townhouse residential uses: Actual RECs.
b. Multiple-family residential uses: 9.0 RECs per gross acre.
c. Commercial, industrial or institutional uses: 3.5 RECs per gross acre.
3. The sewer availability charge shall be paid at the time of final plat approval except as provided by subsection B4 of this section or as may be allowed
by an agreement entered into by the City Council at its discretion.
4. For multiple-family residential, commercial, industrial and institutional uses to be constructed on lots of record existing as of February 25, 2013:
a. The sewer availability charge as provided by subsection B3 of this section shall be paid at the time of issuance of a building permit for the initial
construction.
b. The sewer availability charge required to be paid at the time building permit is issued shall be the current fee in effect as set forth by section 3-1-2
of this Code. (Prior Code § 6-1-6)
C. Sewer Connection Charges:
1. The sewer connection charge for one REC shall be adopted by the City Council in section 3-1-2 of this Code and calculated by the City Engineer to
include those current and future costs related to the construction of the Municipal sewer utility other than the facilities that comprise the collection
system. (Prior Code § 6-1-6; amd. 2018 Code)
2. The calculation of the sewer connection charge required to be paid for a specific use shall be calculated by multiplying the sewer connection charge
set forth in section 3-1-2 of this Code by the number of RECs for that use.
3. For residential uses, the sewer connection charge shall be paid prior to issuance of a building permit, except as may be provided by an agreement
entered into by the City Council at its discretion except: For the initial development of residential uses on lots of record final platted prior to August
13, 2012, the sewer connection charges to be paid prior to issuance of a building permit shall be calculated as one-half (1/2) the sum of the sewer
availability charge and the sewer connection charge as set forth by section 3-1-2 of this Code, multiplied by the number of RECs.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 153/497
4. For commercial, industrial and institutional uses, the sewer connection charge applicable to the build out of the finished space within all or a portion
of a building shall be paid prior to issuance of a building permit for that construction.
D. Required Connection To Water System: No person shall connect to the City sewer system without also connecting to the City water system, except by
resolution of the City Council. (Prior Code § 6-1-6)
8-1-7: USER ACCOUNTS:
A. Owners or users of any property within those areas where City water, sanitary sewer and/or stormwater service is available (meaning physically
available to the property) and deliverable pursuant to the City's assessment policy and the applicable sections of the City Comprehensive Land Use
Plan to the property may not use a nonmunicipal system without specific written agreement with or some other specific approval from the City.
B. All accounts shall be carried in the name of the property owner who personally, or by his or her authorized agent, applied for such service. The owner
shall be liable for services supplied to and consumed by the property, whether he or she is occupying the property or not. The owner shall be liable for
services supplied to and consumed by the property even if the property is a rental property. (Prior Code § 6-2-2)
8-1-8: BILLS FOR SERVICE; LATE PAYMENTS:
A. Charges shall be billed on one bill as applicable to each account. All charges shall be due upon receipt and considered delinquent immediately after the
due date of the current bill.
B. All bills shall contain the address and telephone number of the City Utility Department. That information shall be clearly visible and easily readable on all
bills. (Prior Code § 6-2-3)
C. Residential, commercial and industrial property bills shall be mailed to the owner on a monthly basis and shall specify the water consumed in
accordance with section 3-1-2 of this Code. (Prior Code § 6-2-3; amd. 2018 Code)
D. All charges shall be due and payable as provided in this section within thirty (30) days after the date of any billing statement.
E. Any unpaid charges shall constitute a lien against the premises from and after the date they were due and shall be processed as delinquent in
accordance with section 8-1-9 of this chapter. (Prior Code § 6-2-3)
8-1-9: DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS:
A. Late Payment Fee: A late payment fee of ten percent (10%) shall be assessed on the unpaid portion(s) on all accounts when payment of the balance is
not postmarked or received by the due date. The unpaid portions and late payment penalty shall be due immediately. Additional late payment fees on
the past due amount shall be added each billing period the account is delinquent.
B. Adjustment And/Or Payment Plan: The City Utility Department may authorize adjustment and/or payment plans for delinquent accounts for total
delinquent amounts not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). A request for a payment plan shall be directed to the City Utility Department. The
City will only authorize adjustment and/or payment plans on a case by case basis based upon the facts and circumstances of each account. The City
Utility Department reserves the right to obtain City Council approval before authorization of an adjustment or payment plan is finalized.
C. Assessment Of Unpaid Fees, Usage Charges And Late Payments Or Discontinuance Of Service: For any account with a balance more than ninety (90)
days past due, the assessment of unpaid fees, usage charges and late payments or discontinuance of service shall be in accordance with the
following:
1. The first occurrence of a delinquent account within a twelve (12) month period shall be assessed to the property in accordance with the provisions of
this section.
2. Subsequent delinquencies of an account previously assessed for nonpayment shall be subject to the following procedures:
a. For residential properties, except those subject to subsection C2b of this section, the City Council may, at its discretion, direct the Utility
Department to commence the disconnection of services as provided in subsection C3 of this section.
b. Where service is required to be provided by section 4-6-8 of this Code pertaining to rental of residential properties, the delinquent account shall be
assessed to the property in accordance with the provisions of subsection C3 of this section and also issued an administrative citation for violation
of this Code for each month that the account remains delinquent.
c. For all nonresidential properties, the Utility Department shall commence the disconnection of services as provided in subsection C3 of this section.
3. The Utility Department shall issue a shutoff notice by first class mail to the address on file for the account that shall state that if full payment is not
made by the date specified, said water service to the property shall be shut off at any time after the date stated in the shutoff notice for nonpayment
without further notice.
D. Shutoff Notice: The shutoff notice shall contain the address and telephone number of the City Utility Department in charge of billing. That information
shall be clearly visible and easily readable on the shutoff notice.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 154/497
E. Disconnect And Reconnect Fee And Account Delinquency Administrative Fee: A disconnection fee and a reconnection fee and an account delinquency
administration fee as set forth in section 3-1-2 of this Code must be paid in addition to the outstanding delinquent balance, together with current
charges before water service will be restored. Payment under this subsection shall be in the form of credit card, cash or cashier's check. Scheduling
the reconnection of water service by the Utility Department may require as many as ten (10) days from the date payment is received.
F. Unpaid Charges: Unpaid charges on sewer and water accounts shall be certified to the Wright County Auditor without hearing and pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes section 444.075, subdivision 3e, with interest, penalties and any administrative charge as determined by the City Council. The
administrative charge is as set out in section 3-1-2 of this Code.
G. Assessments: After adoption of the assessment roll by the City Council, the property owner shall have the following options:
1. To pay the delinquent amount listed on the adopted assessment roll, but without additional interest after adoption, within thirty (30) days of the date
of adoption.
2. To pay the certified charges as billed to them by Wright County on their Property Tax statements with a collection term of one year.
H. Appeals: If the owner of a property feels that charges for utility accounts are improperly charged, the following process shall be used to appeal the
matter:
1. The property owner shall contact the Finance Department to determine if City staff may handle the problem.
2. If the Finance Department cannot resolve the appeal, the property owner shall communicate the appeal to the City Clerk in writing, including the
account number and the nature of the problem, and shall include any documentation that the customer wants considered.
3. The City employee charged with appeals shall research account usage from the past and make inquiries of the appealing property owner.
4. The City employee charged with appeals shall propose a written response to the appeal for approval by the City Administrator. The response shall
be sent to the property owner who shall signify acceptance in writing.
5. If the property owner is not satisfied by the written response, the property owner may appeal the matter in writing only to the City within thirty (30)
days after receipt of the City's written response. The appeal will be considered by the City Council within thirty (30) days after receipt of the written
appeal. There will be no public hearing on the matter, but the City Council will determine the appeal based solely upon the consumer's submitted
written appeal as well as any response or information provided by City staff. The City Council shall make the final determination on any appeal.
I. Information To County: After the hearing, the certified roll, minus any payments, shall be delivered to the Wright County Auditor. (Prior Code § 6-2-5)
8-1-10: MISDEMEANOR VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
Violation of a provision of this chapter is a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, a person may be punishable by a fine of not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or such other amount set by law, or imprisonment for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days, or such other term set by law, or
both, but in either case, the costs of prosecution may be added. Each act of violation and each day on which a violation occurs or continues is a separate
violation. The provisions of this section notwithstanding, no penalty shall be greater than that established by State Statute for the same offense. The City
reserves the right to enforce the terms and conditions of this chapter by use of administrative enforcement procedures or any applicable action in law or
equity. (Prior Code § 6-2-12)
Chapter 2
WATER USE AND SERVICE
8-2-1: WATER LINE CONNECTIONS:
A. Every premises which, for the purposes of this section, may include more than one residential dwelling unit if approved by the City pursuant to a written
agreement recorded with the property, is connected to the Municipal water system shall have the following:
1. A separate service line connecting between the lateral service line and a separate meter.
2. Each service line shall have a water service valve installed in accordance with the Engineering Manual. The water service valve shall be the property
of the City, but the property owner shall be responsible for maintaining it in working order and keeping it accessible at all times. The City retains the
right to access the water service valve in the operation of the utility system as provided by this Code. Furthermore, the City shall not be liable for any
damage resulting from the need to gain access to the water service valve or to the water service valve itself if any damage should occur as a result
of the operation of the utility system pursuant to this section or services provided at the request of the account owner.
B. No person, firm, or corporation shall hook up any water connection or meter to the City water line without first obtaining a permit therefor from the City.
The initial connection and turn on operation for any water system connection shall only be performed by a City employee or authorized agent.
C. No person, firm, or corporation may hook up or service any water line connected to the City water system unless said person, firm or corporation is a
plumber duly licensed under the laws of the State of Minnesota or the ordinances of the City.
D. The connection charge imposed by the City for hookup to the Municipal water system shall be as set out in section 3-1-2 of this Code.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 155/497
E. Residential equivalent connections (RECs) will be established for nonresidential users. The number of RECs per use will be per the current version of
the Metropolitan Council Environmental Services Procedures Manual or will be otherwise determined by City Council decision. (Prior Code § 6-2-6)
F. Each property shall connect to the City water system unless excepted by a City Council decision, resolution, or unless previous approval by the City
Council. Specific exceptions may be made for single-family residences with continued use of an existing well for irrigation purposes only after
connection to City water. (Prior Code § 6-2-6; amd. 2018 Code)
8-2-1-1: LAWN SPRINKLER AND IRRIGATION SYSTEMS:
A. Permit Required; Installation Requirements: All lawn sprinkler systems and irrigation systems connected to the Municipal water system, whether such
systems are aboveground or underground, shall require a permit for connection and shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of this section
and section 9-1-1 of this Code.
B. Rain Detection Device Required: All lawn sprinkler systems and irrigation systems which are automatic or are equipped to operate automatically and
which are connected to the Municipal water system shall be equipped with a rain detection device so as to prevent the system from operating during
times of precipitation. (Prior Code § 6-2-6)
8-2-1-2: CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL:
A. Separation Of Public And Private Systems Required: Whenever any premises is connected to the City water system, there shall be maintained a
complete physical separation between the City water supply system and any private water supply system so that it is impossible to intentionally or
unintentionally allow any water produced by a private system to be introduced in the supply line of the City system.
B. Reduced Pressure Zone (RPZ) Backflow Preventer Monitoring Program:
1. Requirements: RPZ monitoring requirements are established by the State of Minnesota Plumbing Code 4715:
a. Testing and inspection shall be completed by a qualified person at least annually and overhauls not to exceed five (5) years.
b. A test inspection tag must be affixed to the device including the date, signature and tester identification number.
c. Design plans including sizing and location of these devices are required to be kept on file with the City.
d. Change of use to an establishment will require verification of proper sizing and functionality.
2. Inspection And Rebuild Reports:
a. Copies of inspections and maintenance records shall be sent to "Otsego City Hall Attn: RPZ Program" by July 1 annually as a means of
determining compliance.
b. Information to be include on the report shall include:
(1) Address and location of RPZ.
(2) RPZ serial number.
(3) Date of service.
(4) Type of service (inspection or rebuild).
(5) License number and signature of the certified tester. (Prior Code § 6-2-6)
8-2-2: METERS:
A. Metered Water Required:
1. All water consumption shall be measured by a City provided meter. Meters shall be supplied to customers at a price determined by the City.
2. Except for the extinguishment of fires, no person other than an authorized City employee shall use water from the City water system unless the
water passes through a meter supplied by or approved by the City. No person not authorized by the City shall connect, disconnect, take apart, or in
any manner change or interfere with any such meter or its use.
B. Installation Requirements: Every water meter shall be installed pursuant to City specifications.
C. Access For Reading Meters: Authorized meter readers and repair personnel shall have free access at reasonable hours of the day to all parts of every
building and premises connected with the City water supply system in order to read meters, make inspections and make repairs. Denial of such access
may result in water service being shut off.
D. Responsibility For Meters: The property owner or builder shall pay for the initial water meter(s) installed at each property. After such initial purchase and
installation of the water meter(s), the City shall maintain and repair, at its expense, any meter that has become unserviceable through ordinary wear
and tear and shall replace the meter if necessary. Where repair or replacement is made necessary by act or neglect of the owner or occupant of the
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 156/497
premises, any City expense caused thereby shall be a charge against and collected from the water consumer, and water service may be discontinued
until the cause is corrected and the amount charged is paid.
E. Possible Errors In Billing:
1. When a consumer complains that a bill for any past water consumption and use is excessive, the City shall have the meter reread upon the
consumer's written request. If the consumer remains dissatisfied, the consumer may, upon written request, have the meter tested. If the test shows
an error in the City's favor exceeding five percent (5%) of water consumed, a new meter shall be installed, and the bill shall be adjusted accordingly.
If the test shows an error in the customer's favor exceeding five percent (5%) of the water consumed, such adjustment shall not extend back more
than the last billing period from the date of the written request. The result of any test shall be reported to the owner or consumer in every case.
2. If the City becomes aware of an error for any past water consumption or billing in the property owner's favor, the City will reimburse the property
owner for the amount paid in error. Adjustments shall not extend back more than six (6) years from the date of notice of the error.
3. If the City becomes aware of an error for any past water consumption or billing in the City's favor, the City may correct said error and collect unpaid
amounts from the owner for water service provided. In that event, the City shall provide the owner with documentation and an explanation of the
error, and the adjustment shall not extend back more than six (6) years from the date of notice of the error, and the City shall provide for a payment
plan.
F. Removal Or Replacement Of Meters: The City reserves the right to remove and/or replace meters as to size and type when deemed necessary by the
City. (Prior Code § 6-2-7)
8-2-3: SERVICE PIPES; RESPONSIBILITY FOR REPAIRS:
A. The service pipe from the water main to the meter and the connections thereto shall be the property of the consumer. The pipe must be protected and
maintained by the consumer. In the event the consumer fails to make any necessary repairs to the connections or pipe within twenty four (24) hours
after being notified to do so by the City, the City shall disconnect the premises from City water.
B. The cost of all repairs and replacement of any plumbing or service pipes between the property and the main City utility line(s) shall be borne entirely by
the owner of the property affected, and if such repair or replacement work is performed by the City, the cost of time and material shall be assessed
against the owner of the affected property. (Prior Code § 6-2-8)
8-2-4: FIRE HYDRANTS:
A. No person, except a person authorized by the City, shall be allowed to use any fire hydrant in the City for any purpose whatsoever without first securing
a permit from the City. Payment for the water used, except for firefighting, shall be made in accordance with the rate schedule duly adopted by the City
Council.
B. The owner and/or occupant of any property adjacent to a fire hydrant shall be responsible for the fire hydrant being visible and accessible from the
public street including, but not limited to, removal of landscaping, grass, weeds, snow, ice and/or rubbish. (Prior Code § 6-2-10)
8-2-5: EMERGENCY SITUATIONS:
To protect the health and safety of the consumers, as well as the general welfare, the Public Utilities Director, City Administrator or their designee may
impose emergency regulations pertaining to City water use.
A. During an emergency, restrictions for the use of City water may include, but are not limited to, the total prohibition of watering, sprinkling, or irrigation of
lawn, grass, turf, or plantings.
B. Restrictions imposed during an emergency shall continue in effect until the end of the emergency and/or removed by the City Administrator or his
designee.
C. Notification of restrictions to City water use may be given by publication or by posting in the City Hall and at such public places as the Council may
direct.
D. Penalties are as follows:
1. Failure to comply with restrictions or prohibitions imposed under this section shall result in a surcharge for water service for each violation in an
amount established by section 3-1-2 of this Code, which will be added to the water bill for the property on which such violation occurs.
2. Violators will be notified prior to the imposition of a surcharge mailed to the property owner, and the City shall presume receipt of the notice three (3)
days after mailing. Subsequent violations in the same calendar year will result in the imposition of a surcharge to be included on the bill for the utility
account to be paid in accordance with section 8-1-8 of this title. (Prior Code § 6-1-7)
8-2-6: CONSERVATION MEASURES:
To conserve water resources and allow the City's water system flexibility in meeting peak demands, certain limitations on the use of the City's water supply
are hereby established:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 157/497
A. An odd-even irrigation restriction based on street addresses is in effect from May 1 to September 30 each year. Property owners with odd numbered
addresses may water on odd calendar days, and property owners with even numbered addresses may water on even calendar days.
B. Homeowners' associations and apartment complexes that provide a common irrigation system shall irrigate only every other day.
C. City water shall not be used for the purposes of irrigating or watering lawns, sod, or seeded areas between eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. and five o'clock
(5:00) P.M. daily.
D. Subsections A, B and C of this section do not apply in the following situations:
1. Limited hand watering of plants using a hose or hand held watering container.
2. Irrigation of new landscaping, sod, or seed within thirty (30) days of installation.
3. Irrigation from a source other than the City's water supply if the alternative source is allowed by this Code and properly permitted by the State of
Minnesota. Under this exemption, the City may inspect the property to ensure compliance.
E. Penalties are as follows:
1. Failure to comply with restrictions imposed under this section shall result in a surcharge for water service for each violation in an amount established
by section 3-1-2 of this Code, which will be added to the water bill for the property on which such violation occurs.
2. Violators will be notified prior to the imposition of a surcharge mailed to the property owner, and the City shall presume receipt of the notice three (3)
days after mailing. Subsequent violations in the same calendar year will result in the imposition of a surcharge to be included on the bill for the utility
account to be paid in accordance with section 8-1-8 of this title. (Prior Code § 6-1-8)
8-2-7: NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
The City shall not be liable for any damages resulting from stoppage of the supply or flow of water as the result of breaks in any mains, service pipes or
fixtures, by reason of the breaking of machinery or stoppage for necessary repair or any other interruption of service. (Prior Code § 6-2-9)
8-2-8: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
A. A property owner desiring to discontinue the use of City water shall notify the City to that effect in writing. Discontinuation of City water services shall
require:
1. A fee for disconnection of water service as set forth by section 3-1-2 of this Code shall be paid.
2. All unpaid fees, usage charges and late payment penalties are paid.
3. Service shall be maintained to a residential property occupied as a rental dwelling unit in accordance with section 4-6-8 of this Code.
4. Subject to the provisions of this chapter, service shall be shut off at the curb stop box by City authorized personnel, and no unauthorized person shall
otherwise shut off water service.
B. Where City water has been turned off, it will be turned on only when:
1. A fee is paid; and
2. All unpaid fees, usage charges and late payment penalties are paid.
C. In addition, water service may be shut off at any stop box connection whenever:
1. The owner or occupant of the premises served or any person working on any pipes or equipment thereon which are connected with the water
system has violated or threatens to violate any of the provisions of this chapter;
2. Any charge for water, service, meter or any other financial obligation imposed on the present or former owner or occupant of the premises served is
unpaid and in default; and
3. Fraud or misrepresentation by the owner or occupant of the premises served in connection with any application for service. (Prior Code § 6-2-11)
8-2-9: MISDEMEANOR VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
Violation of a provision of this chapter is a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, a person may be punishable as established in section 1-4-1 of this
Code. Each act of violation and each day on which a violation occurs or continues is a separate violation. The provisions of this section notwithstanding,
no penalty shall be greater than that established by State Statute for the same offense. The City reserves the right to enforce the terms and conditions of
this chapter by use of administrative enforcement procedures or any applicable action in law or equity. (Prior Code § 6-2-12; amd. 2018 Code)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 158/497
Chapter 3
SANITARY SEWER USE AND OPERATIONS
8-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the optimum public use of the City's wastewater collection and treatment facilities through the regulation of
sewer construction, sewer use and industrial wastewater discharges; to provide for the distribution of the City's costs for ownership, operation and
maintenance of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities necessary for protection of public health and environment; and to meet the applicable
regulatory requirements that may be imposed on the City now or in the future. (Prior Code § 6-3-1)
8-3-2: INTERPRETATION AND SCOPE:
A. Interpretation: This chapter shall be interpreted in accordance with the definitions set forth in section 8-3-3 of this chapter.
B. Scope: The provisions of this chapter shall apply to direct and/or indirect wastewater discharge to the City's facilities. This chapter provides for
regulation of sewer construction that will contribute to the City's facilities, quantity and quality of wastewater discharges, industrial wastewater
pretreatment requirements, establishment of fees for the distribution of costs for ownership, operation and maintenance of the collection and treatment
facilities, the approval of plans and/or specifications for sewer construction, issuance of permits for industrial wastewater discharge, miscellaneous
permits, and establishment of appropriate enforcement actions for violations of this chapter. (Prior Code § 6-3-2)
8-3-3: DEFINITIONS:
A. For use in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
ACT OR THE ACT: Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE: The individual designated by the City Council with authority to act on the City's behalf in regard to a specific
issue.
AVERAGE DAILY FLOW: The volume of flow compiled over a given period of time and converted to a daily average by dividing the total flow by the
number of days represented in the time period for which data has been compiled. Where individual day's flow readings are recorded, the average will
be based on the number of days for which flows are recorded and not necessarily the total number of days in the time period. For computing average
daily flow for industrial users, only production days shall be included in the computation. Weekends and/or holidays, shutdowns, etc., shall not
generally be considered by the City in computing the average daily flow.
AVERAGE DAILY LOADING: The measure of a particular constituent, generally BOD, TSS and/or TKN, compiled over a period of time and
converted to a daily average by dividing the cumulative concentration and/or volume of the constituent by the number of days represented in the time
period for which data has been compiled. Where individual day's loadings are recorded, the average shall be based on the number of days for which
loadings are recorded and not necessarily the total number of days in the time period. For computing average daily loadings for industrial users, only
production days shall be included in the computation. Weekends and/or holidays, shutdowns, etc., shall not generally be considered by the City in
computing the average daily loading.
BASIC WASTEWATER CHARGE: The monthly charge based on volume of flow by a contributor which is intended to recover the cost of operation
and maintenance of the City's share of POTWs and associated programs.
BILLABLE FLOW: The volume of wastewater generated by a user as measured by a water meter or other approved metering system.
BIOSOLIDS/SLUDGE: The solids, semisolids, residues and/or precipitates that result from the treatment of wastewater.
BYPASS: The diversion of wastewater from or around any portion of the collection system and/or treatment facility.
CBOD (CARBONACEOUS BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND): That portion of the BOD attributable to the biochemical oxidation of the
carbonaceous organic matter. This is determined through standard laboratory analyses using a nitrification inhibitor in performing the BOD test, and
generally expressed in milligrams per liter.
COD (CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND): The quantity of oxygen used in the chemical decomposition of organic matter in wastewater as determined
by the appropriate laboratory procedure, usually expressed in milligrams per liter.
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS: The national pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and
(c) of the Clean Water Act, which apply to specific categories of industrial users (40 CFR 403.6 and 405 - 471). Unless noted otherwise, categorical
pretreatment standards shall always refer to the latest approved limits.
CITY ENGINEER: The City Engineer of the City and is an individual/company designated by the City Council with the authority to act on the City's
behalf in specific issue(s).
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer that receives both sanitary sewage and storm sewage.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE: The sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an
increment of either flow or time.
CONTRIBUTOR/DISCHARGER/OR USER: Any person, firm, corporation or other entity or organization responsible for the production of domestic,
commercial or industrial wastewater which is discharged to the wastewater collection and treatment system.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 159/497
CROSS CONNECTION: A connection between a storm drain system and a sanitary collection system, and/or a connection between two (2) sections
of a collection system to handle anticipated overloads of one system.
CURRENT LICENSE: One which is current, valid, unsuspended and unrevoked.
DEBT SERVICE: The funds necessary to recover annual principal and interest payments for bonds issued for the wastewater system.
DEMAND CHARGE: The charge which recovers debt service costs associated with the wastewater treatment system.
DIRECTOR: The individual or company appointed by the City Council as the Public Utilities Director of the City with the authority to act on the City's
behalf in specific issue(s).
DOMESTIC USER: The discharge of wastewater originating in a residential facility or dwelling. In this use, it means the type and quantity of wastes
are different from commercial and industrial or agricultural wastes.
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER: Household type wastes discharged from places of human habitation, including sanitary convenience, kitchen and
laundry waste. Domestic strength wastewater is accepted as having the following strengths, or less:
BOD 300 mg/L
FOG 100 mg/L
NH3-N 15 mg/L
TKN 30 mg/L
TSS 350 mg/L
EFFLUENT: Discharge from a particular facility, unit, treatment process or system.
EFFLUENT LIMITS/EFFLUENT STANDARDS: The numerical limits on pollutants in effluents generally reported in milligrams per liter or pounds per
day.
FOUNDATION DRAIN OR FOOTING DRAIN: The piping system around the foundation of a structure or building which is intended to carry
groundwater away from the structure to relieve hydraulic pressure and help keep the structure walls dry. This may also refer to the sump pump used
in the footing drain system, where applicable.
GRAB SAMPLE: A single sample which is taken from a waste stream without regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of
time.
GRAVITY SEPARATION INTERCEPTOR: A facility designed for removal of dangerous, deleterious or prohibited matter from the waste stream by
differential gravity separation (i.e., grease traps and/or catch basins).
GRAVITY SEWER: A sewer that flows by the force of gravity, and generally operates hydraulically as an open channel.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Waste defined as hazardous by 40 CFR part 261.
HOUSE SERVICE CONNECTION/BUILDING SEWER: The sewer connection from the house/building plumbing system to a lateral or branch sewer.
The building sewer may begin at the outside of the building's foundation wall. Also called a "house connection" or "service connection".
INDUSTRIAL USER: Source of discharge of wastewater into a POTW from any source other than a domestic user.
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER: Wastewater and waterborne wastes of the community, excluding domestic wastewater and uncontaminated water,
and includes all wastewater from any production, manufacturing, processing, institutional, commercial, agricultural or other operation where the
wastes discharged include significant quantities of wastes from nondomestic sources.
INSPECTOR: An authorized representative of the Public Utilities Department, Public Works Department, Building Inspection Department, City
Engineer or other individual authorized by the Otsego City Council.
INTERCEPTOR SEWER: A public sewer which generally collects wastewater from lateral sewers and transports it to another interceptor, pumping
station or treatment facilities.
INTERFERENCE: A discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, which:
1. Inhibits or disrupts a POTW, its treatment process or operations, or its sludge process, use or disposal; and/or
2. Causes a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in magnitude of duration of a violation) or prevents
sewage sludge use or disposal in accordance with section 405 of the Act, or any criteria, guidelines or regulations of EPA or MPCA.
JURISDICTIONAL LIMITS: The area within the corporate limits of the City and all of the territory outside the corporate limits of the City which is
within one mile of the corporate limits but exclusive of that part of such territory which lies within the corporate limits of another city, town or village.
LATERAL SEWER: A public sewer which generally collects wastewater from house sewers and/or industrial sewers and transports it to an
interceptor sewer.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT: The Mayor and Council of the City.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 160/497
MILLIGRAM PER LITER (mg/L): The measure of concentration of a substance in a liquid generally accepted to equal parts per million.
NPDES PERMIT (NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT): A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act.
NEW SOURCE: As defined in 40 CFR 403.3(k):
1. Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards
are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section; provided, that:
a. The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or
b. The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process of production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at
an existing source; or
c. The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an
existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing
source, should be considered.
2. Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection 1b or 1c of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or
adds to existing process or production equipment.
3. Construction of a new source, as defined herein, has commenced if the owner or operator has:
a. Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on site construction program, any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is
necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
b. Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment that is intended to be used in its operation within a
reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts that can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility,
engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT: The treatment works portion of a POTW.
PASS THROUGH: A discharge which exits a POTW into a water of the State in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any of the requirements of a POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in
the magnitude or duration of a violation) or other permit issued to the POTW by the MPCA or USEPA.
pH: The negative logarithm of the hydrogen ion activity. It generally refers to a measure of the acidity of a solution; pH 7 is neutral, pH greater than 7
is alkaline and pH less than 7 is acidic.
PRETREATMENT: The reduction of pollutants or conditioning of the waste stream to enhance treatability prior to discharge to a POTW for treatment.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer constructed for public use under the control of the City.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW): The system of public sewers, pumping facilities and treatment facilities used to collect, convey
and treat wastewater and manage wastewater sludges which is owned, managed and regulated by the City or its authorized representative.
RENDERING ESTABLISHMENT: Any establishment, plant, or premises at or within which dead animals, dead fowls, fish, inedible offal, meat scraps,
bones, suet, feathers, unrendered animal fat, waste cooking greases, and similar animal matter, or the transportation of such matter to and from
disposal at a rendering establishment, either as a separate business or in connection with any other established business.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer which is intended to transport wastewater and to which storm sewage, surface water and groundwater are not
intentionally connected.
SEWER SYSTEM: A network of wastewater collection, conveyance, pumping, treatment and disposal facilities connected with sewers and owned
and controlled by the City.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER: An industrial user meeting any of the following criteria:
1. Discharges more than twenty five thousand (25,000) gallons per day of process wastewater.
2. Discharges a process wastewater which makes up five percent (5%) or more of the hydraulic or organic capacity of a POTW.
3. Is designated as significant by the Director because the discharge may adversely affect the operation of a POTW or for violating any
pretreatment requirement.
4. Any industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards.
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE: 1. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty six percent (66%) or
more of wastewater measurements taken during a six (6) month period exceed, by any amount, the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same
pollutant parameter;
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 161/497
2. Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken
for each pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied
by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
3. Any other discharge violation the Director believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through,
including endangering the health of any POTW's personnel or the general public;
4. Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the Director
exercising emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
5. Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge
pretreatment agreement or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
6. Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance
with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
7. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
8. Any other violation(s) which the Director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
SLUDGE/BIOSOLIDS: Solids, semisolids, residues and/or precipitates that result from the treatment of wastewater.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC): A classification of industrial facilities in accordance with the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual issued by the Office of Management and Budget or, whatever officially replaces it.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS): Solids that float on the surface or are in suspension in wastewater which can be removed through standard laboratory
filtering.
TOTAL KJELDAHL NITROGEN (TKN): The measure of nitrogen in wastewater determined in a laboratory by measuring ammonia after digesting
organic nitrogen to convert it to ammonia nitrogen.
TOXIC POLLUTANT: Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency.
USER CHARGE: Rates, charges and fees charged to contributors for use of a POTW.
WASTEWATER COLLECTION SYSTEM: Network of sewers and pumping stations which collect wastewater from individual building sewers and
convey it to the treatment facilities.
WASTEWATER/SEWAGE: A combination of waterborne wastes from residences, businesses, institutions and industrial facilities, along with the
groundwater and surface runoff that may be present, which is discharged to a POTW.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITIES/WATER POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITIES: A system of unit processes which function to reduce
pollutant discharges, and therefore, receiving water pollutant loading through physical, chemical and/or biological processes.
B. The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
CBOD Carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
CFS Cubic feet per second
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA Environmental Protection Agency
FOG Fats, oils, grease
gpd Gallons per day
gpm Gallons per minute
ISTS Individual sewage treatment system
mg Milligram
MGD Million gallons per day
mg/L Milligrams per liter
MPCA Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
ng/L Nanograms per liter
NH3-N Ammonia nitrogen
NPDES National pollutant discharge elimination system
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 162/497
ppm Parts per million
RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIC Standard industrial classification
SIU Significant industrial user
TKN Total kjeldahl nitrogen
TSS Total suspended solids
WPCF Water pollution control facilities
WWTF Wastewater treatment facility
(Prior Code § 6-3-3)
8-3-4: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the City.
B. Application For Permit: The application for the permit shall set forth the location and description of the property to be connected with the sewer system
and the purpose for which the sewer is to be used, and shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent.
(Prior Code § 6-3-4)
C. Permit Fee: The applicant shall pay a fee to the City as established in section 3-1-2 of this Code to cover the cost of issuing the sewer connection
permit and supervising, regulating and inspecting the work. (Prior Code § 6-3-4; amd. 2018 Code)
D. Time For Completion Of Construction: The permit shall require the applicant to complete construction and connection of the building sewer to the public
sewer within ninety (90) days after the issuance of the permit; except, that when the applicant makes sufficient showing that due to conditions beyond
the applicant's control or due to peculiar hardship, such time period is inequitable or unfair, an extension of time within which to comply with the
provisions herein may be granted.
E. Revocation Of Permit: Any sewer connection permit may be revoked at any time for a violation of this chapter. (Prior Code § 6-3-4)
8-3-5: CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS:
Any connection with a public sanitary sewer shall be performed consistent with the City Engineering Manual (adopted March 1999 and subsequent
revisions). (Prior Code § 6-3-5)
8-3-6: ABATEMENT OF BUILDING SEWER VIOLATIONS:
Construction or maintenance of building sewer lines, whether located upon the private property of any owner or in the public right-of-way, which
construction or maintenance is in violation of any of the requirements of this chapter, shall be corrected, at the owner's expense, within thirty (30) days
after date of official notice from the City Council of such violation. If not made within such time, the City Council shall, in addition to the other penalties
herein provided, have the right to finish and correct the work and assess the cost thereof to the property owner. Such assessment shall be collected with
and in the same manner as general Property Taxes. (Prior Code § 6-3-6)
8-3-7: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, either directly or indirectly, any wastewater which, in the opinion of the Director, may have any
harmful effect on the sewer system, any POTW personnel or equipment, effluent quality, sludge quality, public or private property, or may otherwise
endanger the public, a POTW, the environment or create a public nuisance. The Director, in reviewing the acceptability of specific wastewater, shall
consider the characteristics of the wastewater and the adequacy and characteristics of any POTW to accept the wastewater.
A. General Discharge Prohibitions: No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere
with the operation or performance of any POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all such users of a POTW whether or not the user is subject to
national categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, State, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. A user may not contribute the
following substances to a POTW:
1. Any liquids, solids, or gases with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) (60°C) using test methods
referenced in 40 CFR 261.21 or which, by reasons of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other
substances to cause fire or explosion hazard or be injurious in any other way to a POTW or to the operation of a POTW. At no time shall two (2)
successive readings on an explosimeter at any point in the system be more than five percent (5%) nor any single reading over ten percent (10%) of
the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter.
2. Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with a POTW.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 163/497
3. Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or higher than 9.0, or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment and/or personnel of a POTW.
4. Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any
wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of a POTW, or to exceed the
limit set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to section
307(a) of the Act.
5. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance,
or hazard to life, or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair.
6. Any substance which may cause a POTW's effluent, or any other product of a POTW, such as residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for
reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to a POTW cause the POTW to be out of
compliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations.
7. Any substance which will cause a POTW to violate its NPDES and/or State disposal system permit or the receiving water quality standards.
8. Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions.
9. Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in a POTW resulting in treatment interference. Wastewater with a
temperature at the introduction to a POTW which exceeds forty degrees Celsius (40°C) (104°F) unless the POTW is designed to accommodate such
temperature.
10. Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause
interference to a POTW. The industry shall coordinate with any connected POTW for the discharge of any slug load which may have the potential to
cause interference with that POTW.
11. Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Director in
compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations.
12. Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference with POTW processes or pass
through to the receiving waters.
13. Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance.
14. Mercury quantities in excess of ten (10) ng/L.
B. Dilution Of Discharges: No user shall ever increase the use of process water for the purposes of attempting to dilute or to dilute a discharge as a partial
or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the Federal categorical pretreatment standards or
in any other pollutant specific limitation developed by the City, State or Federal government.
C. Specific Limits: In most cases, the concentration of the amount of any particular constituent which will be considered excessive will depend upon the
results of technical determinations and regulatory agency regulations. Limits and/or constituents to be subject to limits are subject to change based on
POTW impacts, technical determinations and regulatory requirements. Specific local limits for pollutants to be allowed in the discharge to any Otsego
wastewater treatment facility are developed based upon the design limits of the respective POTW. When the Director determines that a user(s) is
contributing to a POTW any of the substances identified in subsection B of this section in such amounts as to interfere with the operation of the POTW,
the Director shall advise the user(s) of the impact of the contribution on the POTW, and require effluent limitation(s) for such user to correct the
interference with the POTW.
D. Stormwater Prohibited:
1. Prohibited Discharges Into System: It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant or user of any premises to direct into or allow any stormwater,
surface water, water from air conditioning systems or building sump pump systems, oil or other material hereafter excluded by the City to drain into
the sanitary sewer system.
2. Sump Pump Required:
a. All dwellings and other buildings and structures which require, because of the infiltration of water into basements, crawl spaces and the like, a
sump pump system to discharge excess water, shall have a permanently installed discharge line which shall not at any time discharge water into
the sanitary sewer system, except as otherwise provided herein.
b. A permanent installation shall be one which provides for year-round discharge capability to either the outside of the dwelling, building or structure,
or to the storm sewer system.
c. Unless directly connected to the storm sewer system by an underground tile or line system, or some other verifiable means, it shall consist of:
(1) A mechanical sump pump and discharge line which shall be constructed with rigid pipe (plastic, copper, galvanized or black pipe) one inch (1")
inside diameter minimum with a union or other approved coupling for easy disconnection for repair or replacement.
(2) The discharge line shall protrude to the outside to a permanently drilled hole or opening, and shall extend at least three feet (3') outside of the
foundation wall of the dwelling, building or other structure with a hose connection.
(3) The line leading from the sump pump shall have a connection on the outside of the dwelling, building or structure which shall prevent it from
being pulled back in through the hole.
3. Disconnection Of Prohibited Discharges: All discharges to the sanitary sewer system prohibited by this chapter shall be immediately disconnected.
4. Inspections:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 164/497
a. The building official, Public Utilities Supervisor, City Engineer or other authorized City staff shall, at reasonable times, be permitted to enter upon
all properties connected to the sanitary sewer system for the purpose of an inspection and observation, to determine whether there is compliance
with the requirements of this chapter.
b. A utility surcharge shall be established in section 3-1-2 of this Code and charged to properties in accordance with section 8-1-8 of this title for the
following reasons:
(1) Noncompliance with the requirements of this chapter not corrected within thirty (30) days after the date of an inspection by the City, unless
extended by City staff due to issues with seasonal construction.
(2) Properties that have not complied with a request for an inspection within thirty (30) days of mailed notice by the City.
c. The City further reserves its rights to all criminal, civil or administrative actions necessary for the administration and enforcement of this
subsection.
E. Swimming Pools: Swimming pools shall be equipped with facilities for completely emptying the pool and other drainage to the POTW. Discharge of the
pool water to the POTW shall be at a rate not exceeding two hundred fifty (250) gallons per minute. No direct connection shall be made to the sewer.
The outlet from the pool recirculation system shall terminate at least six inches (6") above the receptacle connected to the POTW. (Prior Code § 6-3-7)
8-3-8: PRETREATMENT:
Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all Federal categorical
pretreatment standards and schedules where applicable. Any nondomestic user of any Otsego POTW may be required to have a pretreatment agreement
and will be required to achieve certain pollutant discharge limits. If pretreatment is necessary to achieve these limits, the facility constructed/installed to
meet the limits shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user/owner's expense.
A. Pretreatment Agreement: Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater pretreatment agreement shall be deemed a violation of this chapter
and subjects the nondomestic user to extra sewer charges and sanctions described in the agreement. Obtaining a pretreatment agreement does not
relieve a user of its obligation to comply with all Federal, State, or local laws. The wastewater pretreatment agreement may require pretreatment of
industrial wastewaters prior to discharge to any Otsego POTW, flow equalization to reduce peak flows, discharge of certain wastes only to specific
sewers, relocation of discharge points, prohibition of certain discharges, restriction of some discharges to specific hours of the day, payment of charges
to defray costs that may be related to specific discharges, extra charges for discharges over limits, and other conditions that may be needed to
implement activities consistent with the intent of this chapter. No person shall discharge wastewater to any Otsego POTW in excess of the quantity or
quality limits established in the wastewater pretreatment agreement. A schedule for complying with agreement requirements, effluent limits, selfmonitoring
requirements or other requirements deemed necessary by the Director shall be submitted to the City for approval by the nondomestic user
in a time frame established by the Director. The Director may require compliance schedule progress reports, a report on final compliance with effluent
limits and standards, and periodic reports on continued compliance. The Director may require a nondomestic user to submit to compliance independent
of a compliance schedule.
B. Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards: Upon the promulgation of the Federal categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial
subcategory, the Federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this Code for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately
supersede the limitations imposed under this Code. The Director shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR
section 403.12.
C. Federal Categorical Pretreatment Modifications: Where the City's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by
Federal pretreatment standards, the City may apply to the approval authority for modification of specific limits in the Federal pretreatment standards.
Consistent removal shall mean reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater treatment system to
a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent which is achieved by the system in ninety five percent (95%) of the samples taken when measured
according to the procedures set forth in section 403.7(c)(2) of title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations, General Pretreatment Regulations for
Existing and New Sources of Pollution promulgated pursuant to the Act. The City may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the Federal pretreatment
standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR section 403.7 are fulfilled and prior approval from the approval authority is obtained. (Prior Code
§ 6-3-8)
8-3-9: MONITORING FACILITIES:
A. The City may require to be provided, at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the building
sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the City may, when such a
location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located
so that it will not interfere with traffic or be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
B. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility
and sampling and measuring equipment shall be accessible to the City or its authorized representative at all times for the purpose of gathering samples
and flow data. If the sampling manhole or facility is a confined space as defined by Federal or State OSHA, the user shall supply equipment to safely
enter the confined space.
C. Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the City's requirements
and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within ninety (90) days following written notification
by the City. (Prior Code § 6-3-9)
8-3-10: REPORTS AND RECORDS:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 165/497
A. Reports:
1. Compliance Reports: Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with an applicable pretreatment agreement or, in the case of a
new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into any Otsego POTW, any user subject to a pretreatment agreement shall
submit to the Director a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited
by pretreatment agreement and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user facility which are limited by such
pretreatment agreement. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements can be met on a consistent basis
and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and certified by a
qualified professional.
2. Other Reports: The Director may require reports from nondomestic/industrial users as necessary, including, but not limited to, the reports required by
40 CFR 403.12.
B. Recordkeeping: All industrial users required to have an individual pretreatment agreement subject to reporting requirements shall retain, in accordance
with the City's record retention schedule, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring
activities required by this chapter and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user
independent of such requirements. (Prior Code § 6-3-10)
8-3-11: FATS, OILS, GREASE AND FLAMMABLES:
In addition to other provisions of this chapter, the following regulations shall apply to nondomestic users regarding the discharge of fats, oils, grease and
flammables to the POTW:
A. Prohibited Discharges: The discharge of fats, oils, grease or flammable materials into the POTW shall be prohibited.
B. Interceptors And Separators Required:
1. Users with potential discharge of FOG and flammables shall install interceptors and separators in accordance with Minnesota Plumbing Code 4715,
subject to review and approval of the building official.
2. Any change of use within an existing building shall comply with the provisions of this chapter.
C. Maintenance:
1. Users shall maintain separators and interceptors on a schedule based on the individual user's operation to ensure proper function and prevent
discharge of FOG and flammables to the POTW.
2. The Utilities Supervisor may require modification of the maintenance schedule or additional maintenance of a user's separator and interceptor
system if there is discharge of FOG and flammables to the POTW.
D. Reporting:
1. Any user required to provide pretreatment for FOG and flammables shall submit to the Utilities Department a report outlining ongoing maintenance of
the interceptor and separator system at least annually but within thirty (30) days of any service.
2. The report shall state any and all operation and maintenance service that has been completed to the interceptor and separator system such that the
user is in compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements and include the following information:
a. Date of maintenance.
b. Volume of FOG or flammables hauled from the site.
c. Identification of the firm or individual completing the maintenance and/or hauling.
d. Any comments or issues identified by the maintenance provider.
e. Other information as required by the building official, Utilities Supervisor or City Engineer.
3. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user and certified by a qualified professional.
E. Inspections:
1. The interceptor and separator systems for nondomestic users shall be inspected by the Utilities Supervisor or his designee a minimum of every two
(2) years based on a schedule determined by the Utilities Supervisor.
2. The building official, Utilities Supervisor or City Engineer or their designee may enter upon private property at any time for the purpose of inspecting
interceptor and separator systems.
3. Inspections shall be scheduled by the Utilities Department and shall require payment of any fee established in section 3-1-2 of this Code. (Prior
Code § 6-3-11)
8-3-12: PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SYSTEM:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 166/497
All houses, buildings or properties which are required by this chapter or by other authority to have sanitary wastewater facilities and are located where a
POTW is not available shall be equipped at the owner's expense with suitable wastewater facilities connected to a private wastewater disposal system
which complies with the provisions of title 9, chapter 5 of this Code. (Prior Code § 6-3-12)
8-3-13: SPECIAL AGREEMENTS PERMITTED:
No statement in this chapter shall be construed as preventing a special agreement, arrangement or contract between the City Council and any POTW user
as to special conditions, rates and costs as established by the City Council. (Prior Code § 6-3-13)
8-3-14: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punishable pursuant to applicable State Statute regarding misdemeanor penalties, as amended,
plus the costs of prosecution. The City may, in its discretion, seek any administrative or civil remedies available to it as well, including administrative fines,
injunctive relief or abatement. Each right or remedy accruing to the City under this chapter or at law is separate and distinct and may, in the City's
discretion, be exercised independently or simultaneously with any other right or remedy. (Prior Code § 6-3-14)
Chapter 4
STORMWATER UTILITIES
8-4-1: STORM SEWER IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT:
There is hereby established a storm sewer improvement district incorporating all properties within the territorial limits of the City as of October 13, 2014, for
the purpose of building, constructing, reconstructing, repair, enlargement, improvement, or in any other manner obtain stormwater management facilities,
and maintain and operate the stormwater management facilities and including financing and collection of charges for said actions related to stormwater
management facilities in accordance with Minnesota Statutes section 444.075. (Prior Code § 6-1-9)
8-4-2: STORMWATER UTILITY FEE:
A. There is hereby established a fee for City stormwater services. Said fee is authorized by Minnesota Statutes chapter 444 and is to be uniformly applied
across the City and is based upon the estimated amount of impervious surfaces for certain lots as well as the expected discharge of stormwater from a
particular parcel based upon its use. The purpose of the fee is to pay for costs incurred by the City for implementation of statutorily required stormwater
programs, for required capital improvements to the overall system, required inspection of the system and replacement and repair of the system. The
City finds that these programs, repairs, maintenance and improvements benefit all properties in the City but that such benefit is not equally realized by
all properties, nor do properties contribute to overall stormwater flow equally.
B. In order to provide for as equitable a system as possible, the City fee is hereby established based upon a variation of the rational method as outlined in
the Fee Study prepared for the City by Hakanson Anderson and Associates dated December 8, 2008. The rational method adopted is a variation of a
formula taking into account the average runoff coefficient of certain classes of properties, the average area of parcels within each class and the
intensity of use of that parcel as set forth in the report listed herein. The study identifies three (3) general classes of properties based upon use by
zoning designation, residential uses, commercial and industrial uses, and agricultural uses.
C. Based upon the formula, the entire City was evaluated to determine the number of parcels in each designated zoning district. The composite C values
(runoff coefficient) were adjusted by the average area of parcels within each respective district in order to determine proper allocation of costs between
different kinds of lots. The final allocation of costs represents the area adjusted C value for a particular parcel as a percentage of the overall sum of
area adjusted C values for the entire City.
D. Operation of the formula above results in a fee per parcel to be charged to existing parcels within the City as their fair share of the costs incurred by the
City. The basic formula will be recalculated yearly and included in section 3-1-2 of this Code in order to account for ongoing changes in lot size and use
and changes in zoning designation. The formula may be amended from time to time by amendment to this chapter.
E. The fee is for the purpose of paying for the ongoing review, monitoring, repair, maintenance and improvement of the existing City stormwater
infrastructure. The City may include in the fee any and all costs incurred relative to stormwater drainage within the City no matter how said fees are
categorized, or may choose to pay portions of the fee from the general levy or other funding sources. Nothing in this chapter is to be construed as a
limitation on the City's ability to allocate or reallocate the costs herein to this fee or to other funding sources from year to year. Administrative costs for
collection of the fee may be added to bills as an additional charge. The fee shall be administered by the City Utility Department and shall be billed or
charged to residents on a regular basis as determined by the Utility Billing Department. (Prior Code § 6-1-9)
8-4-3: STORMWATER UTILITIES REGULATIONS:
8-4-3-1: PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES:
The purpose of this section 8-4-3 is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents and environment of the City through the
regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by Federal and State law. This
section 8-4-3 establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply
with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this section 8-4-3 are:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 167/497
A. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by stormwater discharges by any user.
B. To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4.
C. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter.
D. To establish responsibility for failure and remediation, if necessary. (Prior Code § 6-9-1)
8-4-3-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
This section 8-4-3 shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted
by the City. (Prior Code § 6-9-3)
8-4-3-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this section 8-4-3, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention
and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly
to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to
control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one
acre or more. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which, because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety,
property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the storm drain system.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS: Either of the following:
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including, but not
limited to, any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm
drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been
previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or
B. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans,
maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR 122.26 (b)(14).
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT: A permit issued by EPA (or by a state
under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is
applicable on an individual, group, or general areawide basis.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON: Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the
owner's agent.
POLLUTANT: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, and
accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes;
sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or
structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM: Publicly owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with
drainage systems, Municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and humanmade
or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
STORMWATER: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP): A document which describes the Best Management Practices and activities to be
implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges
to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 168/497
WASTEWATER: Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. (Prior Code § 6-9-2; amd. 2018 Code)
8-4-3-4: MINIMUM STANDARDS:
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this section 8-4-3 are minimum standards. Therefore, this section 8-4-3 does not intend nor
imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants. (Prior Code § 6-9-
5)
8-4-3-5: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES; EXEMPTIONS:
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the Municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including, but not limited to,
pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater.
B. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows:
1. The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this chapter: water line flushing or other potable water sources,
landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped
groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation,
springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less than 1 ppm
chlorine), firefighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants.
2. Discharges specified in writing by the City as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
3. Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the City prior to the time of the test.
4. The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency; provided, that the discharger is in full compliance
with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted
for any discharge to the storm drain system.
C. 1. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
2. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible
under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
3. A person is considered to be in violation of this section if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to
continue. (Prior Code § 6-9-6)
8-4-3-6: SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS:
A. Suspension Due To Illicit Discharges In Emergency Situations:
1. The City may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened
discharge that presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or
waters of the United States.
2. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the City may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or
minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons.
B. Suspension Due To Detection Of Illicit Discharge:
1. Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this section 8-4-3 may have his MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce
an illicit discharge. The City will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the City for a
reconsideration and hearing.
2. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this chapter, without the prior approval of the
City. (Prior Code § 6-9-7)
8-4-3-7: INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES:
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of
compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the City prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. (Prior Code § 6-9-8)
8-4-3-8: MONITORING DISCHARGES:
A. Application Of Provisions: This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction
activity.
B. Access To Facilities:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 169/497
1. The City shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this section as often as may be necessary to determine
compliance with this chapter. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its
premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency.
2. Facility operators shall allow the City ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of
records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as
defined by State and Federal law.
3. The City shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the City to conduct monitoring and/or
sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge.
4. The City has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall
be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater
flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
5. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the City and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
6. Unreasonable delays in allowing the City access to a permitted facility shall be a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this section 8-4-3.
A person who is the operator of a facility with an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the
person denies the City reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this section 8-
4-3.
7. If the City has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable
cause to believe that there may be a violation of this section 8-4-3, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and
sampling program designed to verify compliance with this section 8-4-3 or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety,
and welfare of the community, then the City may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. (Prior Code § 6-9-9)
8-4-3-9: BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES:
A. The City shall adopt requirements identifying Best Management Practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to
pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the United States.
B. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at his own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other wastes into the Municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs.
C. Any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said
person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the Municipal separate storm sewer
system.
D. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the
extent practicable, shall be deemed compliant with the provisions of this section 8-4-3. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention
plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit. (Prior Code § 6-9-10)
8-4-3-10: WATERCOURSE PROTECTION:
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that
such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. (Prior Code § 6-9-11)
8-4-3-11: NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS:
A. Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a
facility or operation, has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants
discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or water of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment, and cleanup of such release.
B. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via
emergency dispatch services.
C. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the City in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business
day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the City within three (3) business days of the
phone notice.
D. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also
retain an on site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3)
years. (Prior Code § 6-9-12)
8-4-3-12: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 170/497
A. Administration Of Provisions: The City shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed
upon the City may be delegated by the City Council to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the City. (Prior Code
§ 6-9-4)
B. Notice Of Violation: Whenever the City finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this section 8-4-3, the City may
order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:
1. The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
2. The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
3. That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;
4. The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
5. Payment of all expenses incurred by the City related to administrative and remediation costs; and
6. The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
C. Action Required: If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established
deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor, and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
D. Appeal: Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the authorized enforcement agency. The notice of appeal must be
received within ten (10) days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the appropriate authority or its designee shall take
place within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the Municipal authority or its designee shall be final.
E. Post Appeal Enforcement: If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an
appeal, within ten (10) days of the decision of the City upholding the decision of the authorized enforcement agency, then representatives of the City
shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the
property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or
designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth herein.
F. Abatement Costs: Within thirty (30) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including
administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment according to State Statute. If the amount
due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the City or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges
shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.
G. Injunctive Relief: It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this section 8-4-3. If a
person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this section 8-4-3, the City may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining
the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
H. Compensatory Actions: In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this section, the City may impose upon a violator
alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup or other actions approved by the
City Council.
I. Violations A Public Nuisance: In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of
any of the provisions of this section 8-4-3 is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be
summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may
be taken.
J. Criminal Prosecution: Any person violating any provision of this section 8-4-3 shall be punishable pursuant to applicable State Statute regarding
misdemeanor penalties, as amended, plus the costs of prosecution.
K. Remedies Not Exclusive: The remedies listed in this section are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable Federal, State or
local law and it is within the discretion of the City to seek cumulative remedies. (Prior Code § 6-9-13)
Chapter 5
SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
8-5-1: PURPOSE:
A. The procedures used by the City for levying special assessments are those specified by various sections of Minnesota Statutes that provide that all or a
part of the cost of public improvements may be assessed against benefiting or affected properties.
B. The following criteria must be satisfied before a particular parcel can be assessed:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 171/497
1. The land must have received special benefit from the improvement.
2. The amount of the assessment must not exceed the special benefit.
3. The assessment must be uniform in relation to the same class of property within the assessment area.
C. The City has adopted an Assessment Policy that includes specific criteria for different improvements and that may be amended by the City Council from
time to time. (Prior Code § 6-4-1)
8-5-2: PROJECTS ELIGIBLE FOR ASSESSMENT:
A. The following public improvements and related acquisition, construction, extension, and maintenance of such improvements are eligible for special
assessment within the City as projects approved at the discretion of the City Council as may be authorized pursuant to Minnesota Statutes section
429.021, subdivision 1 and section 459.14, subdivision 7:
1. To acquire, open, and widen any street, and to improve the same by constructing, reconstructing, and maintaining sidewalks, pavements, gutters,
curbs, and vehicle parking strips of any material, or by grading, graveling, oiling, or otherwise improving the same, including the beautification thereof
and including storm sewers or other street drainage and connections from sewer, water, or similar mains to curb lines.
2. To acquire, develop, construct, reconstruct, extend, and maintain storm and sanitary sewers and systems, including outlets, holding areas and
ponds, treatment plants, pumps, lift stations, service connections, and other appurtenances of a sewer system, within and without the corporate
limits.
3. To install, replace, extend, and maintain streetlights and street lighting systems and special lighting systems.
4. To acquire, improve, construct, reconstruct, extend, and maintain waterworks systems, including mains, valves, hydrants, service connections, wells,
pumps, reservoirs, tanks, treatment plants, and other appurtenances of a waterworks system within the corporate limits.
5. To acquire, improve and equip parks, open space areas, playgrounds, and recreational facilities within the corporate limits.
6. To plant trees on streets and provide for their trimming, care, and removal.
7. To abate nuisances and to drain swamps, marshes, and ponds on public or private property and to fill the same.
8. To construct, reconstruct, extend, and maintain dikes and other flood control works.
9. To construct, reconstruct, extend, and maintain retaining walls and area walls.
10. To acquire, construct, reconstruct, extend, operate, maintain, and promote underground pedestrian concourses.
11. To acquire, construct, improve, alter, extend, operate, maintain, and promote public malls, plazas or courtyards.
12. To acquire, construct, reconstruct, improve, alter, extend, and maintain highway sound barriers.
13. To acquire real property needed for providing, regulating and operating on street or off street parking lanes or areas, to purchase or lease parking
meters or other parking or traffic control devices or may construct, or otherwise provide, equip, maintain and operate automobile parking facilities.
B. The City is also authorized by this section, as adopted pursuant to Minnesota Statutes section 429.101, to recover through special assessment the
following special charges as a special assessment against the property benefited for all or any part of the cost of:
1. Snow, ice, or rubbish removal from sidewalks.
2. Weed elimination from streets or private property.
3. Installation or repair of water service lines, street sprinkling, sweeping, or other dust treatment of streets.
4. The trimming and care of trees and the removal of unsound trees from any street.
5. The treatment and removal of insect infested or diseased trees on private property.
6. The repair of sidewalks.
7. The operation of a street lighting system.
8. The operation and maintenance of a fire protection system.
9. The City may remove or eliminate public health or safety hazards from private property excluding any structure included under the provisions of
Minnesota Statutes sections 463.15 to 463.26.
C. The City, in accordance with Minnesota Statutes section 444.075, subdivision 1a, finance the following projects related to waterworks, storm sewer and
sanitary sewer systems through a levy against affected properties:
1. Build, construct, reconstruct, repair, enlarge, improve, or in any other manner obtain these facilities within the corporate limits.
2. Acquire any and all land and easements required for the facilities.
3. Following the adoption of an ordinance under Minnesota Statutes sections 444.16 to 444.21, the City may acquire, construct, reconstruct, extend,
maintain, and otherwise improve storm sewer systems and related facilities within the Stormwater District. Stormwater holding areas and ponds
within and without the City may also be acquired, constructed, maintained, and improved for the benefit of any such district. The cost of the systems
and facilities described in this subsection may be recovered by the tax authorized in Minnesota Statutes section 444.20. (Prior Code § 6-4-2)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 172/497
8-5-3: INITIATION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT PROJECTS:
Public improvement projects can be initiated in the following ways:
A. Petition:
1. Public improvement projects may be initiated by petition of owners of the property benefited by the proposed improvement.
2. Public improvements also may be initiated by majority vote of the City Council when, in its judgment, such action is required including projects
necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare from an imminent threat.
B. Ordering Improvements:
1. Statute Chapter 429 Assessment Projects:
a. A resolution ordering any improvements initiated by the City Council or by owners of less than thirty five percent (35%) of benefiting property
owners shall require a four-fifths (4/5) majority vote of all members of the City Council.
b. A resolution ordering any improvements initiated by owners of not less than thirty five percent (35%) of benefiting property owners shall require a
majority vote of all members of the City Council.
c. A resolution ordering any improvements initiated by petition of all owners of benefiting properties waiving all hearing procedures and appeals and
assessing the entire cost against their property, may be adopted without a public hearing.
2. Statute Chapter 444 Assessment Projects:
a. A resolution ordering any improvements initiated by the City Council or by owners fifty percent (50%) or less of benefiting property owners shall
require a four-fifths (4/5) majority vote of all members of the City Council.
b. A resolution ordering any improvements initiated by owners of more than fifty percent (50%) of benefiting property owners defined in subsection A
of this section requires a majority vote of all members of the City Council.
c. A resolution ordering any improvements initiated by petition of all owners of benefited or affected properties, specifically waiving public hearing
procedures and assessing the entire cost against their properties, may be adopted without a public hearing.
3. Consideration Of Petition: The City Council may consider the petition of a developer to construct the improvements within a project under their
control and authority and assess them subject to the developer agreeing to a waiver of a hearing and a waiver of appeal in a form approved by the
City Attorney with said improvements to be ordered by a majority vote of the City Council. (Prior Code § 6-4-3)
8-5-4: PROCEDURE:
The following is the general procedure followed by the City Council for all public improvement projects from initiation of such a project through certification
of the assessment roll to the County Auditor. Formats for the various reports and resolutions referenced in this section are made a part of the policies and
procedures of the City.
A. Petition For Public Improvement:
1. The petition is submitted to the City Clerk, together with an agreement approved by the City Attorney, and signed by the petitioners to pay all costs
related to the consideration of the petition including preparation of a feasibility report.
2. City staff shall review the petition to verify authenticity of the developer's request and present a request for action to the City Council.
3. The City Council, upon review of the petition or request, shall accept or reject the petition or request:
a. If based upon a petition, the City Council shall adopt a resolution declaring whether the required percentage of property owners has signed.
b. If the petition or request is accepted, the City Council, by resolution, shall order preparation of a feasibility report.
B. Preparation And Consideration Of A Feasibility Report:
1. The City Engineer shall prepare the feasibility report which shall preliminarily evaluate whether the proposed improvement is necessary, cost
effective, and feasible and whether it should be made as proposed or in conjunction with another project.
2. The feasibility report shall include:
a. An estimate of the cost of the improvement as proposed.
b. A reasonable estimate of the total amount to be assessed, and a description of the methodology used to calculate individual assessments for
affected properties.
3. If the report is not prepared by an employee of a municipality, the compensation for preparing the feasibility report must be based on the following
factors:
a. The time and labor required;
b. The experience and knowledge of the preparer;
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 173/497
c. The complexity and novelty of the problems involved;
d. The extent of the responsibilities assumed; and
e. The compensation must not be based primarily on a percentage of the estimated cost of the improvement.
4. The City Council may refer the report to the Planning Commission for a recommendation.
5. The City Council shall, by resolution, accept or reject the feasibility report, which, if accepted, the City Council, by resolution, shall call for a public
hearing to consider the improvements unless the right to a hearing is waived by all affected property owners in a form approved by the City Attorney.
C. Consideration Of The Improvements:
1. Notices: The City Clerk shall post and publish hearing notice and mails notices to affected property owners as provided in Minnesota Statutes
section 429.031, subdivision 1(a) or section 444.18, subdivision 3, as applicable.
2. Council Review And Action:
a. The City Council shall conduct the public hearing.
b. The information presented at the public hearing shall include a preliminary assessment amount for each of the affected property owners.
c. Within six (6) months of the hearing date, the City Council shall adopt a resolution ordering improvement to be constructed and advertisement of
bids or reject the project.
(1) Minnesota Statutes Section 429 Projects: If the City Council orders the improvement, City staff prepares final plans, advertises for and opens
bids as provided in Minnesota Statutes section 429.041, prepares bid tabulation, makes recommendation to the City Council for award, and
prepares the proposed assessment roll.
(2) Minnesota Statutes Section 444 Projects: If the City Council orders the improvement, City staff prepares final plans, advertises for and opens
bids as provided in Minnesota Statutes section 471.345, prepares bid tabulation, makes recommendation to the City Council for award of the
contract.
d. The City Council may award the contract for the proposed improvements based on the bids received.
e. City staff shall supervise construction and prepares payment requests for City Council consideration.
f. The City Council may vary the order of procedures for any section 429 improvement project in accordance with the particular needs of a specific
project or concerns, financial or otherwise, raised by a specific project.
D. Bonds, Assessments And/Or Taxes:
1. Issuance Of Bonds: Bonds to finance project costs may be issued at any time pursuant to statutory authority after the improvements are ordered.
2. Process For Section 429 Assessments:
a. City staff prepares the proposed assessment roll for City Council review, and the City Council, by resolution, orders an assessment hearing.
b. The City Clerk shall publish the required hearing notice, mail notice of hearing date and proposed assessments to the affected property owners as
provided in Minnesota Statutes section 429.061.
c. The City Council conducts the assessment hearing and adopts, revises, or rejects the resolution determining the amount of the total expense the
City will pay, if any, and establishing the assessment roll.
d. If adopted, the City Council thereby authorizes certification of the assessment to the County Auditor upon completion of the project and receipt of
all final project costs, and the City Clerk shall certify the assessment roll to the County Auditor.
3. Levy For Section 444 Taxes: The City Council shall levy a tax on all taxable property within the district in an amount necessary to finance the cost of
the improvement, including maintenance and to pay the principal and interest on bonds issued to finance the improvement. (Prior Code § 6-4-4)
8-5-5: FINANCING IMPROVEMENTS:
The cost of any improvement shall be assessed upon property by the improvement based upon benefits received with the following general principles
used as a basis for adoption of a separate, more detailed assessment policy:
A. Project Cost: The "project cost" of an improvement includes the costs of all necessary construction work required to accomplish the improvement, plus
engineering, legal, administrative, financing and other contingent costs, including acquisition of rights-of-way and other property. The finance charges
include all costs of financing the project. These costs include, but are not limited to, financial consultant's fees, bond rating agency fee, bond attorney
fees, and capitalized interest. The interest charged to the project shall be included as financing charges.
B. City Cost: The "City cost" of an improvement is the amount of the total improvement expense the City will pay as determined by City Council resolution.
Where the project cost of an improvement is not entirely attributed to the need for service to the area served by said improvement, or where unusual
conditions beyond the control of the owners of the property in the area served by the improvement would result in an inequitable distribution of special
assessments, or for any other reason determined by the City, the City, through the use of other funds, may pay such City cost.
C. Assessable Cost: The "assessable cost" of an improvement is equal to the project cost minus the City cost.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 174/497
D. Interest:
1. The City will charge interest on special assessments at a rate specified in the resolution approving the assessment roll.
2. If bonds were sold to finance the improvement project, the interest rate shall be one and one-half percent (1.5%) more than the average interest rate
of the bonds, rounded to the nearest quarter of a percent.
3. If no bonds were sold, the interest rate shall be one and one-half percent (1.5%) more than the average interest rate as if bonds were issued,
rounded to the nearest quarter of a percent.
E. Prepayment:
1. Property owners may pay their assessments in full, interest free, for a period of thirty (30) days after the adoption of the resolution approving the
assessment roll. After such period, interest shall be computed from the date specified in the assessment resolution.
2. The City will transmit a certified duplicate of the assessment roll with each installment, including interest, to the County Auditor, or in lieu of such
certification, annually certify to the County Auditor by November 30 in each year, the total amount of installments of and interest on assessments on
each parcel which is to become due in the following year.
3. Prior to certification of principal and interest or the first installment thereof, to the County Auditor, a property owner may make a partial prepayment of
the principal to the City. Such partial prepayment must be at least one hundred dollars ($100.00). If the partial prepayment is made after the thirty
(30) day interest free period allowed by statute, interest will be charged on the amount of the partial prepayment from the date specified in the
resolution and paid along with the partial prepayment.
4. After the City has made the first certification of principal and interest to the County Auditor, prepayment will be accepted only for the total amount still
owing including interest and must be made prior to November 15 of any year.
5. The remaining principal after the partial prepayment will be paid in equal installments over the remaining term of the special assessments.
F. Extensions:
1. Where an improvement is designed for service of an area beyond that receiving the initial benefit, the City may pay for increased project costs due to
such provisions for future service extensions.
2. The City may levy assessments to cover this cost when a new improvement is installed as an extension of the existing improvement upon
identification of such additional amount in the notice of hearing for the extensions or new improvements. As an alternative, the City may assess these
costs to the area of future benefit immediately.
G. Project Assistance: If the City receives financial assistance from the Federal government, the State of Minnesota, the County, or from any other source
to defray a portion of the costs of a given improvement, such aid will be used first to reduce the City cost of the improvement. If the financial assistance
received is greater than the City cost, the remainder of the aid will be placed in the Capital Improvement Fund to be applied towards other City projects
where allowed and at the discretion of the City Council.
H. Assessable Property: Property owned by the City and other political subdivisions including Municipal building sites, parks and playgrounds, but not
including public streets and rights-of-way, shall be regarded as being assessable on the same basis as if such property was privately owned.
I. Individual Benefits: The City must construct improvements specifically designed for or shown to be of benefit solely to one or more properties. The costs
for these improvements will be assessed directly to such properties, and not included in the assessments for the remainder of the project. An example
of this would be utility service lines running from the main lines to the property.
J. Benefit Appraisals Or Studies: In the event that a question exists as to whether or not the proposed assessments exceed the special benefits to the
property in question, the City Council may order benefit appraisals or other studies to determine market value as it deems necessary to support the
proposed assessments.
K. Condemnation Awards: A property owner may elect to offset special assessments against condemnation awards subject to the property owner
executing a Net Assessment Agreement approved by the City Council. (Prior Code § 6-4-5)
8-5-6: DEFERMENT OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
A. Deferments For Hardship, Senior Citizens Or Persons With Disabilities: Special assessments may be deferred as a result of hardship for senior citizens
or retired and disabled persons pursuant to Minnesota Statutes section 435.193:
1. Deferral Categories And Authority: The City Council may defer the payment of any special assessment on homestead property owned by a person
who is sixty five (65) years of age or older, or who is retired by virtue of permanent and total disability, and the City Clerk is hereby authorized to
record the deferment of special assessments where the following conditions are met:
a. The applicant must apply for the deferment not later than ninety (90) days after the assessment is adopted by the City Council.
b. The applicant must be sixty five (65) years of age or older or retired by virtue of permanent and total disability.
c. The applicant must be the owner of the property.
d. The applicant must occupy the property as his principal place of residence.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 175/497
e. The applicant shall meet the eligibility requirements of the Minnesota Energy Assistance Program.
f. The average annual payment for assessments levied against the subject property must exceed one and one-half percent (1.5%) of the adjusted
gross income of the applicant as evidenced by the applicant's most recent Federal Income Tax return. The average annual payment of an
assessment shall be the total cost of the assessment divided by the number of years over which it is spread.
2. Term:
a. The deferment shall be granted for as long a period of time as the hardship exists and the conditions aforementioned have been met.
b. It shall be the duty of the applicant to notify the City Clerk of any change in the applicant's status that would affect eligibility for deferment.
3. Payment:
a. The entire amount of deferred special assessments shall be due within sixty (60) days after loss of eligibility by the applicant.
b. If the special assessment is not paid within the sixty (60) days, the City Clerk shall add thereto interest at a per annum interest rate of one and
one-half percent (1.5%) above the bond interest rate and the total amount of principal and interest shall be certified to the County Auditor for
collection with taxes the following year.
c. Should the applicant demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City Council that full repayment of the deferred special assessment would cause the
applicant particular undue financial hardship, the City Council may order that the applicant pay within sixty (60) days a sum equal to the number of
installments of deferred special assessments outstanding and unpaid to date, including principal and interest, with the balance thereafter paid
according to the terms and conditions of the original special assessments.
4. Termination Of Deferment: The option to defer the payment of special assessments shall terminate, and all amounts accumulated plus applicable
interest shall become due upon the occurrence of any one of the following:
a. The death of the owner when there is no spouse who is eligible for deferment.
b. The sale, transfer or subdivision of all or any part of the property.
c. Loss of homestead status on the property.
d. Determination by the City Council for any reason that immediate or partial payment would impose no hardship.
B. Deferments Regarding Urban Development: The City Council may, at its discretion, defer special assessments related to urban development consistent
with the City's Comprehensive Plan for benefited properties as follows:
1. Properties eligible for the option deferments under this section shall meet the following criteria:
a. The property is zoned A-1, A-2, R-1, R-2, or R-3 District.
b. Development of the property is limited to one dwelling unit and related accessory uses.
2. The option to defer the payment of special assessments shall terminate and all amounts accumulated plus applicable interest shall become due
upon the occurrence of any one of the following, whichever occurs first: (Prior Code § 6-4-6)
a. Rezoning to R-C, R-4, R-4A, R-5, R-6, R-7, R-MH, INS or PUD District or any commercial or industrial district as defined title 11, chapter 50 of this
Code. (Prior Code § 6-4-6; amd. 2018 Code)
b. The subdivision of all or any part of the property.
c. Five (5) years from the date the assessment is initially adopted.
d. A date or event specified by the City Council at the time the option to defer payment of special assessments is approved.
3. The City Council, at its discretion, may approve an extension to defer the payment of special assessments that would terminate pursuant to
subsection B2 of this section subject to the following:
a. The extension is requested in writing and filed with the City Clerk at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the initial deferment.
b. The request states the reasons for which the property owner believes the deferment should be extended.
c. If approved by the City Council, the extension of the deferment shall terminate as provided by subsection B2 of this section. (Prior Code § 6-4-6)
Chapter 6
PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
8-6-1: OBJECTIVES AND FINDINGS:
The primary objective of this chapter is to protect the public's interest in its rights-of-way. The Otsego City Council finds that regulation, maintenance and
administration of public rights-of-way, as set forth in this chapter, is in the best interests of the health, safety and welfare of Otsego's citizens. Specifically,
the Council makes the following findings:
A. Demands for usable space over, under, and across rights-of-way threaten to exceed the already limited space practically available in existing public
rights-of-way.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 176/497
B. Because systems are typically installed in shallow trenches, the streets are restored in narrow "ribbons" which deteriorate faster than the surrounding
street surface and shorten the original design life, thereby increasing costs to taxpayers.
C. Lengthy and uncoordinated construction, installation, repair or relocation of equipment or facilities within the public rights-of-way add to existing hazards
and inconvenience for motorists and pedestrians.
D. Telecommunication companies and users are not paying their fair share of the costs to acquire, develop, and maintain public rights-of-way.
E. Efficient management and regulation of public rights-of-way can ensure economical access to City owned water, storm drain and sanitary sewer
systems, as well as economical access for all other current and future users of public rights-of-way.
F. This chapter seeks, among other things, to accomplish the following objectives:
1. Eliminate hidden subsidization of private companies by taxpayers.
2. Protect the public health, safety, welfare and convenience.
3. Ensure the structural integrity and quality of streets.
4. Minimize detours and bottlenecks on public streets due to lengthy and uncoordinated construction activity within public rights-of-way.
5. Make efficient use of the limited space below the public right-of-way to ensure both access by private utility and communications companies, as well
as economical access to City owned water, storm drain, and sanitary sewer systems. (Prior Code § 6-6-1)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-07 - SMALL CELL WIRELESS FACILITIES . Go to new ordinance.
8-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions apply to the terms indicated below and found throughout this chapter. References hereafter to "sections" are, unless otherwise
specified, references to sections in this chapter. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized.
APPLICANT: Any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a right-of-way.
CITY: The City of Otsego, Minnesota. For purposes of section 8-6-20 of this chapter, "City" means its elected officials, officers, employees, and agents.
CONSTRUCTION PERFORMANCE BOND: A performance bond or other form of security posted to ensure the availability of sufficient funds to assure
that right-of-way excavation and obstruction work is completed in accordance with the terms of the right-of-way permit or other applicable State law or local
regulation.
DEGRADATION: A decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused by excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to
reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation did not occur.
DEGRADATION COST: The cost to achieve a level of restoration as determined by the City at the time the permit is issued, not to exceed the maximum
restoration shown in plates 1 to 13, set forth in proposed PUD rules parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950.
DEGRADATION FEE: The estimated fee established at the time of permitting by the City to recover costs associated with the decrease in the useful life of
the right-of-way caused by the excavation, and which equals the degradation cost.
DELAY PENALTY: The penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays in right-of-way construction.
DEPARTMENT: The Department of Public Works of the City.
DIRECTOR: The City Administrator, or his or her designee, or such other person authorized by City Council resolution to carry out the duties assigned to
the Director pursuant to this Code.
EMERGENCY: A condition that: a) poses a clear and immediate danger to life or health, or of a significant loss of property; or b) requires immediate repair
or replacement of facilities in order to restore service to a customer.
EQUIPMENT: Any tangible asset used to install, repair, or maintain facilities in any right-of-way.
EXCAVATION PERMIT: The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be obtained before a person may excavate in a right-of-way. An excavation
permit allows the holder to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit.
EXCAVATION PERMIT FEE: Money paid to the City by an applicant to cover the costs as provided in subsection 8-6-7E of this chapter.
FACILITY OR FACILITIES: Any tangible asset in the right-of-way required to provide utility service.
LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE: A local person or persons, or designee of such person or persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make
decisions for that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this chapter.
MANAGEMENT COSTS: The actual costs the City incurs in managing its rights-of-way, including such costs, if incurred, as those associated with
registering applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration projects; maintaining,
supporting, protecting, or moving user facilities during right-of-way work; determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration; restoring work inadequately
performed after providing notice and the opportunity to collect the work; and revoking right-of-way permits. Management costs do not include payment by a
telecommunications right-of-way user for the use of the right-of-way, the fees and cost of litigation relating to the interpretation of Minnesota Session Laws
1997 chapter 123 and Minnesota Statutes section 237.162 or 237.163 or any ordinance enacted under those sections, or the City fees and costs related to
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 177/497
appeals taken pursuant to section 8-6-22 of this chapter.
OBSTRUCT: To place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to hinder free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.
OBSTRUCTION PERMIT: The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be obtained before a person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the holder to
hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of that right-of-way by placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way for the duration
specified therein.
OBSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE: Money paid to the City by a permittee to cover costs as provided in subsection 8-6-7E of this chapter.
PATCH OR PATCHING: A method of pavement replacement that is temporary in nature. A patch consists of: a) the compaction of the subbase and
aggregate base; and b) the replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement for a minimum of two feet (2') beyond the edges of the excavation in all
directions. A patch is considered full restoration only when the pavement is included in the City's five year project plan.
PERMITTEE: Any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a right-of-way has been granted by the City under this chapter.
PERSON: Any natural or corporate person, business association or other business entity including, but not limited to, a partnership of any kind, a sole
proprietorship, a political subdivision, a public or private agency of any kind, a utility, a successor or assign of any of the foregoing, or any other legal entity.
PROBATION: The status of a person that has been found in noncompliance with the conditions of this chapter.
PROBATIONARY PERIOD: One year from the date that a person has been notified in writing that they have been put on probation.
REGISTRANT: Any person who: a) has or seeks to have its equipment or facilities located in any right-of-way; or b) in any way occupies or uses, or seeks
to occupy or use, the right-of-way or place its facilities in the right-of-way.
RESTORATION COST: The amount of money paid to the City by a permittee to achieve the level of restoration according to plates 1 to 13 of PUD rules.
RESTORE OR RESTORATION: The process by which a right-of-way is returned to the same condition and life expectancy that existed before excavation.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane, and public sidewalk in which the City has an
interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel purposes and utility easements of the City. A right-of-way does not include the air waves above a
right-of-way with regard to cellular or other nonwire telecommunications or broadcast service.
RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT: Either the excavation permit or the obstruction permit, or both, depending on the context, required by this chapter.
SERVICE OR UTILITY SERVICE: The term includes, but is not limited to: a) those services provided by a public utility as defined in Minnesota Statutes
section 216B.02, subdivisions 4 and 6; b) telecommunications, pipeline, community antenna television, fire and alarm communications, water, electricity,
light, heat, cooling energy, or power services; c) the services provided by a corporation organized for the purposes set forth in Minnesota Statutes section
301B.01; d) the services provided by a district heating or cooling system; e) cable communications systems as defined in Minnesota Statutes chapter 238;
and f) a telecommunication rights-of-way user, as defined in this section.
SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION: An application made to excavate or obstruct more of the right-of-way than allowed by, or to extend a permit that had
already been issued.
TELECOMMUNICATION RIGHTS-OF-WAY USER: A person owning or controlling a facility in the right-of-way, or seeking to own or control a facility in the
right-of-way, that is used or is intended to be used for transporting telecommunication or other voice or data information. For purposes of this chapter, a
cable communication system defined and regulated under Minnesota Statutes chapter 238 and telecommunication activities related to providing natural
gas or electric energy services whether provided by a public utility as defined in Minnesota Statutes section 216B.02, a municipality, a Municipal gas or
power agency organized under Minnesota Statutes chapters 453 and 453A, or a cooperative electric association organized under Minnesota Statutes
chapter 308A are not telecommunications right-of-way users for purposes of this chapter.
UNUSABLE FACILITIES: Facilities in the right-of-way which have remained unused for one year and for which the registrant is unable to provide proof that
he has either a plan to begin using it within the next twelve (12) months or a potential purchaser or user of the facilities will begin using it within the next
twelve (12) months. (Prior Code § 6-6-2; amd. 2018 Code)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-07 - SMALL CELL WIRELESS FACILITIES . Go to new ordinance.
8-6-3: ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL:
The Director is the principal City official responsible for the administration of the rights-of-way, right-of-way permits, and the ordinances related thereto.
The Director may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder. (Prior Code § 6-6-3)
8-6-4: UTILITY COORDINATION COMMITTEE:
The City may create an advisory Utility Coordination Committee. Participation on the committee is voluntary. It will be composed of any registrants that
wish to assist the City in obtaining information and by making recommendations regarding use of the right-of-way, and to improve the process of
performing construction work therein. The Director may determine the size of such committee and shall appoint members from a list of registrants that
have expressed a desire to assist the City. (Prior Code § 6-6-4)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-07 - SMALL CELL WIRELESS FACILITIES . Go to new ordinance.
8-6-5: REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Registration Required:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 178/497
1. Each person who occupies, uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the right-of-way for purposes of placing, maintaining or repairing any equipment or
facilities in the right-of-way, including persons with installation and maintenance responsibilities by lease, sublease or assignment, must register with
the Director. Registration will consist of providing application information and paying a registration fee.
2. No person may construct, install, repair, remove, relocate, or perform any other work on, or use any facilities or any part thereof in any right-of-way
without first being registered with the Director. (Prior Code § 6-6-5)
B. Registration Information:
1. Information Required: The information provided to the Director at the time of registration shall include, but not be limited to:
a. Each of the following, if applicable, registrant's name, Gopher One Call registration certification number, address, e-mail address, and telephone
and facsimile numbers.
b. The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local representative or
designee shall be available at all times. Current information regarding how to contact the local representative in an emergency shall be provided at
the time of registration.
c. A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:
(1) Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Minnesota,
or a form of self-insurance acceptable to the Director.
(2) Verifying that the registrant is insured against claims for personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising out of
the: a) use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents, employees and permittees; and b) placement and use of
facilities in the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents, employees, and permittees, including, but not limited to, protection against
liability arising from completed operations, damage of underground facilities and collapse of property.
(3) Naming the City as an additional insured as to whom the coverage required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will be
provided as to all such coverage.
(4) Requiring that the Director be notified thirty (30) days in advance of cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage term.
(5) Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile liability coverage, workers' compensation and umbrella coverage established by the
Director in amounts sufficient to protect the City and the public and to carry out the purposes and policies of this chapter.
d. The City may require a copy of the actual insurance policies. (Prior Code § 6-6-6)
e. If the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate required to be filed under Minnesota Statutes section 302A.821 as recorded and certified to
by the Secretary of State. (Prior Code § 6-6-6; amd. 2018 Code)
f. A copy of the person's order granting a certificate of authority from the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other applicable State or Federal
agency, where the person is lawfully required to have such certificate from said commission or other State or Federal agency.
2. Changes To Information: The registrant shall keep all of the information listed above current at all times by providing to the Director information as to
changes within fifteen (15) days following the date on which the registrant has knowledge of any change. (Prior Code § 6-6-6)
C. Exceptions: Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or amend the provisions of a City ordinance permitting persons to plant or maintain boulevard
plantings or gardens in the area of the right-of-way between their property and the street curb. Persons planting or maintaining boulevard plantings or
gardens shall not be deemed to use or occupy the right-of-way, and shall not be required to obtain any permits or satisfy any other requirements for
planting or maintaining such boulevard plantings or gardens under this chapter. However, nothing herein relieves a person from compliance with the
provisions of Minnesota Statutes chapter 216D, "One Call Law". (Prior Code § 6-6-5)
8-6-6: REPORTING OBLIGATIONS:
A. Operations:
1. Each registrant shall, at the time of registration and by December 1 of each year, file a construction and major maintenance plan for underground
facilities with the Director. Such plan shall be submitted using a format designated by the Director and shall contain the information determined by the
Director to be necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in the frequency of excavations and obstructions of rights-of-way. The plan shall
include, but not be limited to, the following information:
a. The locations and the estimated beginning and ending dates of all projects to be commenced during the next calendar year (in this chapter, a
"next year project").
b. To the extent known, the tentative locations and estimated beginning and ending dates for all projects contemplated for the five (5) years following
the next calendar year (in this chapter, a "five year project").
2. The term "project" in this chapter shall include both next year projects and five year projects. By January 1 of each year, the Director will have
available for inspection in the Director's Office a composite list of all projects of which the Director has been informed in the annual plans. All
registrants are responsible for keeping themselves informed of the current status of this list. Thereafter, by February 1, each registrant may change
any project in its list of next year projects, and must notify the Director and all other registrants of all such changes in said list. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, a registrant may at any time join in a next year project of another registrant listed by another registrant.
B. Additional Next Year Projects: Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Director will not deny an application for a right-of-way permit for failure to include a
project in a plan submitted to the City if the registrant has used commercially reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan for the project. (Prior Code § 6-6-
7)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 179/497
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-07 - SMALL CELL WIRELESS FACILITIES . Go to new ordinance.
8-6-7: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permits Required: Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no person may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way without first having obtained the
appropriate right-of-way permit from the Director to do so.
1. Excavation Permit: An excavation permit is required by a registrant to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit and to hinder
free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified
therein.
2. Obstruction Permit: An obstruction permit is required by a registrant to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of right-of-way by
placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the extent and for the duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is not required if a
person already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same project. (Prior Code § 6-6-8)
B. Application For Permits; Compliance With Certain Requirements: Application for a permit is made to the Director. Right-of-way permit applications shall
contain, and will be considered complete, only upon compliance with the requirements of the following provisions:
1. Registration with the Director pursuant to this chapter.
2. Submission of a completed permit application form, including all required attachments, and sealed drawings showing the location and area of the
proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed facilities.
3. Payment of money due the City for:
a. Permit fees, estimated restoration costs, and other management costs.
b. Prior obstructions or excavations.
c. Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the City because of the applicant's prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way or
any emergency actions taken by the City.
d. Franchise or user fees, if applicable.
4. Payment of disputed amounts due the City by posting security or depositing in an escrow account an amount equal to at least one hundred ten
percent (110%) of the amount owing.
5. When an excavation permit is requested for purposes of installing additional facilities, and the posting of a construction performance bond for the
additional facilities is insufficient, the posting of an additional or larger construction performance bond for the additional facilities may be required.
(Prior Code § 6-6-9)
C. Issuance Of Permit; Conditions: If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of this chapter, the Director shall issue a permit. The Director may
impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to protect the health, safety, and
welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use. (Prior Code § 6-6-10)
D. Denial Of Permit: The Director may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and conditions of this chapter or if the Director determines that
the denial is necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use. (Prior Code § 6-6-
16)
E. Permit Fees:
1. Fees Established:
a. Excavation Permit: The excavation permit fee shall be established in section 3-1-2 of this Code in an amount sufficient to recover the following
costs: (Prior Code § 6-6-11; amd. 2018 Code)
(1) The City management costs.
(2) Degradation costs, if applicable.
(3) Use of the limited area within the public right-of-way. (Prior Code § 6-6-11)
b. Obstruction Permit: The obstruction permit fee shall be established by the Director and shall be in an amount sufficient to recover the City
management costs, as provided in section 3-1-2 of this Code. (Prior Code § 6-6-11; amd. 2018 Code)
2. Payment Of Fees: No excavation permit or obstruction permit shall be issued without payment of excavation or obstruction permit fees. The City may
allow the applicant to pay such fees within thirty (30) days of billing.
3. Nonrefundable Fees: Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the Director has revoked for a breach as stated in subsection J of this section are
not refundable. (Prior Code § 6-6-11)
F. Joint Applications:
1. Registrants may jointly apply for permits to excavate or obstruct the right-of-way at the same place and time.
2. Registrants who join in a scheduled obstruction or excavation performed by the City, whether or not it is a joint application by two (2) or more
registrants or a single application, are not required to pay the obstruction and degradation portions of the permit fee.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 180/497
3. Registrants who apply for permits for the same obstruction or excavation, which the City does not perform, may share in the payment of the
obstruction of excavation permit fee. Registrants must agree among themselves as to the portion each will pay and indicate the same on their
applications. (Prior Code § 6-6-13)
G. Supplementary Applications:
1. Limitation On Area: A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area of the right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work outside
the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in the permit
must be obstructed or excavated must, before working in that greater area: a) make application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees
required thereby; and b) be granted a new permit or permit extension.
2. Limitation On Dates: A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the permit start
date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the end date. If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it must apply
for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the new permit or an extension of the old permit before working after the end date of the
previous permit. This supplementary application must be done before the permit end date. (Prior Code § 6-6-14)
H. Display Of Permit: Permits issued under this section shall be conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated work site and
shall be available for inspection by the Director.
I. Permit Extensions; Delay Penalty:
1. No person may excavate or obstruct the right-of-way beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless such person: a) makes a
supplementary application for another right-of-way permit before the expiration of the initial permit; and b) a new permit or permit extension is
granted.
2. Notwithstanding subsection I1 of this section, the City shall establish and impose a delay penalty for unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation,
obstruction, patching, or restoration. The delay penalty shall be established from time to time by City Council resolution. (Prior Code § 6-6-8)
J. Revocation Of Permits:
1. Substantial Breach: The City reserves its right, as provided herein, to revoke any right-of-way permit, without a fee refund, if there is a substantial
breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial breach by the
permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
a. The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit.
b. An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit
upon the City or its citizens.
c. Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a right-of-way permit.
d. The failure to complete the work in a timely manner, unless a permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to reasons
beyond the permittee's control.
e. The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not conform to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to section 8-6-11 of this
chapter.
2. Notice Of Breach: If the Director determines that the permittee has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute, ordinance,
rule, regulation or any condition of the permit, the Director shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. The demand
shall state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the permit. A substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the Director, at his or
her discretion, to place additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate and remedy the breach.
3. Response To Notice: Within twenty four (24) hours of receiving notification of the breach, the permittee shall provide the Director with a plan,
acceptable to the Director, that will cure the breach. The permittee's failure to so contact the Director, or the permittee's failure to submit an
acceptable plan, or the permittee's failure to reasonably implement the approved plan shall be cause for immediate revocation of the permit. Further,
the permittee's failure to so contact the Director, or the permittee's failure to submit an acceptable plan, or the permittee's failure to reasonably
implement the approved plan shall automatically place the permittee on probation for one full year.
4. Cause For Probation: From time to time, the Director may establish a list of conditions of the permit, which if breached, will automatically place the
permittee on probation for one full year, such as, but not limited to, working out of the allotted time period or working on the right-of-way grossly
outside of the permit authorization.
5. Automatic Revocation: If a permittee, while on probation, commits a breach as outlined in this subsection J, the permittee's permit will automatically
be revoked, and the permittee will not be allowed further permits for one full year, except for emergency repairs.
6. Reimbursement Of City Costs: If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall also reimburse the City for the City's reasonable costs, including restoration
costs and the cost of collection and reasonable attorney fees incurred in connection with such revocation. (Prior Code § 6-6-21)
8-6-8: RIGHT-OF-WAY PATCHING AND RESTORATION:
A. Timing: The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be completed
within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days as work could not be done because of extraordinary circumstances beyond the
control of the permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under section 8-6-9 of this chapter.
B. Patch And Restoration: The permittee shall patch its own work. The City may choose to either have the permittee restore the right-of-way or to restore
the right-of-way itself.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 181/497
1. City Restoration: If the City restores the right-of-way, the permittee shall pay the costs thereof within thirty (30) days of billing. If, during the thirty six
(36) months following such restoration, the pavement settles due to the permittee's improper backfilling, the permittee shall pay to the City, within
thirty (30) days of billing, all costs associated with having to correct the defective work.
2. Permittee Restoration: If the permittee restores the right-of-way itself, it shall, at the time of application for an excavation permit, post a construction
performance bond in an amount determined by the City Engineer to be sufficient to cover the cost of restoration. If, within thirty six (36) months after
completion of the restoration of the right-of-way, the City Engineer determines that the right-of-way has been properly restored, the surety on the
construction performance bond shall be released.
C. Standards: The permittee shall perform patching and restoration according to the standards and with the materials specified or approved by the City
Engineer. The City Engineer shall have the authority to prescribe the manner and extent of the restoration, and may do so in written procedures of
general application or on a case by case basis. The City Engineer, in exercising this authority, shall comply with PUC standards for right-of-way
restoration and shall further be guided by the following considerations:
1. The number, size, depth and duration of the excavations, disruptions, or damage to the right-of-way.
2. The traffic volume carried by the right-of-way; the character of the neighborhood surrounding the right-of-way.
3. The preexcavation condition of the right-of-way; the remaining life expectancy of the right-of-way affected by the excavation.
4. Whether the relative cost of the method of restoration to the permittee is in reasonable balance with the prevention of an accelerated depreciation of
the right-of-way that would otherwise result from the excavation, disturbance or damage to the right-of-way.
5. The likelihood that the particular method of restoration would be effective in slowing the depreciation of the right-of-way that would otherwise take
place.
D. Guarantees: By choosing to restore the right-of-way itself, the permittee guarantees its work and shall maintain it for thirty six (36) months following its
completion. During the thirty six (36) month period, it shall, upon notification from the Director, correct all restoration work to the extent necessary, using
the method required by the City Engineer. Said work shall be completed within five (5) business days of the receipt of the notice from the Director,
exclusive of weekends, legal holidays, periods during which work cannot be done because of circumstances beyond the permittees reasonable control
or days when work is prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under section 8-6-9 of this chapter.
E. Failure To Restore: If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way in the manner and to the condition required by the City Engineer, or fails to
satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the City Engineer, the City, at its option, may do such work. In that event, the permittee
shall pay to the City, within thirty (30) days of billing, the cost of restoring the right-of-way. If the permittee fails to pay as required, the City may exercise
its rights under the construction performance bond.
F. Degradation Cost In Lieu Of Restoration: In lieu of right-of-way restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation fee. However, the right-ofway
user shall remain responsible for patching, and the degradation fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these responsibilities. (Prior Code § 6-
6-12)
8-6-9: OTHER OBLIGATIONS:
A. Compliance With Other Laws: Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not relieve permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses, and
authority and to pay all fees required by the City or other applicable rule, law or regulation. A permittee shall comply with all requirements of local,
State, and Federal laws, including Minnesota Statutes sections 216D.01 to 216D.09 ("One Call Excavation Notice System"). A permittee shall perform
all work in conformance with all applicable codes and established rules and regulations, and is responsible for all work done in the right-of-way
pursuant to its permit, regardless of who does the work.
B. Prohibited Work: Except in an emergency, and with the approval of the Director, no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be done when
seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work.
C. Interference With Right-Of-Way: A permittee shall not so obstruct a right-of-way that the natural free and clear passage of water through the gutters or
other waterways shall be interfered with. Private vehicles of those doing work in the right-of-way may not be parked within or next to a permit area,
unless parked in conformance with City parking regulations. The loading or unloading of trucks must be done solely within the defined permit area
unless specifically authorized by the permit. (Prior Code § 6-6-15)
8-6-10: INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS:
The excavation, backfilling, patching, and restoration, and all other work performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with Engineering
Standards adopted by the PUC or other applicable local requirements, insofar as they are not inconsistent with the PUC Rules. (Prior Code § 6-6-17)
8-6-11: INSPECTIONS:
A. Notice Of Completion: When the work under any permit hereunder is completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in accordance with
PUC Rules.
B. Site Inspection: The permittee shall make the work site available to the City Engineer and to any other City employees or agents and to all others as
authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the work.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 182/497
C. Authority Of Director:
1. At the time of inspection, the Director may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety or well
being of the public.
2. The Director may issue an order to the permittee for any work which does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable standards,
conditions, or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten (10) days after
issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to the Director that the violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented
within the required time, the Director may revoke the permit pursuant to subsection 8-6-7J of this chapter. (Prior Code § 6-6-18)
8-6-12: WORK WITHOUT PERMIT:
A. Emergency Situations:
1. Each registrant shall immediately notify the Director of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The registrant may
proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency. Within two (2) business days after the occurrence of the emergency,
the registrant shall apply for the necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith and fulfill the rest of the requirements necessary to bring itself
into compliance with this chapter for the actions it took in response to the emergency.
2. If the Director becomes aware of an emergency regarding a registrant's facilities, the Director will attempt to contact the local representative of each
registrant affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. In any event, the Director may take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to
the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the registrant whose facilities occasioned the emergency.
B. Nonemergency Situations: Except in an emergency, any person who, without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a rightof-
way must subsequently obtain a permit and, as a penalty, pay double the normal fee for said permit, pay double all the other fees required by this
chapter, deposit with the Director the fees necessary to correct any damage to the right-of-way and comply with all other requirements of this chapter.
(Prior Code § 6-6-19)
8-6-13: SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION:
If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends sooner than the date given on the permit, the permittee shall notify the Director of
the accurate information as soon as this information is known. (Prior Code § 6-6-20)
8-6-14: MAPPING DATA:
A. Information Required: Each registrant shall provide mapping information required by the City in accordance with PUC Rules.
B. Trade Secret Information: At the request of any registrant, any information requested by the City which qualifies as a "trade secret" under Minnesota
Statutes section 13.37(b) shall be treated as trade secret information as detailed therein. (Prior Code § 6-6-22)
8-6-15: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
A. Undergrounding: Unless otherwise permitted by an existing franchise or, where determined by the City to be unfeasible such as in the provision of
electric service at certain voltages, or unless existing aboveground facilities are repaired or replaced, new construction and the installation of new
facilities and replacement of old facilities shall be done underground or contained within buildings or other structures in conformity with applicable
codes. (Prior Code § 6-6-23; amd. 2018 Code)
B. Corridors:
1. The City Engineer may assign specific corridors within the right-of-way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of
facilities that is or, pursuant to current technology, the City Engineer expects will someday be located within the right-of-way. All excavation,
obstruction, or other permits issued by the Director involving the installation or replacement of facilities shall designate the proper corridor for the
facilities at issue.
2. Any registrant who has facilities in the right-of-way in a position at variance with the corridors established by the City Engineer shall, no later than at
the time of the next reconstruction or excavation of the area where the facilities are located, move the facilities to the assigned position within the
right-of-way, unless this requirement is waived by the Director for good cause shown, upon consideration of such factors as the remaining economic
life of the facilities, public safety, customer service needs and hardship to the registrant.
C. Nuisance Conditions: One year after the effective date hereof, any facilities found in a right-of-way that have not been registered shall be deemed to be
a nuisance. The City may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance or taking
possession of the facilities and restoring the right-of-way to a usable condition.
D. Limitation Of Space: To protect health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use, the Director shall have the
power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional facilities within the right-of-way. In making such decisions, the Director shall strive to the
extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the right-of-way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public interest,
the public's needs for the particular utility service, the condition of the right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential utilities, the protection of
existing facilities in the right-of-way, and future City plans for public improvements and development projects which have been determined to be in the
public interest. (Prior Code § 6-6-23)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 183/497
8-6-16: RELOCATION OF FACILITIES:
A. A registrant must promptly and at its own expense, with due regard for seasonal working conditions, permanently remove and relocate its facilities in the
right-of-way whenever the Director, for good cause, requests such removal and relocation, and shall restore the right-of-way to the same conditions it
was in prior to said removal or relocation. The Director may make such request to prevent interference by the company's equipment or facilities with: 1)
a present or future City use of the right-of-way; 2) a public improvement undertaken by the City; 3) an economic development project in which the City
has an interest or investment; 4) when the public health, safety and welfare require it; or 5) when necessary to prevent interference with the safety and
convenience of ordinary travel over the right-of-way.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a person shall not be required to remove or relocate its facilities from any right-of-way which has been vacated in favor
of a nongovernmental entity unless and until the reasonable costs thereof are first paid to the person thereof. (Prior Code § 6-6-24)
8-6-17: PREEXCAVATION FACILITY AND FACILITIES LOCATION:
In addition to complying with the requirements of Minnesota Statutes sections 216D.01 to 216D.09 ("One Call Excavation Notice System") before the start
date of any right-of-way excavation, each registrant who has facilities or equipment in the area to be excavated shall mark the horizontal and approximate
vertical placement of all said facilities. Any registrant whose facilities are less than twenty inches (20") below a concrete or asphalt surface shall notify and
work closely with the excavation contractor to establish the exact location of its facilities and the best procedure for excavation. (Prior Code § 6-6-25)
8-6-18: DAMAGE TO OTHER FACILITIES:
A. When the City does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to maintain, support, or move a registrant's facilities to protect them, the Director
shall notify the local representative as early as is reasonably possible. The costs associated therewith will be billed to that registrant and must be paid
within thirty (30) days from the date of billing.
B. Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the right-of-way which it or its facilities damages. Each registrant shall be
responsible for the cost of repairing any damage to the facilities of another registrant caused during the City's response to an emergency occasioned
by that registrant's facilities. (Prior Code § 6-6-26)
8-6-19: VACATION OF RIGHT-OF-WAY:
A. Reservation Of Right: If the City vacates a right-of-way which contains the facilities of a registrant, and if the vacation does not require the relocation of
the registrant's or permittee's facilities, the City shall reserve, to and for itself and all registrants having facilities in the vacated right-of-way, the right to
install, maintain and operate any facilities in the vacated right-of-way and to enter upon such right-of-way at any time for the purpose of reconstructing,
inspecting, maintaining or repairing the same.
B. Relocation Of Facilities: If the vacation requires the relocation of the registrant's facilities; and 1) if the vacation proceedings are initiated by the
registrant or permittee, the registrant or permittee must pay the relocation costs; or 2) if the vacation proceedings are initiated by the City, the registrant
or permittee must pay the relocation costs unless otherwise agreed to by the City and the registrant or permittee; or 3) if the vacation proceedings are
initiated by a person or persons other than the registrant or permittee, such other person or persons must pay the relocation costs. (Prior Code § 6-6-
27)
8-6-20: INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY:
By registering with the Director, or by accepting a permit under this chapter, a registrant or permittee agrees as follows:
A. Limitation Of Liability: By reason of the acceptance of a registration or the grant of a right-of-way permit, the City does not assume any liability: 1) for
injuries to persons, damage to property, or loss of service claims by parties other than the registrant or the City; or 2) for claims or penalties of any sort
resulting from the installation, presence, maintenance, or operation of facilities by registrants or activities of registrants.
B. Indemnification:
1. A registrant or permittee shall indemnify, keep, and hold the City free and harmless from any and all liability on account of injury to persons or
damage to property occasioned by the issuance of permits or by the construction, maintenance, repair, inspection, or operation of the registrant's or
permittee's facilities located in the right-of-way.
2. The City shall not be indemnified for losses or claims occasioned through its own negligence except for losses or claims arising out of or alleging the
City's negligence as to the issuance of permits or inspections to ensure permit compliance. The City shall not be indemnified if the injury or damage
results from the performance in a proper manner of acts that the registrant or permittee reasonably believes will cause injury or damage, and the
performance is nevertheless ordered or directed by the City after receiving notice of the registrant's or permittee's determination.
C. Defense:
1. If a suit is brought against the City under circumstances where the registrant or permittee is required to indemnify, the registrant or permittee, at its
sole cost and expense, shall defend the City in the suit if written notice of the suit is promptly given to the registrant or permittee within a period in
which the registrant or permittee is not prejudiced by the lack or delay of notice.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 184/497
2. If the registrant or permittee is required to indemnify and defend, it shall thereafter have control of the litigation, but the registrant or permittee may
not settle the litigation without the consent of the City. Consent will not be unreasonably withheld.
3. This subsection C is not, as to third parties, a waiver of any defense, immunity, or damage limitation otherwise available to the City.
4. In defending an action on behalf of the City, the registrant or permittee is entitled to assert in an action every defense, immunity, or damage limitation
that the City could assert in its own behalf. (Prior Code § 6-6-28)
8-6-21: ABANDONED AND UNUSABLE FACILITIES:
A. Discontinued Operations: A registrant who has determined to discontinue its operations in the City must either:
1. Provide information satisfactory to the Director that the registrant's obligations for its facilities in the right-of-way under this chapter have been
lawfully assumed by another registrant.
2. Submit to the Director a proposal and instruments for transferring ownership of its facilities to the City. If a registrant proceeds under this clause, the
City may, at its option:
a. Purchase the facilities; or
b. Require the registrant, at its own expense, to remove it; or
c. Require the registrant to post a bond in an amount sufficient to reimburse the City for reasonably anticipated costs to be incurred in removing the
facilities.
B. Abandoned Facilities: Facilities of a registrant who fails to comply with subsection A of this section and which, for two (2) years, remains unused shall
be deemed to be abandoned. Abandoned facilities are deemed to be a nuisance. The City may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in
equity, including, but not limited to: 1) abating the nuisance; 2) taking possession of the facilities and restoring it to a usable condition; or 3) requiring
removal of the facilities by the registrant or the registrant's successor in interest.
C. Removal: Any registrant who has unusable and abandoned facilities in any right-of-way shall remove it from that right-of-way during the next scheduled
excavation, unless this requirement is waived by the Director. (Prior Code § 6-6-29)
8-6-22: APPEALS:
A. A right-of-way user that: 1) has been denied registration; 2) has been denied a permit; 3) has had a permit revoked; or 4) believes that the fees imposed
are invalid, may have the denial, revocation, or fee imposition reviewed, upon written request, by the City Council. The City Council shall act on a
written request in a timely manner. A decision by the City Council affirming the denial, revocation, or fee imposition will be in writing and supported by
written findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision.
B. Upon affirmation by the City Council of the denial, revocation, or fee imposition, the right-of-way user shall have the right to have the matter resolved by
binding arbitration. Binding arbitration must be before an arbitrator agreed to by both the City Council and right-of-way user. If the parties cannot agree
on an arbitrator, the matter must be resolved by a three (3) person arbitration panel made up of one arbitrator selected by the City, one arbitrator
selected by the right-of-way user, and one selected by the other two (2) arbitrators. The costs and fees of single arbitration shall be borne equally by
the City and right-of-way user. In the event there is a third arbitrator, each party shall bear the expense of its own arbitrator and shall jointly and equally
bear with the other party the expense of the third arbitrator and of the arbitration. (Prior Code § 6-6-30)
8-6-23: RESERVATION OF REGULATORY AND POLICE POWERS:
A permittee's or registrant's rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the City to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to protect
the health, safety and welfare of the public. (Prior Code § 6-6-31)
8-6-24: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or
administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. If a regulatory body or a court of competent jurisdiction should determine by a final, nonappealable
order that any permit, right or registration issued under this chapter or any portions of this chapter is illegal or unenforceable, then any such permit, right or
registration granted or deemed to exist hereunder shall be considered as a revocable permit with a mutual right in either party to terminate without cause
upon giving sixty (60) days' written notice to the other. The requirements and conditions of such a revocable permit shall be the same requirements and
conditions as set forth in the permit, right or registration, respectively, except for conditions relating to the term of the permit and the right of termination.
Nothing in this chapter precludes the City from requiring a franchise agreement with the applicant, as allowed by law, in addition to requirements set forth
herein. (Prior Code § 6-6-32)
Chapter 7
PARK AND TRAIL REGULATIONS
8-7-1: SCOPE:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 185/497
This chapter applies to all City parks and trails within the City. (Prior Code § 6-7-1)
8-7-2: CURFEW:
A. No person shall be upon any City parks or trails, nor shall any person park a vehicle upon any City park, greenway or parking lot within a City park or
greenway between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of the following day, subject to more restrictive provisions of this
chapter and minors further subject to the restrictions of the juvenile curfew established by section 6-4-1 of this Code.
B. Use of City trails directly adjacent to and within the right-of-way of public streets shall be exempt from the curfew requirement set forth in subsection A
of this section. (Prior Code § 6-7-3)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2016-12 - PARK HOURS. Go to new ordinance.
8-7-3: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
The following activities shall be prohibited upon or within all City parks, greenways and trails within the City:
A. Structures:
1. No person shall cut, break, scratch, mark or in any way damage or deface any building, fence, sign, lamp, flagpole, table, bench, railing, paving,
public utility, improvement, facility or other structure, feature or property upon or within any City park or trail.
2. No person shall move any bench, table or other equipment, structure or improvement located within any City park or trail; except, that portable picnic
tables may be moved within the designated limits of the picnic area in which they are located.
3. No person shall install upon any City park or trail permanent grills, tables, chairs, benches, volleyball, badminton, tennis, or croquet standards, or
horseshoe stakes.
B. Vegetation: Without specific permission of the City Council, no person shall in any way plant, cut, injure or deface any tree, shrub, or plant upon or
within any City park or trail.
C. Refuse: No person shall deposit, place or leave in any City park or trail any paper, rubbish, waste, cans, bottles or refuse of any kind, whether such
material is offensive to the senses or injurious to health, except in provided receptacles. Garbage, trash and refuse from activities occurring outside of
any City park or trail shall not be deposited within any park or trail or any receptacles within any park or trail.
D. Signs And Advertisements: No person shall post, glue, tack or otherwise display any sign, placard, banner, advertisement or inscription upon any City
park or trail.
E. Bathroom Facilities:
1. No person shall fail to cooperate in maintaining bathroom facilities within any City park or trail in a neat, orderly and sanitary condition.
2. No person over the age of six (6) years shall use bathroom facilities designated for members of the opposite sex.
F. Commercial Activities:
1. No person shall sell, rent, lease, or offer for sale, rent or lease, any article, thing, or service whatsoever upon any City park or trail without prior
approval of a permit by the City Council. (Prior Code § 6-7-4)
2. No person or organization shall sell any intoxicating liquor or 3.2 malt liquor beverages within any City park or trail. (Prior Code § 6-7-7)
G. Disorderly Conduct: No person shall use threatening, profane, abusive, disorderly, insulting or indecent language or commit any act that is a breach of
the public peace upon any City park or trail.
H. Gambling: No person shall gamble upon any City park or trail.
I. Fire: No person shall start, maintain or allow to burn any fire upon any City park or trail except as allowed by section 8-7-5 of this chapter.
J. Nudity; Improper Clothing: No person shall be upon any City park or trail nude, clad solely in any undergarment or otherwise clothed in such a manner
as to expose his or her buttocks or male or female genitalia.
K. Animal Traps; Killing Animals: No person shall possess, place, or set, or cause to be placed or set, any trap, trapping device or weapon or shall take or
kill any animal within any City park or trail. (Prior Code § 6-7-4)
L. Weapons: No person shall discharge any firearm or conduct archery activities within any City park or trail, except as allowed by section 8-7-8 of this
chapter. (Prior Code § 6-7-4; amd. 2018 Code)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 186/497
M. Golfing: No person shall engage in golfing practice within any City park or trail.
N. Motor Vehicles: No person shall park, drive or move, or cause to be parked, driven or moved, any form of motorized vehicle over, on or across any
portion of a City park or trail other than on a driveway providing access to or through the park or trail or within a facility designated for parking.
O. Watercraft: Except at designated public accesses, no floating device, boat or other form of watercraft or structure shall be placed on, or rolled, dragged
or pushed over, or moored to any structure within any City park or trail.
P. Fireworks: No person shall fire, discharge or explode any squib, cracker, firecracker or any other thing containing powder or other explosive material
upon any City park or trail.
Q. Swimming: No person shall swim in, bathe in or enter any waters upon any City park or trail, except in areas designated for such activities by the City
Council and posted by signs.
R. Smoking And Tobacco: Smoking of any tobacco product or e-cigarette and the use of oral tobacco products or "spit" tobacco is prohibited within any
City park. (Prior Code § 6-7-4)
S. Alcohol:
1. Consumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited within City parks except by persons twenty one (21) years of age during allowed park hours.
2. Alcohol shall only be consumed from containers made of materials other than glass. (Ord. 2018-14, 12-10-2018)
8-7-4: ANIMALS:
No person shall take or allow to be taken upon any City park or trail any animal except as provided by this chapter.
A. Restraint: The domestic animal shall be under physical restraint on a leash or using an electronic remote collar and accompanied by and under the
control and direction of a responsible person and not permitted to run at large at any time within any City park or trail unless within an area specifically
designated by the City Council for off leash activities.
B. Female Animal In Heat: Any female domestic animal in heat or season shall be prohibited from any City park or trail.
C. Excrement Removal: Any person having custody of the domestic animal shall have in his immediate physical possession a means to collect and
sanitarily dispose of and shall immediately collect and remove any and all feces deposited by the domestic animal within any City park or trail.
D. Horses: Horses shall only be allowed upon City parks and trails specifically designated for such use by the City Council. Any person having custody of
the domestic animal shall have in his immediate physical possession a means to collect and sanitarily dispose of any and all animal fecal matter and
shall immediately collect and remove any and all feces deposited by the horse within any City park or trail.
E. Dog Parks: Fenced areas within parks designated as "dog parks" for off leash recreation shall be subject to the rules of this chapter and the following
additional provisions:
1. Persons and dogs entering the dog park do so at their own risk. The City shall not be liable for any claim, demand, injury, damage, action, or causes
of action whatsoever to such persons, dogs, or property due to the negligence or failure to act of the City.
2. Dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs, as defined by Wright County ordinance, shall be prohibited from entering the dog park. (Prior Code § 6-7-
5)
3. Dogs must be at least four (4) months of age to be within any City park or trail. (Prior Code § 6-7-5; amd. 2018 Code)
8-7-5: PICNICS AND PICNIC SHELTERS:
A. Use Considerations: No person shall use any portion of the picnic areas for the purpose of holding picnics to the unreasonable exclusion of others, nor
shall any person use such areas and facilities for an unreasonable length of time if such facilities are crowded, except as may be allowed by the City
park shelter reservation policies.
B. Fires: A fire used for culinary purposes may be started and maintained upon any City park or trail only in a grill or inside a fire ring designed for such
purposes within a designated picnic area. No person shall leave a picnic area before any fire has been completely extinguished and before all garbage,
trash and refuse has been placed in the receptacles provided. Where no receptacles are provided, all garbage, trash and refuse shall be carried away
from the park and shall be properly disposed of elsewhere.
C. Garbage, Trash And Refuse: No person shall leave a picnic area before all garbage, trash and refuse has been placed in the receptacles provided.
Where no receptacles are provided, all garbage, trash and refuse shall be carried away from the park and shall be properly disposed of elsewhere.
(Prior Code § 6-7-6)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 187/497
8-7-6: ICE RINKS:
A. Use of ice rinks shall be limited to between the hours of five o'clock (5:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. each day.
B. Use of hockey sticks and hockey pucks shall only be allowed within the designated hockey rink.
C. Ice rinks are provided for informal recreational use only; no organized practices or games affiliated with a league or athletic association are to occur on
the ice rinks.
D. No animals shall be allowed on any ice surface that is maintained for skating. (Prior Code § 6-7-8)
8-7-7: ARCHERY RANGE:
A. Nonliability Of City: Persons entering the archery range do so at their own risk. The City shall not be liable for any claim, demand, injury, damage,
action, or causes of action whatsoever to such persons or property due to the negligence or failure to act of the City.
B. Rules:
1. All users shall adhere to the posted archery shooting procedures.
2. Users shall only shoot at designated targets, including shooting broadhead arrows only at specifically designated targets, and be aware of the target
and what is beyond the target.
3. Always draw the bow with arrow parallel to the ground unless using a crossbow, use only nock arrows at the shooting line unless using a crossbow,
and at all times keep the bow pointed toward the target when loaded.
4. Persons under the age of sixteen (16) years must be accompanied and supervised by an adult. (Prior Code § 6-7-9)
8-7-8: EXCEPTIONS:
An activity otherwise prohibited by this chapter may be allowed to occur under any one or more of the following circumstances and upon such terms and
conditions as the City Council may prescribe:
A. When the activity is conducted by a duly authorized public employee performing a necessary public function.
B. When the activity is a specifically authorized exception granted in writing by the City Council. (Prior Code § 6-7-2)
Chapter 8
STREET LIGHTING
8-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and regulations for the uniform installation and efficient operation and maintenance of streetlights along
public streets and trails to ensure adequate visibility for vehicles and pedestrians and to protect public safety. (Prior Code § 6-8-1)
8-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, when used in this chapter, shall be defined as follows:
ABOVE STANDARD SYSTEM: Street lighting that exceeds basic illumination needs established by this chapter for aesthetic or unique vehicle and/or
pedestrian traffic situations including, but not limited to:
A. Any system with fixtures spaced more closely than necessary to meet the standards for traffic or pedestrian safety.
B. Use of nonstandard lighting units.
HPS: High pressure sodium.
LED: Light emitting diode.
LIGHTING UNIT, TYPE I: A single arm shepherd's hook aluminum pole with the luminarie mounted at the down turned end of the pole and also having a
decorative base cover and one banner bracket.
LIGHTING UNIT, TYPE II: A straight round tapered steel or aluminum pole and cobra or mongoose or shoebox style luminaire mounted either at the top of
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 188/497
the pole or at the end of a mast arm.
LIGHTING UNIT, TYPE III: A straight round aluminum pole and top mounted lantern or globe luminaire.
PROPERTY OWNER: The person or entity identified by Wright County Property Tax records as the owner of a parcel of land.
STANDARD SYSTEM: Street lighting that fulfills basic illumination standards as established by this chapter. (Prior Code § 6-8-2)
8-8-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. The City Engineer shall plan the street lighting system.
B. All street lighting fixtures and materials shall be listed and approved by Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (UL).
C. All luminaries shall be controlled by a photo cell to be oriented north to the extent practical.
D. All fixtures shall comply with the Otsego Standard Lighting Specifications and sheets included in the Engineering Manual and the following minimum
specifications:
Type I Type II Type III
Luminaries HPS HPS HPS
Wattage 70 150 n/a
Horizontal cutoff 90 degree 90 degree 90 degree
Pole type Aluminum Steel or aluminum Steel or aluminum
Luminarie height 15 feet 30 feet n/a
E. Finish shall be factory applied polyester powder paint with paint chip supplied to the City Engineer for approval prior to installation.
F. Installation of nonstandard fixtures or above standard systems shall be allowed upon approval by the City Council; provided, that:
1. The nonstandard fixtures or above standard system shall be consistent with the minimum efficiency, durability and maintenance specifications of this
chapter as determined by the City Engineer.
2. Those requesting installation of the nonstandard fixtures or above standard systems shall be subject to an agreement assigning responsibility for
installation, maintenance, operating and administrative costs incurred that are in excess of standard fixtures or standard systems.
G. All lighting units installed as part of the street lighting system shall be supplied with a manufacturers warranty meeting the following specifications:
1. The luminaire electrical system consisting of a core and coil ballast, starting aid, capacitor and wiring inside the lighting unit will be free from defects
for a period of five (5) years from the date installation is complete and accepted by the City.
2. The luminaire housing shall be free from defects for a period of two (2) years from the date installation is complete and accepted by the City.
H. The location of the street lighting system within the public right-of-way shall comply with the specifications of the Engineering Manual and chapter 6 of
this title. (Prior Code § 6-8-3)
8-8-4: STANDARD STREET LIGHTING:
The standard street lighting system shall consist of the following:
A. Type II Lighting Units: Type II lighting units shall be installed:
1. At all corners of a four-way intersection of two (2) arterial streets or at each corner of the approaching vehicle lane of an arterial street at a Tintersection
with another arterial street.
2. At the corner of the approaching vehicle lane for all intersections with arterial streets.
3. At two (2) opposing corners of a four-way intersection of two (2) collector streets; or at the corner of the approaching vehicle lane of a collector street
intersecting another collector street at a T-intersection.
B. Type III Lighting Units: Type III lighting units shall be installed:
1. Every six hundred sixty feet (660') along both sides of urban collector streets offset such that there is one streetlight approximately every three
hundred thirty feet (330') on alternating sides of the collector street.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 189/497
2. At two (2) opposing corners of a four-way intersection of two (2) local streets or a local street with a collector street; or at the corner of the
approaching vehicle lane of a local street at a T-intersection with another local or collector street.
3. At the terminus end of a cul-de-sac street.
4. At the point of deflection in the alignment of a single curved street where the interior angle is one hundred thirty five degrees (135°) or less. The
lighting unit is to be located on the interior of the curve unless a sidewalk exists on the outside of the curve, and then the lighting unit shall be located
adjacent to the sidewalk.
C. Residential Street Lighting: Within residential subdivisions developed within the Sanitary Sewer Service District defined by the Comprehensive Plan,
one type III lighting unit shall be installed:
1. On one side of a public street at the midpoint of a block longer than nine hundred feet (900'). If a sidewalk is located on one side of a street, the light
unit shall be installed on the same side of the street.
2. At midblock access points to off street trail corridors.
D. Industrial Street Lighting: Within industrial subdivisions, one type II fixture shall be installed every six hundred sixty feet (660') along one side of local
industrial streets.
E. Other: Streetlights shall be installed as standard street lighting as determined by the City Engineer and/or Public Works Director to address unique
vehicle traffic, pedestrian or public safety issues. (Prior Code § 6-8-4)
8-8-5: ABOVE STANDARD STREET LIGHTING:
The following street lighting shall be above standard systems and shall be installed in addition to the lighting required by section 8-8-4 of this chapter:
A. Commercial Street Lighting: Within subdivisions developed within the Sanitary Sewer Service District defined by the Comprehensive Plan, the following
street lighting shall be installed:
Alternating type I and type II lighting units shall be installed along both sides of local commercial streets spaced one hundred fifty feet (150') between
fixtures. The alignment of lighting units on opposite sides of the same street shall be offset such that the type I and type II lighting units are
approximately across from each other along the length of the street.
B. Other: Streetlights shall be installed as above standard street lighting as determined by the City Engineer and/or Public Works Director to address
unique vehicle traffic, pedestrian or public safety issues. (Prior Code § 6-8-5)
8-8-6: INSTALLATION:
A. New Subdivisions: Street lighting shall be installed by the developer at the developer's cost in all new subdivisions in accordance with this chapter and
the subdivision ordinance.
B. Existing Developed Areas: Street lighting shall be installed in developed areas of the City in accordance with the following provisions:
1. The City shall establish a program for installation of street lighting along arterial and collector streets defined by the transportation plan in
accordance with this chapter as part of the capital improvement plan.
2. Within existing developed areas and along local streets, street lighting shall be installed:
a. At the direction of the City Council.
b. Any property owner may request installation of a streetlight upon a local street benefiting his property by submitting a petition to the City Clerk
subject to the following procedures:
(1) The petition shall include the following information:
(A) The name, address and phone number of a petitioner's representative.
(B) A map or other description indicating the street(s) upon which the light(s) is to be located and number of lights being requested.
(C) Signatures of a minimum of sixty percent (60%) of the property owners within six hundred sixty feet (660') of a proposed streetlight location
approving of the proposed installation.
(D) Provide a written statement as to the demonstrated need for the requested streetlight(s).
(2) Upon submission of a complete petition, the City Clerk shall schedule consideration of the petition for a City Council meeting occurring not
more than thirty (30) days from the date which it is received.
(3) The City Engineer and/or Public Works Director shall prepare a report to the City Council regarding conformance with the provisions of this
chapter and recommendations as to the need for installation of street lighting requested by the petition.
3. The cost for equipment and installation of street lighting within existing developed areas shall be assigned at the direction of the City Council. (Prior
Code § 6-8-6)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 190/497
8-8-7: OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS:
Charges for electricity and maintenance of street lighting shall be made against all property benefited by the streetlights in accordance with the following
provisions:
A. Standard Street Lighting: The costs of operating and maintaining the standard street lighting system shall be financed as part of the General Fund.
B. Above Standard Street Lighting: The costs for operating above standard street lighting systems shall be funded through establishment of a special
service district pursuant to Minnesota Statutes section 428A.02 encompassing all benefited property:
1. District Established: In accordance with Minnesota Statutes section 428A.02, subdivision 1, the City hereby establishes a special service district to
fund the ongoing operation and maintenance of the above standard street lighting system described in section 8-8-5 of this chapter.
2. Boundaries Of District:
a. Boundaries Established: The special service district shall include commercial properties classified as such under Minnesota Statutes section
273.13 and zoned business district or PUD District allowing commercial uses as defined by the business districts as set out in section 11-50-1 of
this Code.
b. Hearing:
(1) The City Clerk shall set a public hearing for the City Council to consider adoption of a map establishing the defined Above Standard Street
Lighting System Special Service District for the next calendar year no later than November 30 of each year or the prior special service district
boundaries approved by the City Council and published shall remain in full force and effect.
(2) Notice of a public hearing to consider adoption of amendments to the Above Standard Street Lighting System Service District boundaries shall
be given by publication in at least two (2) issues of the official City newspaper with a minimum of fourteen (14) days between said publications.
(3) Notice of a public hearing to consider adoption of amendments to the Above Standard Street Lighting System Service District boundaries shall
be mailed to the property owner of each parcel to be included in the special service district not less than ten (10) days before the date of the
hearing.
(4) The public hearing shall be conducted not less than three (3) days after the date of the second publication of the notice in the official City
newspaper.
(5) A copy of the notice and a list of the property owners and addresses to which the notice was sent shall be attested and made a part of the
records of the proceeding.
(6) Failure of a property owner to receive said notice shall not invalidate any such proceedings as set forth within this chapter, provided a bona fide
attempt has been made to comply with the notice requirements of this chapter and Minnesota Statutes.
3. Above Standard Street Lighting Service Rates:
a. Above standard street lighting service rates shall be charged in accordance with charges incurred to the City and estimated costs for future
maintenance and replacement of lighting units associated with the above standard street lighting system and established annually by ordinance in
section 3-1-2 of this Code.
b. The charges for above standard street lighting shall be assessed to all properties within the special service district established by this chapter in
accordance with Minnesota Statutes section 428A.05.
C. New Subdivisions: In new subdivisions in which standard and/or above standard street lighting systems are installed, the developer shall make payment
to the City in the amount set forth by section 3-1-2 of this Code for each lighting unit for the estimated cost of operation and maintenance of the street
lighting system within the subdivision for a period of two (2) years. (Prior Code § 6-8-7)
Title 9
BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT
Chapter 1
GENERAL BUILDING REGULATIONS; ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
9-1-1: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. State Regulations Apply: The issuance of building permits and the collection of fees shall be as authorized in Minnesota Statutes section 326B.121,
subdivision 2.
B. Fees:
1. Fees Established:
a. Surcharge Fee: A surcharge fee as established in section 3-1-2 of this Code shall be collected on all permits issued for work governed by this
chapter and chapter 2 of this title in accordance with Minnesota Statutes section 326B.148. (Prior Code § 4-1-2; amd. 2018 Code)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 191/497
b. Permit Fees: Building permit fees shall be assessed in accordance with section 3-1-2 of this Code for work governed by this chapter and chapter 2
of this title.
c. Special Investigation Fee: If work for which a building permit is required by the Building Code has been commenced without first obtaining
approval of said permit, a special investigation shall be made before the permit is issued, and a special investigation fee collected in addition to the
permit fees as established in section 3-1-2 of this Code.
2. Refund Policy:
a. Procedure:
(1) The request for a refund must be submitted from the person, firm, or corporation that paid the original fees.
(2) All requests for cancellations of permits and refunds of fees must be in writing, shall include a copy of the original permit and the reason why
the refund is being requested.
(3) Any request for refund must be made within one hundred eighty (180) days of the date when the fee was paid or the request will not be
considered.
b. Eligibility For Refund:
(1) One hundred percent (100%) of permit fees may be refunded when determined by the Department of Building Safety that:
(A) No work requiring a building permit has been started.
(B) A fee was erroneously paid or collected.
(2) All building permit fees shall be nonrefundable once a building permit has been issued and work requiring a building permit has been started.
(3) All plan review fees and permit surcharges shall be nonrefundable once an application for a building permit has been accepted by the City.
(Prior Code § 4-1-2)
9-1-2: EXTERIOR CONSTRUCTION COMPLETION:
Exterior construction of a building shall be fully completed within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date a building permit is issued unless extended
by the building official. For the purposes of this section, exterior construction shall include installation of all exterior siding and finishes, roofing materials,
doors and windows such that the building is weatherproof. (Prior Code § 4-1-3)
9-1-3: DAYS AND HOURS OF CONSTRUCTION:
A. The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration, or repair of any building shall occur only between the following hours:
1. Monday through Saturday: Seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
2. Sunday: Eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
B. The building official may, in cases of emergency, grant permission to repair at any time when he finds that such repair work will not affect the health and
safety of the persons in the vicinity. (Prior Code § 4-1-4)
9-1-4: MISDEMEANOR VIOLATION:
Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor. (Prior Code § 4-1-5)
Chapter 2
BUILDING CODE
9-2-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
The Minnesota State Building Code, established pursuant to Minnesota Statutes sections 326B.101 to 326B.16, including all of the amendments, rules and
regulations established, adopted, and published from time to time by the Minnesota Commissioner of Labor and Industry, through the Building Codes and
Standards Division, is hereby adopted by reference as to the Building Code for the City, excepting the optional chapters unless specifically adopted in
section 9-2-2 of this chapter. The Code is hereby incorporated into this section as if fully set out herein. (Prior Code § 4-1-1; amd. 2018 Code)
9-2-2: OPTIONAL PROVISIONS:
The Minnesota State Building Code, established pursuant to Minnesota Statutes sections 326B.101 to 326B.16, allows the City to adopt by reference and
enforce certain optional chapters of the most current edition of the Minnesota State Building Code. The following optional provisions identified in the most
current edition of the State Building Code are hereby adopted and incorporated as part of the Building Code for the City:
1335 Floodproofing Regulations parts 1335.0600 to 1335.1200.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 192/497
(Prior Code § 4-1-1; amd. 2018 Code)
9-2-3: MISDEMEANOR VIOLATION:
Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor. (Prior Code § 4-1-5)
Chapter 3
ELECTRICAL REGULATIONS
9-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to implement the provisions of the Minnesota State Building Code and Minnesota Rules chapter 1315 which adopts the
National Electrical Code. (Prior Code § 4-6-1)
9-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
A. As used in this chapter, "reasonably safe to persons and property", as applied to electrical installations and electrical equipment, means safe to use in
the service for which the installation or equipment is intended without unnecessary hazard to life, limb or property.
B. For purposes of interpretation of the provisions of this chapter, the most recently published edition of the National Electrical Code shall be prima facie
evidence of the definitions and scope of words and terms used in this chapter. (Prior Code § 4-6-1)
9-3-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all installations of electrical conductors, fittings, devices, and fixtures hereinafter referred to as "electrical
equipment", within or on public and private buildings and premises, with the following general exceptions: The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the
installations in mines, ships, railway cars, aircraft, automotive equipment or the installations or equipment employed by a railway, electric or
communication utility in the exercise of its functions as a utility, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Prior Code § 4-6-1)
9-3-4: ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR:
A. Office Created; Appointment: There is hereby created the office of electrical inspector appointed by the City Council.
B. Qualifications:
1. The person chosen to fill the office of electrical inspector shall be of good moral character, shall be possessed of such executive ability as is requisite
for the performance of his duties and shall have a thorough knowledge of the standard materials and methods used in the installation of electrical
equipment; shall be well versed in approved methods of construction for safety to persons and property; the Statutes of the State relating to electrical
work and any orders, rules and regulations issued by authority thereof; and the National Electrical Code as approved by the American Standards
Association; shall have two (2) years' experience as an electrical inspector or five (5) years' experience in the installation of electrical equipment, or a
graduate mechanical or electrical engineer with two (2) years of practical electrical experience.
2. The electrical inspector shall be a licensed master or journeyman electrician as defined under Minnesota Statutes.
C. Duties: It shall be the duty of the electrical inspector to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The inspector shall, upon application, grant permits for the
installation or alteration of electrical equipment, and shall make inspections of electrical installations, all as provided in this chapter. The inspector shall
keep complete records of all permits issued, inspections and reinsertions made and other official work performed in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
D. Conflict Of Interest: It shall be unlawful for the inspector to engage in the sale, installation or maintenance of electrical equipment, directly or indirectly,
and the inspector shall have no financial interest in any concern engaged in any such business.
E. Authority:
1. The inspector shall have the right, during reasonable hours, to enter any building or premises in the discharge of his official duties, or for the purpose
of making any inspection, reinsertion or test of electrical equipment contained therein or its installation.
2. When any electrical equipment is found by the inspector to be dangerous to persons or property because it is defective or defectively installed, the
person responsible for the electrical equipment shall be notified in writing and shall make any changes or repairs required in the judgment of the
inspector to place such equipment in a safe condition. If such work is not completed within fifteen (15) days or any longer period that may be
specified by the inspector in said notice, the inspector shall have the authority to disconnect or order discontinuance of electrical service to said
electrical equipment.
3. In cases of emergency where necessary for safety to persons and property, or where electrical equipment may interfere with the work of the Fire
Department, the inspector shall have the authority to disconnect or cause disconnection immediately of any electrical equipment. (Prior Code § 4-6-
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 193/497
2)
9-3-5: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required; Restrictions And Exceptions:
1. An electrical permit is required for each installation, alteration, addition or repair of electrical work for light, heat and power within the limits of the
City. Permits for the installation of electrical work in new structures shall only be issued to electrical contractors duly licensed by the State. Permits
for the installation, alteration, addition or repair of electrical work in existing structures shall only be issued to electrical contractors duly licensed by
the State or to resident owners of property where the work is to be done.
2. No permit shall be required for electrical installations of equipment owned, leased, operated or maintained by a public service corporation which is
used by said corporation in the performance of its function as a utility; except, that such electrical installation shall conform to the minimum standards
of the National Electrical Safety Code.
B. Application For Permit; Issuance: Application for such permit, describing the electrical work to be done, shall be made in writing to the City by the
person so registered to do the work. The application shall be accompanied by such plans, specifications and schedules as may be necessary to
determine whether the electrical installation as described will be in conformity with all the legal requirements. The fees for electrical inspection as set
forth in section 3-1-2 of this Code shall accompany such application. If the applicant has complied with all of the provisions of this chapter, a permit for
such electrical installation shall be issued.
C. Permit Fees:
1. Before commencing any installation of any work regulated by this chapter, a permit therefor shall be secured from the Building Department and the
fee for such permit set forth by section 3-1-2 of this Code paid. No such permit shall be issued to do any of the work or make any installation
regulated by this chapter except to persons licensed to do such work under the terms of this chapter. Holders of a contractor's license shall not
obtain permits for electrical work unless the work is supervised by them and is performed by workers employed by them or their firm.
2. Should any person begin work of any kind, such as set forth in this chapter, or for which a permit from the electrical inspector is required by
ordinance, without having secured the necessary permit therefor from the building official either previous to or during the day of the commencement
of any such work, or on the next succeeding day where such work is commenced on a Saturday or on a Sunday or a holiday, he shall, when
subsequently securing such permit, be required to pay double the fees provided for such permit.
3. Additional fees and/or fee shortages must be received by the City within fourteen (14) days of written notice. If additional fees and/or fee shortages
are not received within fourteen (14) days of notice, permits for electrical installations will not be accepted by the City until such time as the additional
fees and/or fee shortages are received. (Prior Code § 4-6-5)
9-3-6: INSPECTIONS:
A. All electrical installations which involve the concealment of wiring or equipment shall have a "rough-in" inspection prior to concealment, wherein the
inspector shall be duly notified in advance, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
B. At regular intervals, the electrical inspector shall visit all premises where work may be done under annual permits and shall inspect all electrical
equipment installed under such a permit since the day of his last previous inspection, and shall issue a certificate of approval for such work as is found
to be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, after the fee required has been paid.
C. When any electrical equipment is to be hidden from view by the permanent placement of parts of the building, the person installing the equipment shall
notify the electrical inspector, and such equipment shall not be concealed until it has been inspected and approved by the electrical inspector or until
twenty four (24) hours, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, shall have elapsed from the time of such scheduled inspection; provided, that on
large installations where the concealment of equipment proceeds continuously, the person installing the electrical equipment shall give the electrical
inspector due notice, and inspections shall be made periodically during the progress of the work.
D. If, upon inspection, the installation is not found to be fully in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, the electrical inspector shall at once forward
to the person making the installation a written notice stating the defects which have been found to exist. (Prior Code § 4-6-5)
9-3-7: OWNERSHIP OF TRANSMISSION OR DISTRIBUTION LINES OR APPURTENANCES:
Ownership of any transmission or distribution lines or appurtenances thereto, including, but not limited to, transformers, shall not be transferred by a public
service corporation to any person, except another franchised public service corporation dealing in electric energy for distribution and sale, without a permit
first having been issued therefor by the City. Such permit shall be issued only after the facilities to be transferred have been inspected and approved as
provided in this chapter and upon payment of an inspection fee as set forth in this chapter. (Prior Code § 4-6-5)
9-3-8: STANDARDS FOR ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT INSTALLATION:
A. All installations of electrical equipment shall be reasonably safe to persons and property and in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and the
applicable Statutes of the State and all orders, rules and regulations issued by the authority thereof. All electrical equipment shall be listed and labeled
by a testing agency.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 194/497
B. Conformity of installations of electrical equipment with applicable regulations set forth in the current National Electrical Code as adopted by the
Minnesota Rules shall be prima facie evidence that such installations are reasonably safe to persons and property. Noncompliance with the provisions
of this chapter or the National Electrical Code as adopted by the Minnesota Rules shall be prima facie evidence that the installation is not reasonably
safe to persons and property.
C. The electrical inspector may, with approval of the building official, authorize installations of special wiring methods other than herein provided.
D. Buildings or structures moved from without to within and within the limits of the City shall conform to all of the requirements of this Code for new
buildings or structures.
E. Existing buildings or structures hereafter changed in use shall conform in all respects to the requirements of this chapter for the new use. (Prior Code
§ 4-6-3)
9-3-9: CONNECTIONS TO INSTALLATIONS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to make connections from a supply of electricity to any electrical equipment for the installation of which a permit is
required or which has been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by the electrical inspector.
B. The public or private utility providing services shall disconnect the same upon a written order from the electrical inspector, if the inspector considers any
electrical installation unsafe to life and property or installed contrary to this Code. (Prior Code § 4-6-4)
Chapter 4
FIRE CODE
9-4-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
The Minnesota Fire Code and the Fire Code standards, as such may be from time to time amended, supplemented, or replaced in the future, pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes and any rules thereunder is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference in this section as if set forth in full as the Fire Code for the
City. One copy of said Code, as it may be from time to time amended, supplemented, or replaced under the above rules and statutes shall be on file in the
Office of the City Clerk. (Prior Code § 4-2-1; amd. 2018 Code)
9-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
When used in the Fire Code, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings:
CORPORATION COUNSEL: The City Attorney for the City of Otsego, Minnesota.
JURISDICTION: The City of Otsego, Minnesota. (Prior Code § 4-2-2; amd. 2018 Code)
9-4-3: PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS REQUIRED:
A. Permit: A permit required by the Fire Code shall be obtained by submission of an application to the Department of Building Safety along with any fee
established in section 3-1-2 of this Code.
B. Inspections: Inspections as required by the Fire Code shall be scheduled by the Department of Building Safety and shall require payment of any fee
established in section 3-1-2 of this Code. (Prior Code § 4-2-3)
Chapter 5
SUBSURFACE SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEMS
9-5-1: PURPOSE; STATUTE AUTHORITY:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards for and regulation of subsurface sewage treatment systems (SSTS) and sewage disposal
including the proper location, design, construction, operation, maintenance, and repair to protect surface water and groundwater from contamination by
human sewage and waterborne household and commercial waste; to protect the public's health and safety; to protect the natural environment; and to
eliminate or prevent the development of public nuisances. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted under Minnesota Statutes sections
115.55 to 115.58 and Minnesota Rules 7080 through 7083, pertaining to sewage and wastewater treatment, as the same may from time to time be
amended. (Prior Code § 4-3-1; amd. 2018 Code)
9-5-2: SCOPE:
All sewage generated in areas of the City where a sanitary sewer is not available, as determined by the City, shall be treated and dispersed by an
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 195/497
approved SSTS that is sited, designed, installed, operated and maintained in accordance with this chapter or by a system that has been permitted by the
MPCA. (Prior Code § 4-3-2)
9-5-3: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The City hereby adopts by reference Minnesota Statutes section 115.55 and Minnesota Rules 7080 and 7081 along with any future amendments thereof.
(Prior Code § 4-3-2)
9-5-4: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Prohibited Discharges: It is unlawful for any person to construct, maintain or use any SSTS regulated under this chapter that results in raw or partially
treated wastewater seeping to the ground surface or flowing into any surface water. Any surface discharging system must be permitted under the
National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Program by the MPCA.
B. Location In Floodplain: SSTS shall not be located in a floodway, and whenever possible, location in a floodplain shall be avoided. If no option exists to
locate an SSTS outside of a floodplain, location within the flood fringe is allowed if the requirements in Minnesota Rules 7080.2270 and the
requirements of the zoning ordinance are met.
C. Management Plans:
1. Management plans are required for all new or replacement SSTS. The management plan shall be submitted by the designer to the building official
before issuance of an SSTS permit. Management plans shall include requirements as listed in Minnesota Rules 7080.0600, subparagraph 1(B), and
any other requirements as determined by the building official.
2. SSTS specified in Minnesota Rules 7080.2290, 7080.2350, 7080.2400 and 7081 require an operating permit and shall include Minnesota Rules
7082.0600, subparagraph 2, and other requirements as determined by the building official. The operating permit for new SSTS and MSTS will be
issued in tandem with the construction permit for the new system. Operating permits, when needed for existing systems and/or system repair, will be
issued as separate permits.
3. SSTS not operated under a management permit or operating permit must have treatment tanks inspected every three (3) years. Solids must be
removed when their accumulations exceed the limits described in Minnesota Rules 7080.2450.
4. Septage shall be pumped, managed, land applied and disposed of in accordance with applicable State and Federal laws.
5. With septic tank pumping, the service manhole(s) shall be brought to within one foot (1') of finished grade and secured as needed. With the
pumping, maintaining or certification of a lift tank, the pump riser must be brought to grade.
D. Holding Tanks:
1. The use of holding tanks for new residential dwellings is prohibited.
2. Use of holding tank(s) may be approved by the City Council for existing structures or uses other than new residential dwellings only when:
a. Physical conditions upon the property make construction of an SSTS meeting the requirements of this chapter not possible.
b. The property does not have access to Municipal sewer as determined by the City.
c. For residential structures, the property owner shall agree that the existing structure shall not be expanded or altered by way of kitchen, bathrooms,
bedrooms or other improvements in such a way as to require additional holding tank capacity.
3. When allowed, holding tanks shall be subject to the following requirements:
a. A level alarm shall be installed within the tank that includes an audible horn and strobe light visible from a public street.
b. The property owner shall maintain a contract on file with the building official for pumping the holding tank(s) with a licensed maintenance business
and shall submit to the building official records of required pumping and other maintenance.
E. New Systems: All lots shall have a minimum of two (2) soil treatment and dispersal areas that can support trenches, seepage beds, mounds and at
grade systems as defined by Minnesota Rules 7080.2200 through 7080.2300 or site conditions described in 7081.0270, subparagraphs 3 through 7.
F. Point Of Sale: No owner of a tract of land on which a structure that is required to have an SSTS is located shall sell or transfer to another party said tract
of land unless the requirements as stated in the Wright County Point of Sale Certification Ordinance for On-Site Septic Systems are met.
G. Abandonment: SSTS must be properly abandoned in accordance with Minnesota Rules 7080.2500:
1. If the individual abandoning an SSTS is not a licensed SSTS professional, the abandonment must be inspected by a licensed SSTS inspector.
2. A State abandonment document must be submitted to the building official within ninety (90) days of abandonment. (Prior Code § 4-3-2)
9-5-5: SITE EVALUATION AND DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 196/497
A. Soil Observations: A minimum of three (3) soil observations are required for each site unless sites are adjacent. For adjacent sites, a minimum of three
(3) soil observations are required with a minimum of two (2) soil observations in the primary site and one observation in the secondary site.
B. Site Identification: Benchmarks, borings, percolation sites and dispersal area must be staked and labeled in the field with the elevations of each on the
submitted design.
C. Septic Tank:
1. A minimum of two (2) 1,000-gallon tanks are required. A one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallon split tank may be allowed subject to approval of
the building official.
2. For a new dwelling, burial of the top of the tank greater than four feet (4') is allowed only with approval of the building official and a statement from
the manufacturer as to the maximum designed depth for the tank.
D. Pump Tank:
1. A minimum one thousand (1,000) gallon pump tank is needed for lifting the effluent to the soil treatment area.
2. The pump must employ an audible alarm and warning light located inside of the principal structure to alert occupants of a failure.
E. Percolation Tests: When conducting percolation tests, soil texture shall be logged and accounted for. If there is a discrepancy between the soil texture
and the percolation rate, the smaller soil loading rate shall be used.
F. Drainfield Sizing: Trenches designed with twelve inches (12") of rock or more under the distribution pipe shall be sized according to the following
provisions:
1. Treatment level A/B:
MINIMUM TREATMENT AREA1
Bedrooms
Sand
Loamy Sand
1.60 gpd/ft.
Sandy Loam
1.00 gpd/ft.
Loam
Fine Sand
0.78 gpd/ft.
Silt
Silt Loam
0.78 gpd/ft.
Clay Loams
0.60 gpd/ft.
2 450 sq. ft. 450 sq. ft. 450 sq. ft. 450 sq. ft. 500 sq. ft.
3 500 sq. ft. 500 sq. ft. 577 sq. ft. 577 sq. ft. 750 sq. ft.
4 550 sq. ft. 600 sq. ft. 769 sq. ft. 769 sq. ft. 1,000 sq. ft.
5 600 sq. ft. 750 sq. ft. 962 sq. ft. 962 sq. ft. 1,250 sq. ft.
Note:
1. There are structure and consistence qualifiers in Minnesota Rules 7080.2150 that may require design modifications before being able to
properly apply this table.
2. Treatment level C:
MINIMUM TREATMENT AREA1
Bedrooms
Sand
Loamy Sand
1.20 gpd/ft.
Sandy Loam
0.78 gpd/ft.
Loam
Fine Sand
0.60 gpd/ft.
Silt
Silt Loam
0.50 gpd/ft.
Clay Loams
0.45 gpd/ft.
2 600 sq. ft. 600 sq. ft. 600 sq. ft. 600 sq. ft. 667 sq. ft.
3 700 sq. ft. 800 sq. ft. 800 sq. ft. 900 sq. ft. 1,000 sq. ft.
4 800 sq. ft. 900 sq. ft. 1,000 sq. ft. 1,200 sq. ft. 1,333 sq. ft.
5 900 sq. ft. 1,000 sq. ft. 1,250 sq. ft. 1,500 sq. ft. 1,667 sq. ft.
Note:
1. There are structure and consistence qualifiers in Minnesota Rules 7080.2150 that may require design modifications before being able to
properly apply this table.
3. Mound systems are to be sized at 1.0 gpd/square foot.
4. Types III, IV and V or nonresidential SSTS shall be time dosed.
5. Bedroom additions with an existing compliance SSTS where the treatment area cannot be practically increased to the proper treatment area size
shall be time dosed.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 197/497
6. When installing gravity trenches in sandy soil per Minnesota Rules 7080.2210 subparagraph 4F(2), the maximum single trench area shall be
determined as fifteen percent (15%) of the State required treatment area.
G. Sewer Pipe:
1. The building sewer pipe extending from the building to the tank shall not be less than four inches (4") in diameter and must meet the strength
requirements of schedule 40 plastic pipe. The pipe shall be supported in such manner so that there is no deflection during backfilling and subsequent
settling of the soil between the building foundation and the inlet to the septic tank. Construction of the line shall provide a grade of not less than oneeighth
inch (1/8") per foot for minimum grades. No ninety degree (90°) ells shall be permitted.
2. All sewer pipelines, manholes, and other appurtenances shall be constructed in accordance with the State Plumbing Code and MPCA requirements.
H. Minimum Setback Distances:
Sewage Or
Holding Tank
Soil
Treatment
Or
Absorption
Area
Building Sewer Or
Supply Pipes
Water supply wells1:
50 ft. continuous casing or encountering 10 ft. of impervious material 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft.2
Less than 50 ft. continuous casing 50 ft. 50 ft.2
Buried water suction pipe1 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft.2
Buried pressurized water distribution pipe1 10 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft.
Buildings3 10 ft. -
Property lines4 10 ft. 10 ft. -
Subsurface drainage systems 50 ft. 50 ft. -
Surface drainage systems 30 ft. 30 ft. -
OHWM of Natural Environment Lakes, Recreation Development Lakes, Tributary
River segments and the Mississippi River
150 ft. 150 ft. -
OHWM of General Development Lakes 50 ft. 50 ft. -
Wetlands 50 ft. 50 ft. -
Notes:
1. Setbacks from buried water pipes and water supply well as governed by Minnesota Rules 4715 and 4725, respectively.
2. The setback can be reduced to 20 feet if the building sewer or supply pipe is air tested by holding 5 pounds of pressure for 15 minutes.
3. For structures other than buildings, these setbacks may be reduced if necessary due to site conditions, but in no case shall any part of the
SSTS be located under or within the structure. For this provision to be employed, there shall not be interior space below the structure. For the new
construction of a structure without interior space below the structure, no part of the absorption area shall encroach closer than 10 feet.
4. The setback from the treatment area to a public right-of-way may be reduced by approval of the City Engineer. Setbacks to other property lines
shall be processed in accordance with the variance procedures established by the zoning ordinance.
(Prior Code § 4-3-3)
9-5-6: FAILING SYSTEMS:
A. Modification Or Discontinuance Required: If, upon inspection, an SSTS is found to be a failing system or a system posing an imminent threat to the
natural environment or the public health, safety and welfare, then the SSTS shall, if possible, either be modified or repaired to comply with this chapter
or its use discontinued within the time periods specified in this section.
B. Failing Septic Systems: A failing SSTS, as defined in Minnesota Rules 7080.1500 subparagraph 4b, shall be upgraded, replaced, or its use
discontinued within the six (6) months of issuance of the notice of noncompliance.
C. SSTS System Posing An Imminent Threat: Any SSTS posing an imminent threat to the natural environment or public health, safety, or welfare, as
defined in Minnesota Rules 7080.1500 subparagraph 4b, shall be abated within ten (10) days. The system shall be upgraded, replaced or repaired, or
its use discontinued, within a reasonable period of time, not to exceed six (6) months.
D. Remediation: A permit shall be required when an operational component is added or a method employed to an SSTS to recover a failing treatment
area. Required information for this permit will be a description of what is wrong with the existing SSTS, an inspection/compliance of the components of
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 198/497
the system, a lab sample of the existing effluent to determine abnormalities and a preliminary site evaluation of what the upgrade options will be on the
property if the remediation fails to correct the problem. A management plan/operating permit will also be required.
E. Emergency Actions:
1. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the building official or City Engineer may require pumping of a septic system not more than twenty
four (24) hours of issuance of a notice of failing system or SSTS system posing an imminent health threat being issued and compliance with the
following additional requirements:
a. Install a level alarm within the tank that includes an audible horn and strobe light visible from the public street.
b. Seal the septic tank outlet converting the tank to a holding tank.
c. Expose the service manhole for pumping the septic tank.
d. Seal all outlets within the basement of the structure served by the septic system.
e. The property owner shall provide the City a right of entry to the property to allow for any needed inspection, maintenance, repair or replacement of
the failed system with all costs incurred by the City being the responsibility of the property owner.
2. Actions as may be required by the building official or City Engineer to immediately abate a threat to public health, safety and welfare shall not
exempt the property owner from providing for a compliant system in accordance with this chapter. (Prior Code § 4-3-4)
9-5-7: ADMINISTRATION:
A. Administrative Officials: The City Clerk, Building Official, and City Engineer shall be responsible for the administration of this chapter.
1. Clerk Duties: The City Clerk shall be responsible for the administration and issuance of orders, permits and notices required by this chapter. The
Clerk is authorized and directed to cooperate with local and State officials and personnel in the enforcement of this chapter, Minnesota Rules chapter
7080 and applicable State laws.
2. Building Official Duties: The building official shall be responsible for site and system inspections, compliance determinations, investigation of failing
systems and permit review and any other duties necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, Minnesota Rules chapter 7080
and applicable State law.
3. Engineer Duties: The City Engineer shall be responsible for review and system design analysis on all holding tanks, drainfield site requirements for
new subdivisions and any variance from the requirements of this chapter. (Prior Code § 4-3-5)
B. Permit Requirements:
1. Permit Required: No person shall engage in the evaluation, inspection, design, installation, construction, alteration, extension, repair, maintenance or
pumping of an SSTS without first obtaining a permit as provided in subsection B2 of this section. (Prior Code § 4-3-2)
2. Application For Permit: Each permit application shall be presented as follows and contain all of the following information:
a. Applications for permits shall be made on forms approved and furnished by the City. The application must be signed by the applicant and shall be
submitted to the City Clerk.
b. Each permit application shall contain the legal description of the property for which the permit is requested. The application shall also disclose the
name of the SSTS professional who will perform the work for which the permit is required and provide all license data required by Minnesota Rules
7080.
c. Each permit application shall be accompanied by a site plan, prepared by an SSTS professional or professional land surveyor, showing the
following, unless such requirements are specifically waived, in whole or in part, in writing by the City building official:
(1) The location of any proposed or existing building on the subject property.
(2) The boundary lines of the subject property.
(3) The location of water supply facilities.
(4) The location and ordinary high water mark or any streams, ponds, or lakes located on or within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the subject
property.
(5) That the proposed SSTS meets all setbacks as required by Minnesota Rules chapter 7080.
(6) Topographic contours at two foot (2') intervals. Topographic contours and elevations shall be drawn to scale on the site plan using common
engineer's scale.
(7) The location of any SSTS or wells on adjoining lots within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the subject property.
(8) Each site plan shall be accompanied by a certificate of accuracy from the SSTS professional or land surveyor who prepared the site plan.
d. Each permit application shall include a complete design plan showing the size and location of all parts of the SSTS and provide a design
certification from a licensed SSTS professional as to the adequacy and location of the SSTS in relation to the requirements imposed by Minnesota
Rules 7080.
e. Each permit application shall contain any and all additional information, as may be required by the City, necessary to show that the conditions of
Minnesota Rules 7080 and this chapter will be met.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 199/497
3. Permit Fees: The amount of fees to be collected at the time of application for permits required by this chapter shall be as established in section 3-1-2
of this Code.
4. Approval Or Denial Of Permit: Permits shall be approved or denied as follows:
a. Submission Of Application: Permit applications shall be submitted to the building official, along with the permit fee. The building official shall, within
fifteen (15) days, determine whether a submitted application is complete. Incomplete applications shall be rejected and returned to the applicant
along with a written explanation as to why the application has been rejected.
b. Technical Review: Once a complete application is received, the building official shall review the application to determine whether it meets the
requirements and standards of this chapter and of Minnesota Rules 7080. The building official may, at his sole discretion, submit the permit
application to the City Engineer for review, comment, and/or a determination as to whether the application meets the requirements of this chapter
and Minnesota Rules 7080.
c. Approval Or Denial By Building Official:
(1) Once a determination is made that the application meets all applicable requirements, the SSTS permit shall be issued. The building official
and/or City Engineer may impose any and all conditions to ensure compliance with the requirements of State law, Minnesota Rules 7080, this
chapter and other applicable local ordinances.
(2) If it is determined that the application does not meet the requirements of this chapter or Minnesota Rules 7080, then the building official shall
give notice to the applicant that the application has been rejected and state the reasons for such rejection as provided by the building official
and/or City Engineer.
(3) The decision to approve or deny the application permit should occur within ten (10) days of the building official's receipt of a complete
application. Failure to approve an application within ten (10) days shall not be construed as an approval or otherwise allowing an SSTS that
would not be approved under this chapter, Minnesota Rules 7080 or other applicable law.
5. Term Of Permit: A permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for one year from the date of approval. (Prior Code § 4-3-5)
C. License Requirements:
1. No person shall engage in the evaluation, inspection, design, installation, construction, alteration, extension, repair maintenance or pumping of an
SSTS without first obtaining a license to perform such tasks from the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) except as provided under
Minnesota Rules 7080.0700.
2. Property owners may only install a gravity fed type 1 system serving a single-family dwelling and only under the supervision of a person having the
qualifications set forth by subsection C1 of this section. (Prior Code § 4-3-2)
9-5-8: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
A. Inspections:
1. General Inspection Requirements: The building official shall make such SSTS inspections as are necessary to determine compliance with this
chapter, Minnesota Rules 7080 and/or any conditions contained in permits issued hereunder. The following events shall trigger an SSTS compliance
inspection:
a. A permit is granted under subsection 9-5-7B of this chapter.
b. A building permit is granted for new construction or the addition of a bedroom or bathroom on property served by an SSTS.
c. For all new SSTS construction, or any SSTS replacement, repair, alteration, maintenance, or operation.
d. Granting of request for change in system design or change in permit conditions.
e. The City learns or receives a complaint that a particular SSTS may be a failing system or poses an imminent threat to public health, safety, and
welfare.
2. Time And Manner Of Inspection:
a. Inspections shall be made by the building official and/or City Engineer to ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter, Minnesota
Rules 7080 and any permit conditions.
b. It shall be the responsibility of the permit applicant to notify the building official in writing that the project is ready for inspection. Inspections shall
be made within seven (7) days of written notification by any SSTS permit holder that the SSTS for which the permit was issued is ready for
inspection.
c. No part of the SSTS shall be covered until it has been inspected and accepted by the building official and/or the City Engineer.
d. Inspections shall be made prior to the issuance of a building permit or variance for new construction or the addition of a bathroom or bedroom on
property served by an SSTS.
3. Certificate Of Compliance And Notice Of Noncompliance:
a. No newly constructed, installed, altered, repaired, extended or relocated SSTS shall be placed in operation until it has received a certificate of
compliance as hereafter provided.
b. Upon completion of the SSTS inspection as described in subsections A2 and A4 of this section, the building official and/or City Engineer shall
make a determination as to whether or not the SSTS has been constructed, repaired, extended or relocated in compliance with the requirements
of this chapter, Minnesota Rules 7080 and any permit conditions.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 200/497
(1) If the SSTS is found to be compliant, then a certificate of compliance shall be issued to the property owner within thirty (30) days of inspection.
(2) If the SSTS is found to be out of compliance, then a notice of noncompliance shall be issued. The notice of noncompliance shall state which
portions of the SSTS are not compliant and shall further state a reasonable period for the property owner to bring the system into compliance.
Once the necessary changes are made or the period specified in the notice of noncompliance has run, whichever occurs first, then the SSTS
shall be again inspected as provided above. If, upon reinspection, the SSTS is not compliant, then a notice of noncompliance shall be issued to
the property owner. The notice of noncompliance shall state why the SSTS is noncompliant. A copy of the certificate of noncompliance shall be
forwarded to the City Attorney for enforcement as provided in subsection C2 of this section.
4. Inspection Protocol:
a. In the event that the building official cannot complete an inspection or perform all required inspections in a timely manner, the building official is
authorized and directed to develop an inspection protocol.
b. The inspection protocol shall establish the order and priority of inspections. For any SSTS required to be inspected for which the building official is
unable to actually physically inspect the SSTS, the building official shall require that evidence of compliance be submitted. Evidence of compliance
includes, but is not limited to, the following:
(1) Affidavits from the SSTS professional who performed any construction, installation, repair, alteration, or relocation of the SSTS.
(2) Video, electronic or photographic images of certain components and/or work performed.
(3) As built drawings.
(4) Any other data, as may be required by the building official in lieu of an actual inspection, evidencing compliance with this chapter, Minnesota
Rules 7080 and applicable State law.
c. The building official shall review such evidence and issue either a certificate of compliance or notice of noncompliance accordingly.
5. No Warranty Or Guarantee Of Operation: Neither the issuance of an SSTS permit or certificate of compliance, nor any inspection of an SSTS shall
constitute any warranty or guarantee that said SSTS will operate or function properly. (Prior Code § 4-3-5)
B. Stop Work Orders And Repair Orders: The building official may issue stop work orders and repair orders at such times and upon such terms and
conditions as are necessary to prevent violations of this chapter from occurring or to eliminate existing ordinance violations.
C. Misdemeanor Violation; Penalties:
1. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or who makes any false statement on a certificate of compliance shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment, a fine, or both, as defined by State law.
2. In the event of a violation of this chapter, in addition to any other remedies, the City Attorney may institute appropriate actions or proceedings to
prevent, restrain, correct or abate such violations. (Prior Code § 4-3-6)
9-5-9: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
The requirements of this chapter are intended to be comparable to the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
(MPCA) standards. Should this chapter differ from the standards of the EPA, MPCA or other agencies or should the standards of these agencies change,
the more strict requirements shall apply. (Prior Code § 4-3-7)
9-5-10: CONNECTION TO MUNICIPAL SEWER:
A. When Required:
1. When Municipal sanitary sewer is available, in the City's sole discretion, a property is served by an SSTS shall be required to discontinue such use
and connect to the Municipal sewer upon the first occurrence of any of the following events:
a. Upon application for an SSTS permit.
b. When a notice of noncompliance is issued in relation to the SSTS serving the property.
c. Upon the expiration of a certificate of compliance.
2. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting the City's ability to specially assess, levy a sewer access charge (SAC) or otherwise bill
properties served by an SSTS for the availability of a Municipal sanitary sewer and the public improvements associated therewith.
B. Condition Of Approval: The issuance of an SSTS permit may be conditioned upon the property connecting to a Municipal sewer when it becomes
available.
C. Cause For Denial: The future availability of a Municipal sewer, in the City's sole discretion, may be cause for denial of an SSTS permit. (Prior Code § 4-
3-8)
Chapter 6
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 201/497
9-6-1: PURPOSE:
During the construction process, soil is the most vulnerable to erosion by wind and water. This eroded soil endangers water resources by reducing water
quality and causing the siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and other desirable species. Eroded soil also necessitates repair of sewers and ditches, and the
dredging of lakes. In addition, clearing and grading during construction causes the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and aquatic habitat
and for a healthy living environment for citizens of the City. The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard persons, protect property, prevent damage to the
environment and promote the public welfare by guiding, regulating, and controlling the design, construction, use, and maintenance of any development or
other activity which disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results in the movement of earth within the City. (Prior Code § 4-4-1)
9-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
BMP MANUAL: The manual titled Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas (Best Management Practices for Minnesota) prepared by the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency, Division of Water Quality, latest edition.
CERTIFIED CONTRACTOR: An individual who has received training and is licensed by the State of Minnesota to inspect and maintain erosion and
sediment control practices.
CLEARING: Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover.
DRAINAGEWAY: Any channel that conveys surface runoff throughout the site.
EROSION CONTROL: Any measures that prevent erosion.
GRADING: Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions thereof.
GRADING, DRAINAGE, AND EROSION CONTROL PLAN: A set of plans prepared by or under the direction of a licensed professional engineer that
depicts existing and proposed grading, temporary and permanent drainage facilities, and indicates the specific measures and sequencing to be used to
control sediment and erosion on a development site before, during and after construction.
PERIMETER CONTROL: A barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a site either by filtering sediment laden runoff, or diverting it to a sediment trap or
basin.
PHASING: Clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the stabilization of each phase before the clearing of the next.
SEDIMENT CONTROL: Any measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving the site.
SITE: A parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work is performed as a single unified operation.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: A permit issued by the City for which the purpose is construction or alteration of ground.
STABILIZATION: The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: The first land disturbing activity associated with a development, including land preparation such as clearing, grading and
filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for basements, footings, piers or foundations; erection of temporary forms; and installation of
accessory buildings such as garages.
WATERCOURSE: A body of water (lake, pond) or a depression of land or expanded part of a river, or an enclosed basin that holds water and is
surrounded by land.
WATERWAY: A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to the public storm drain. (Prior Code § 4-4-2)
9-6-3: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS PRIOR TO ISSUANCE OF OTHER PERMITS; APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. No landowner or land operator shall receive any of building, grading or other land development permits required for land disturbance activities without
first meeting the requirements of this chapter prior to commencing the proposed activity. The permit application must be accompanied by the following
in order that the permit application be considered: a grading, drainage, and erosion control plan and a permit review escrow as established by
ordinance.
B. This chapter applies to any construction activity disturbing ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more.
C. No site development permit is required for the following activities:
1. Any emergency activity which is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property or natural resources.
2. Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a permitted main or accessory use.
3. Developments that do not disturb more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of land, provided they are not part of a larger common development
plan.
4. Repairs to any erosion or sediment control practice deemed necessary by the City Engineer.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 202/497
D. Each application shall include the name(s) and address(es) of the owner or developer of the site, and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant,
together with the name of the applicant's principal contact at such firm, and shall be accompanied by the appropriate permit escrow.
E. Each application shall include a statement that any land clearing, construction, or development involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance
with the grading, drainage, and erosion control plan, and that a certified contractor shall be on site on all days where construction or grading activity
takes place.
F. 1. The applicant shall file with the City a faithful performance bond or bonds, letter of credit, or other improvement security in an amount deemed
sufficient by the City to cover all costs of improvements, landscaping, and maintenance of improvements for such period as specified by the City for
engineering and inspection costs to cover the cost of failure or repair of improvements installed on the site.
2. Determination of other improvement securities will be upon completion of improvements and installation and establishment of landscape and turf.
Establishment of landscape and turf will be at the discretion of the City Engineer.
G. 1. The City will review each application for a site development permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this chapter. Within sixty (60)
days after receiving an application, the City Engineer shall, in writing:
a. Approve the permit application; or
b. Approve the permit application subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this regulation,
and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or
c. Disapprove the permit application, indicating the deficiencies and the procedure for submitting a revised application and/or submission.
2. Failure of the City to act on original or revised applications within sixty (60) days of receipt shall authorize the applicant to proceed in accordance
with the plans as filed unless such time is extended by agreement between the applicant and the City. Pending preparation and approval of a revised
plan, development activities shall be allowed to proceed in accordance with conditions established by the City.
H. Permits issued under this chapter shall be valid from the date of issuance through the date the City notifies the permit holder that the site has passed
the final inspection as required under the permit. (Prior Code § 4-4-3)
9-6-4: GRADING, DRAINAGE, AND EROSION CONTROL PLAN:
A. Plan Criteria: The plan shall meet the criteria set forth in the most recent version of the Engineering Manual.
B. Modifications To Plan:
1. Major amendments of the grading, drainage, and erosion control plan shall be submitted to the City and shall be processed and approved, or
disapproved, in the same manner as the original plans.
2. Field modifications of a minor nature may be authorized by the City Engineer by written authorization to the permittee. (Prior Code § 4-4-4)
9-6-5: DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
Grading, erosion control, and sediment control practices shall be adequate to prevent transportation of sediment from the site to the satisfaction of the City
Engineer. Any construction activity disturbing one acre or more of land shall meet additional criteria outlined in chapter 7 of this title. The design shall
conform to the most recent version of the Engineering Manual and as specified herein:
A. Clearing And Grading:
1. Clearing and grading of natural resources protection areas, including the Wild and Scenic Recreational River District, Shoreland Overlay District,
wetlands or wetland buffers shall not be permitted, except when in compliance with all other provisions of this Code.
2. Clearing techniques that retain natural vegetation and retain natural drainage patterns shall be used to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.
3. Phasing shall be required on all sites disturbing greater than thirty (30) acres, with the size of each phase to be established at plan review and as
approved by the City Engineer.
4. Clearing, except that necessary to establish sediment control devices, shall not begin until all sediment control devices have been installed and have
been stabilized.
5. Cut and fill slopes shall be no greater than two to one (2:1), except as approved by the City Engineer to meet other community or environmental
objectives.
B. Erosion Control:
1. Exposed soil (including stockpiles) must be stabilized according to the following schedule:
Slope
Time
(Days Of Inactivity)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 203/497
Steeper than 3:1 7
3:1 to 10:1 14
Flatter than 10:1 21
2. If vegetative erosion control methods, such as seeding, have not become established within two (2) weeks, the City Engineer may require that the
site be reseeded, or that a nonvegetative option be employed.
3. On steep slopes or in drainageways, special techniques that meet the design criteria outlined in the Engineering Manual shall be used to ensure
stabilization.
4. At the close of the construction season, the entire site must be stabilized using a heavy mulch layer or another method that does not require
germination to control erosion.
5. Best Management Practices shall be employed to prevent the blowing of dust or sediment from the site.
6. Best Management Practices that divert upland runoff past disturbed slopes shall be employed.
C. Sediment Controls:
1. Sediment controls shall be provided and maintained per the Engineering Manual. All control measures shall be installed prior to commencement of
any upstream construction activities.
2. Where possible, detention basins shall be designed in a manner that allows adaptation to provide long term stormwater management. Detention
basins must be cleaned after permanent erosion control measures are in place or final stabilization has been established. The design of the
detention basins shall be per the Engineering Manual.
3. Adjacent properties shall be protected by the use of a vegetated buffer strip, in combination with perimeter controls.
4. Soil stockpiles must be stabilized or covered at the end of each workday unless a perimeter control is in place.
D. Waterways And Watercourses:
1. When a wet watercourse must be crossed regularly during construction, a temporary stream crossing shall be provided, and an approval obtained
from Department of Natural Resources.
2. When in-channel work is conducted, the channel shall be stabilized before, during and after work.
3. All on site stormwater conveyance channels shall be designed according to the criteria outlined in the Engineering Manual.
4. Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion must be provided at the outlets of all pipes and paved channels.
E. Construction Site Access:
1. A temporary access road designed in compliance with the Engineering Manual shall be provided at all sites.
2. Other measures may be required at the discretion of the City Engineer in order to ensure that sediment is not tracked onto public streets by
construction vehicles, or washed into storm drains. (Prior Code § 4-4-5)
9-6-6: INSPECTIONS:
A. The City Engineer shall make inspections as hereinafter required and shall either approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the
permittee wherein the work fails to comply with the grading, drainage, and erosion control plan as approved. Plans for grading, stripping, excavating,
and filling work bearing the stamp of approval of the City shall be maintained at the site during the progress of the work. In order to obtain inspections,
the permittee shall notify the City at least two (2) working days before the following:
1. Start of construction.
2. Erosion and sediment control measures are in place and stabilized.
3. Site clearing has been completed.
4. Rough grading has been completed.
5. Final grading has been completed.
6. Close of the construction season.
7. Final landscaping.
B. The permittee or his agent shall make regular inspections of all control measures in accordance with the inspection schedule outlined on the approved
erosion and sediment control plan(s). The purpose of the inspections will be to determine the overall effectiveness of the control plan and the need for
additional control measures. All inspections shall be documented in written form and submitted to the City Engineer at the time interval specified in the
approved permit.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 204/497
C. The City Engineer shall enter the property of the applicant as deemed necessary to make regular inspections to ensure the validity of the reports filed
under subsection B of this section.
D. After final stabilization of the site has been established, the City Engineer shall inspect the site for compliance with the approved grading, drainage, and
erosion control plans. (Prior Code § 4-4-6)
9-6-7: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit: In the event that any person holding a site development permit pursuant to this chapter violates the terms of the
permit, or implements site development in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of persons residing or working
in the neighborhood or development site so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the
neighborhood, the City Engineer may suspend or revoke the site development permit.
B. Violation; Penalties:
1. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair, or maintain any grading, excavation, or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation
of any terms of this chapter.
2. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each day during which any violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense.
3. In addition to the other penalties authorized by this chapter, any person, partnership, or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be required to bear the expense of such restoration.
4. The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable Federal or State law or this Code and it is
within the discretion of the City to seek cumulative remedies. (Prior Code § 4-4-7)
Chapter 7
POSTCONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
9-7-1: PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES:
Land development projects and associated increases in impervious cover alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater
runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition; stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities
of waterborne pollutants; and stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of
stormwater runoff from development sites. It is determined that the regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development projects and other
construction activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and
nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety. The purpose of this
chapter is to establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general health, safety, and welfare of the
public and environment in the watersheds within the City through the following objectives:
A. Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from any development in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream temperature, and stream bank
erosion and maintain the integrity of stream channels.
B. Minimize increases in nonpoint source pollution caused by stormwater runoff from development which would otherwise degrade local water quality.
C. Minimize the total annual volume of surface water runoff which flows from any specific site during and following development to not exceed the
predevelopment hydrologic regime to the maximum extent practicable.
D. Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management controls
and to ensure that these management controls are properly maintained and pose no threat to public safety. (Prior Code § 4-5-1)
9-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ACCELERATED EROSION: Erosion caused by development activities that exceeds the natural processes by which the surface of the land is worn away
by the action of water, wind, or chemical action.
APPLICANT: A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed an application for a stormwater management permit.
BMP MANUAL: The manual titled Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas (Best Management Practices for Minnesota), prepared by the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency, Division of Water Quality, latest edition.
BUILDING: Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and
occupying more than one hundred (100) square feet of area.
CHANNEL: A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 205/497
DEDICATION: The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for general public use.
DETENTION: The temporary storage of storm runoff in a stormwater management practice with the goals of controlling peak discharge rates and providing
gravity settling of pollutants.
DETENTION FACILITY: A detention basin or alternative structure designed for the purpose of temporary storage of stream flow or surface runoff and
gradual release of stored water at controlled rates.
DEVELOPER: A person who undertakes land disturbance activities.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT: A legal right granted by a landowner to a grantee allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
FEE IN LIEU: A payment of money in place of meeting all or part of the stormwater performance standards required by this chapter.
GRADING, DRAINAGE, AND EROSION CONTROL PLAN: A set of plans prepared by or under the direction of a licensed professional engineer that
depicts existing and proposed grading, temporary and permanent drainage facilities, and indicates the specific measures and sequencing to be used to
control sediment and erosion on a development site before, during and after construction.
HOTSPOT: An area where land use or activities generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in
stormwater.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG): A Natural Resource Conservation Service classification system in which soils are categorized into four (4) runoff
potential groups. The groups range from A soils, with high permeability and little runoff production, to D soils, which have low permeability rates and
produce much more runoff.
IMPERVIOUS COVER: Those surfaces that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall (e.g., building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc.).
INDUSTRIAL STORMWATER PERMIT: A national pollutant discharge elimination system permit issued to a commercial industry or group of industries
which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on site pollution control strategies.
INFILTRATION: The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
INFILTRATION FACILITY: Any structure or device designed to infiltrate retained water to the subsurface. These facilities may be above grade or below
grade.
JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND: An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a
prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
LAND DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY: Any activity which changes the volume or peak flow discharge rate of rainfall runoff from the land surface. This may
include the grading, digging, cutting, scraping, or excavating of soil, placement of fill materials, paving, construction, substantial removal of vegetation, or
any activity which bares soil or rock or involves the diversion or piping of any natural or manmade watercourse.
LANDOWNER: The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding
proprietary rights in the land.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT: A legally recorded document that acts as a property deed restriction, and which provides for long term maintenance of
stormwater management practices.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT: A permit issued by the EPA (or by a
state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC section 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the
permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general areawide basis.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION: Pollution from any source other than from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include, but
not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.
OFF SITE FACILITY: A stormwater management measure located outside the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land
development activity.
OFFSET FEE: A monetary compensation paid to a local government for failure to meet pollutant load reduction targets.
ON SITE FACILITY: A stormwater management measure located within the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land
development activity.
RECHARGE: The replenishment of underground water reserves.
REDEVELOPMENT: Any construction, alteration or improvement exceeding ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area where existing land use is high
density commercial, industrial, institutional or multi-family residential.
SWPPP: The stormwater pollution prevention plan required by the NPDES permit.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: The permit issued by the City for which the purpose is construction or alteration of ground.
STOP WORK ORDER: An order issued which requires that all construction activity on a site be stopped.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT: The use of structural or nonstructural practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge
volumes, peak flow discharge rates and detrimental changes in stream temperature that affect water quality and habitat.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN: The hydrologic analysis report and drainage area map(s) that provides the predevelopment and postdevelopment
hydrologic site conditions.
STORMWATER RETROFIT: A stormwater management practice designed for an existing development site that previously had either no stormwater
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 206/497
management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site.
STORMWATER RUNOFF: Flow on the surface of the ground resulting from precipitation.
STORMWATER TREATMENT PRACTICES (STPs): Measures, either structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective, practical
means of preventing or reducing point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and water bodies.
WATER QUALITY VOLUME (WQv): The storage needed to capture and treat ninety percent (90%) of the average annual stormwater runoff volume.
Numerically WQv will vary as a function of long term rainfall statistical data.
WATERCOURSE: A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or manmade, which gathers or carries surface water. (Prior
Code § 4-5-2)
9-7-3: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS PRIOR TO ISSUANCE OF OTHER PERMITS; GENERAL PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. No landowner or land operator shall receive any of the building, grading or other land development permits required for land disturbance activities
without first meeting the requirements of this chapter prior to commencing the proposed activity. The permit application must be accompanied by the
following in order that the permit application be considered: a grading, drainage, and erosion control plan, a stormwater management plan, and a
permit review escrow as established in section 3-1-2 of this Code.
B. This section shall be applicable to all site development permit applications, unless eligible for an exemption or granted a waiver by the City under the
specifications of this chapter. This chapter also applies to land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria if such
activities are part of a larger common plan of development that meets the following applicability criteria, even though multiple separate and distinct land
development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. In addition, all plans must also be reviewed by local environmental
protection officials to ensure that established water quality standards will be maintained during and after development of the site and that
postconstruction runoff levels are consistent with any local and regional watershed plans.
C. To prevent the adverse impacts of stormwater runoff, the City has developed a set of performance standards that must be met at new development
sites. These standards apply to any construction activity disturbing one acre or more of land.
D. No site development permit is required for the following activities:
1. Additions or modifications to existing single-family structures.
2. Developments that do not disturb more than one acre of land, provided they are not part of a larger common development plan.
3. Repairs to any stormwater treatment practice deemed necessary by the City Engineer or any emergency activity which is immediately necessary for
the protection of life, property or natural resources.
E. When a development plan is submitted that qualifies as a redevelopment project as defined in section 9-7-2 of this chapter, decisions on permitting and
on site stormwater requirements shall be governed by special stormwater sizing criteria found in the current Engineering Manual. These criteria are
dependent on the amount of impervious area created by the redevelopment and its impact on water quality. Final authorization of all redevelopment
projects will be determined after a review by the City.
F. The applicant shall file with the City a security as outlined in subsection 9-6-3F of this title.
G. The permit application shall follow the review and approval procedure outlined in subsection 9-6-3G of this title.
H. Permits issued under this section shall be valid from the date of issuance through the date the City notifies the permit holder that the site has passed
the final inspection as required under the permit. (Prior Code § 4-5-3)
9-7-4: WAIVERS:
A. Every applicant shall provide for stormwater management as required by this chapter, unless a written request is filed to waive this requirement.
Requests to waive the stormwater management requirements shall be submitted to the City for approval.
B. The minimum requirements for stormwater management may be waived in whole or in part upon written request of the applicant; provided, that at least
one of the following conditions applies:
1. It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely to impair attainment of the objectives of this chapter.
2. Alternative minimum requirements for on site management of stormwater discharges have been established in a stormwater management plan that
has been approved by the City, and the implementation of the plan is required by local ordinance.
3. Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off site facility. The off site facility is required to be in place, to be designed and adequately sized
to provide a level of stormwater control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on site practices, and there is a legally
obligated entity responsible for long term operation and maintenance of the stormwater practice.
4. The City finds that meeting the minimum on site management requirements is not feasible due to the natural or existing physical characteristics of a
site.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 207/497
a. On site nonstructural practices will be used that reduce:
(1) The generation of stormwater from the site;
(2) The size and cost of stormwater storage; and
(3) The pollutants generated at the site.
b. These nonstructural practices are explained in detail in the current BMP Manual, and the amount of credit available for using such practices shall
be determined by the City.
C. In instances where one of the conditions above applies, the City may grant a waiver from strict compliance with this chapter, as long as acceptable
mitigation measures are provided. However, to be eligible for a waiver, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that the waiver will
not result in the following impacts to downstream waterways:
1. Deterioration of existing culverts and other structures;
2. Degradation of biological functions or habitat;
3. Accelerated stream bank or streambed erosion or siltation;
4. Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, property.
D. Where compliance with minimum requirements for stormwater management is waived, the applicant will satisfy the minimum requirements by meeting
one of the mitigation measures selected by the City authority. Mitigation measures may include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. The purchase and donation of privately owned lands, or the grant of an easement to be dedicated for preservation and/or reforestation. These lands
should be located adjacent to the stream corridor in order to provide permanent buffer areas to protect water quality and aquatic habitat.
2. The creation of a stormwater management facility or other drainage improvements on previously developed properties, public or private, that
currently lack stormwater management facilities designed and constructed in accordance with the purposes and standards of this chapter.
3. Monetary contributions (fee in lieu) to fund stormwater management activities such as research and studies (e.g., regional wetland delineation
studies, stream monitoring studies for water quality and macroinvertebrates, stream flow monitoring, threatened and endangered species studies,
hydrologic studies, and monitoring of stormwater management practices).
a. Fee In Lieu Of Stormwater Management Practices:
(1) Where the City waives all or part of the minimum stormwater management requirements, or where the waiver is based on the provision of
adequate stormwater facilities provided downstream of the proposed development, the applicant shall be required to pay a fee in an amount as
determined by the City. (Prior Code § 4-5-4)
(2) When an applicant obtains a waiver of the required stormwater management, the monetary contribution required shall be in accordance with
section 3-1-2 of this Code. Otsego is the stormwater authority established by the City, and based on the cubic feet of storage required for
stormwater management of the development in question. All of the monetary contributions shall be credited to an appropriate capital
improvements program project, and shall be made by the developer prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. (Prior Code
§ 4-5-4; amd. 2018 Code)
b. Dedication Of Land: In lieu of a monetary contribution, an applicant may obtain a waiver of the required stormwater management by entering into
an agreement with the City for the granting of an easement or the dedication of land by the applicant, to be used for the construction of an off site
stormwater management facility. The agreement shall be entered into by the applicant and the City prior to the recording of plats or, if no record
plat is required, prior to the issuance of the building permit. (Prior Code § 4-5-4)
9-7-5: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
The stormwater management plan shall include a stormwater drainage report and, where storm sewer structures and pipe are present or proposed, storm
sewer capacity calculations. The plan shall conform to the most recent version of the Engineering Manual requirements.
A. The stormwater drainage report shall include:
1. A title page, table of contents, written summary of items critical to the review of the entire report, computer printouts of the hydrologic analysis
stormwater model, and drainage area maps.
2. When storm sewer is proposed or present storm sewer sizing and spread calculations shall accompany the stormwater drainage report, separate
drainage area maps are required depicting the area draining to each storm sewer structure.
B. The grading, drainage, and erosion control plan shall incorporate all stormwater facilities (i.e., ponds, infiltration basins, storm sewer, etc.) as shown in
the stormwater management plan.
C. 1. Major amendments of the stormwater management plan shall be submitted to the City and shall be processed and approved, or disapproved, in the
same manner as the original plans.
2. Field modifications of a minor nature may be authorized by the City Engineer by written authorization to the permittee. (Prior Code § 4-5-5)
9-7-6: DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 208/497
Stormwater management practices shall be adequate to provide the best possible protection of the City's residents and resources to the satisfaction of the
City Engineer. The design shall conform to the most recent version of the Engineering Manual. (Prior Code § 4-5-6)
9-7-7: INSPECTION OF PRACTICES:
The stormwater management practices shall be subject to the inspection procedures outlined in section 9-6-6 of this title and as specified herein. All
applicants are required to submit actual as built plans for any stormwater management practices located on site after final construction is completed. The
grading, drainage, and erosion control plan must have survey elevations shown to adequately show that the final grading of all ponds, basins, ditches,
swales, and berms are built per the stormwater management design. (Prior Code § 4-5-7)
9-7-8: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR REQUIREMENTS:
A. Maintenance Easement: Prior to the issuance of any permit that has a stormwater management facility as one of the requirements of the permit, the
applicant or owner of the site must execute a maintenance easement agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of land served by the
stormwater management facility. The agreement shall provide for access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the City, or its
contractor or agent, and for regular or special assessments of property owners to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working condition to
meet design standards and any other provisions established by this chapter. The easement agreement shall be recorded by Wright County in the land
records.
B. Maintenance Covenants:
1. Maintenance of all stormwater management facilities shall be ensured through the creation of a formal maintenance covenant that must be approved
by the City and recorded into the land record prior to final plan approval. As part of the covenant, a schedule shall be developed for when and how
often maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility. The covenant shall also include plans for periodic
inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled cleanouts.
2. The City, in lieu of a maintenance covenant, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance,
provided such facility meets all the requirements of this chapter and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or
otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance.
3. All stormwater management facilities must undergo, at the minimum, an annual inspection to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure
compliance with the requirements of this chapter and accomplishment of its purposes. These needs may include: removal of silt, litter and other
debris from all catch basins, inlets and drainage pipes, grass cutting and vegetation removal, and necessary replacement of landscape vegetation.
Any maintenance needs found must be addressed in a timely manner, as determined by the City, and the inspection and maintenance requirement
may be increased as deemed necessary to ensure proper functioning of the stormwater management facility.
C. Inspections:
1. Inspection programs may be established on any reasonable basis, including, but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections
based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical sources of
sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with higher than usual discharges of
contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of State or Federal water
or sediment quality standards or the NPDES stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety
laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater,
and material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage control facilities and other stormwater treatment
practices.
2. When any new drainage control facility is installed on private property, or when any new connection is made between private property and a public
drainage control system, sanitary sewer or combined sewer, the property owner shall grant to the City the right to enter the property at reasonable
times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe
that a violation of this chapter is occurring or has occurred, and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a
violation of this chapter.
D. Recordkeeping: Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall make records of the installation and
of all maintenance and repairs, and shall retain the records for at least five (5) years. These records shall be made available to the City during
inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request.
E. Failure To Maintain Practices:
1. If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the maintenance covenant, the City, after reasonable notice, may correct a violation
of the design standards or maintenance needs by performing all necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition.
2. The City shall notify the party responsible for maintenance of the stormwater management facility of the violation in writing. Upon receipt of that
notice, the responsible person shall have twenty four (24) hours to seven (7) days, as deemed appropriate by the City Engineer and depending on
the nature of the violation, to effect maintenance and repair of the facility in an approved manner.
3. After proper notice, the City may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work and any penalties, and the cost of the work shall be a
lien on the property, or prorated against the beneficial users of the property, and may be placed on the tax bill and collected as Property Taxes. (Prior
Code § 4-5-8)
9-7-9: ENFORCEMENT:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 209/497
A. Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit: In the event that any person holding a site development permit pursuant to this chapter violates the terms of the
permit, or implements site development in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of persons residing or working
in the neighborhood or development site so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the
neighborhood, the City Engineer may suspend or revoke the site development permit.
B. Violation; Penalties:
1. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair, or maintain any grading, excavation, or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation
of any terms of this chapter.
2. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each day during which any violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted shall constitute a separate offense.
3. In addition to the other penalties authorized by this section, any person, partnership, or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be required to bear the expense of such restoration.
4. The remedies listed in this section are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable Federal or State law or this Code and it is
within the discretion of the City to seek cumulative remedies. (Prior Code § 4-5-9)
9-7-10: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements
of this chapter should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by
any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for
human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. (Prior Code § 4-5-1)
Chapter 8
ADDRESS DISPLAY
9-8-1: DISPLAY REQUIRED:
All houses and principal buildings in the City shall display those numbers assigned to them by the City. (Prior Code § 5-5-1)
9-8-2: LOCATION AND SIZE; VISIBILITY:
Numbers shall be displayed on the houses or principal buildings in numerals not less than four inches (4") high and of contrasting color to the background.
Numbers shall be clearly visible from the nearest street. (Prior Code § 5-5-1)
9-8-3: OBSTRUCTION OF VIEW:
A. Numbers On Mailbox: In those cases where the principal building is obscured from the view from the street address by accessory buildings, trees,
shrubbery or other visual obstruction, the numbers shall be displayed on the mailbox in numerals not less than two inches (2") high, of a light reflective
material, and of contrasting color to the background.
B. Posted Signs: In those cases where the principal building is obscured from the view from the street address by accessory buildings, trees, shrubbery or
other visual obstruction, and the residence does not have a mailbox, the numbers shall be displayed from a permanent mounting on the property,
clearly visible from the street, displayed prominently in numerals not less than four inches (4") high, of a light reflective material of contrasting color to
the background. (Prior Code § 5-5-1)
9-8-4: MISDEMEANOR VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
Every person convicted of a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to those penalties contained in
the State Statutes as now exist, or are later amended, plus the costs of prosecution. (Prior Code § 5-5-2)
Title 10
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS
10-1-1: PURPOSE:
All subdivisions of land hereafter submitted shall fully comply in all respects with the regulations to:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 210/497
A. Provide for and guide the orderly, economic and safe development of land, urban services and facilities.
B. Encourage well planned, efficient and attractive subdivisions by establishing adequate and impartial standards for design and construction.
C. Provide for the health, safety and welfare of residents by requiring the necessary services such as properly designed streets and adequate sewage and
water service.
D. Place the cost of improvements against those benefiting from their construction.
E. Secure the rights of the public with respect to public lands and waters.
F. Set the minimum requirements necessary to protect the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. (Prior Code § 21-1-1)
10-1-2: SCOPE:
A. The rules and regulations governing plats and subdivision of land contained herein shall apply within the boundaries of the City. This title is not intended
to repeal, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws, ordinances or with restrictive covenants running with the land
except those specifically repealed by or in conflict with this title.
B. The City shall have the power and authority to review, amend and approve subdivisions of land already recorded and on file with Wright County if such
plats are entirely or partially undeveloped. (Prior Code § 21-1-2)
10-1-3: SEPARABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this title is for any reason found to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this title. (Prior Code § 21-1-8)
10-1-4: INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS:
The language set forth in the text of this title shall be interpreted in accordance with the following rules of construction:
A. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
B. The present tense includes the past and the future tenses, and the future the present.
C. The word "shall" is mandatory while the word "may" is permissive.
D. Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this title are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any
other law, ordinance, code, statute, resolution or regulation, the regulations which are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements shall
prevail.
E. All measured distances shall be expressed in feet and decimals of feet. (Prior Code § 21-1-9)
10-1-5: REGISTERED LAND SURVEYS:
All registered land surveys shall be filed subject to the same procedures as required for the filing of a preliminary plat for platting purposes. The standards
and requirements set forth in this title shall apply to all registered land surveys. Unless the City Council approves, a registered land survey shall not be
used to divide a parcel of land into lots for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development, if any of the tracts do not have the required
frontage on a dedicated public street. (Prior Code § 21-10-1)
10-1-6: METES AND BOUNDS:
A. Except in unique situations as may be allowed by the City Council, conveyances by metes and bounds shall be prohibited where any lot or lots involved
are less than ten (10) acres in area or have a width of less than three hundred thirty feet (330') at the building setback line.
B. No building permit shall be issued for any structure on any parcel of land less than ten (10) acres in area or having a width of less than three hundred
thirty feet (330') on an improved public street, at a building setback line which is described by metes and bounds until a plat describing such parcel of
land is filed with the Wright County Register of Deeds Office and proof thereof is furnished to the City Council.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 211/497
C. When a conveyance by metes and bounds is made for parcels larger than ten (10) acres in size, a survey of the parcels involved shall be submitted to
the Zoning Administrator before any building permits will be issued for those parcels, and a copy of the survey shall be attached to the deed when it is
submitted to the Wright County Register of Deeds Office for recording. (Prior Code § 21-10-2)
10-1-7: FLOOD PRONE LANDS:
A. Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability For Flooding:
1. This title does not imply that areas outside floodplain areas or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damages.
This title shall not create liability on the part of the City or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this title
or any administrative decisions lawfully made hereunder.
2. No responsibility or liability shall arise from the design or operation of subdivision drainage facilities dedicated to the City until the City has accepted
such dedication.
B. Subdivision Flooding And Flood Control: No land shall be subdivided if the City Council finds the land unsuitable for subdividing due to flooding,
inadequate drainage, water supply, or sewage treatment facilities in accordance with this title and the zoning ordinance. Any building sites on lots within
the Floodplain District shall be at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation in accordance with this title and the zoning ordinance. All
subdivisions shall have water supply and sewer disposal facilities that comply with the provisions of this title and any applicable Building, Health or
Safety Codes, including the Minnesota State Building Code. All subdivisions shall have road access both to the subdivision and to the individual
building sites no lower than two feet (2') below the regulatory flood protection elevation. Each of the above requirements shall take into consideration
the 100-year flood profile and other supporting technical data in the Flood Insurance Study and the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
C. Public Utilities: All public utilities and facilities such as gas, electrical, telephone, sewer, and water supply systems to be located in the floodplain shall
be elevated or floodproofed in accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code to an elevation no lower than the regulatory flood protection
elevation, in accordance with State and Federal agency regulations and the City zoning ordinance Floodplain District.
D. Public Transportation Facilities: Railroad tracks, roads and bridges to be located within the Floodway District shall comply with this title and the zoning
ordinance. Elevation to the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be provided where failure and interruption of these transportation facilities would
result in danger to the public health or safety or where such facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or auxiliary railroad
tracks, roads, or bridges may be constructed at a lower elevation where failure or interruption of transportation services would not endanger the public
health or safety and as long as such construction is in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Department of Natural Resources, State of
Minnesota, the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and the City zoning ordinance Floodplain District. (Prior Code § 21-1-10)
Chapter 2
DEFINITIONS OF TERMS
10-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Except for those words and phrases defined in this section, the words and phrases used in this title shall be interpreted to be given the meanings in
common usage, so as to give this title its most reasonable application.
ALLEY: A public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is
on a street.
APPLICANT: The owner, his agent, or other person having legal control, ownership and/or interest in the land proposed to be subdivided.
ATTORNEY: The Attorney employed or retained by the City, unless otherwise stated.
BASE LOT: A lot meeting all the specifications within its zoning district prior to being divided into a subdivision of single-family attached units.
BIKEWAY: A public right-of-way or easement across a block or within a block to provide access for bicyclists and in which a path or trail may be installed.
BLOCK: An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets, or by streets and the entire boundary or boundaries of the subdivision, or
a combination of the above with a river or lake.
BOULEVARD: The portion of the street right-of-way between the curb line and the property line.
BUILDABLE LAND: All land except wetlands, public waters, trunk stormwater facilities and land dedicated for major collector or arterial roadways as
defined by the Comprehensive Plan.
BUILDING: Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or moveable property of any kind, and includes any
structure.
BUTT LOT: A lot at the end of a block, located between two (2) corner lots.
CERTIFICATE OF SURVEY: A document prepared by a registered engineer or registered land surveyor which precisely describes area, dimensions and
location of a parcel or parcels of land.
CITY: The City of Otsego.
CLERK: The Otsego City Clerk.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 212/497
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: A Comprehensive Plan prepared and approved by the City, including a compilation of policy statements, goals, standards,
fiscal guidelines, and maps indicating the general locations recommended for the various functional classes of land use, places and structures, and for the
general physical development of the City, including any unit or part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof.
CONTOUR MAP: A map on which irregularities of land surface are shown by lines connecting points of equal elevations. "Contour interval" shall mean the
vertical height between contour lines.
COPY: A print or reproduction made from a tracing.
COUNCIL: The City Council of Otsego, Minnesota.
COUNTY: Wright County, Minnesota.
DESIGN STANDARDS: The specifications to landowners or those proposing to subdivide land for the preparation of plats, both preliminary and final,
indicating, among other things, the optimum, minimum or maximum dimensions of such items as rights-of-way, blocks, easements and lots.
DEVELOPMENT: Acts relating to subdividing land, platting land, building structures and installing site improvements.
DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT: A lot other than a corner lot which has a property line abutting on one street and an opposite property line abutting on another
nonintersecting street.
DRAINAGECOURSE: A watercourse or surface area for the drainage or conveyance of surface water.
EASEMENT: A grant by an owner of land for a specific use by persons other than the owner.
ENGINEER: The registered engineer employed or retained by the City, unless otherwise stated.
FINAL PLAT: A drawing or map of a subdivision, meeting all of the requirements of the City and in such form as required by Wright County for the purpose
of recording.
FLOOD RELATED:
Accessory Use Or Accessory Structure: A use or structure in the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
Equal Degree Of Encroachment: Method of determining the location of encroachment lines so that the hydraulic capacity of floodplain lands on each
side of a stream are reduced by an equal amount when calculating the increases in flood stages due to floodplain encroachments.
FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Flood: A temporary rise in stream flow or stage that results in inundation of the areas adjacent to the channel.
Flood Frequency: The average frequency, statistically determined, for which it is expected that a specific flood stage or discharge may be equaled or
exceeded.
Flood Fringe: That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway. Flood fringe is synonymous with the term "floodway fringe" used in the Flood
Insurance Study for the City.
Flood Hazard Areas: The areas included in the floodway and flood fringe as indicated on the official zoning map and the Flood Insurance Study and
Flood Insurance Rate Map which have been officially adopted by the City.
Flood Insurance Rate Map: The most recent Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency for the City, and
as applicable and allowed by law, the Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency for the County of Wright
and dated August 4, 1988, as amended.
Flood Insurance Study: The most recent Flood Insurance Study prepared for the City by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and, as
applicable and allowed by law, the Flood Insurance Study prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency for the County of Wright and
dated August 4, 1988, as amended.
Floodplain: The areas adjoining a watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the 100-year flood as determined by the use of the
100-year flood profile and other supporting technical data in the Flood Insurance Study, or in any other officially adopted City flood study.
Floodproofing: A combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding primarily for the
reduction or elimination of flood damages to properties, water and sanitary facilities, structures and contents of buildings in a flood hazard area in
accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code.
Floodway: The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplains which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the
regional flood determined by the use of the 100-year flood profile and other supporting technical data in the Flood Insurance Study, or in any other
officially adopted City flood study.
Obstruction: Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel rectification, culvert, building, wire,
fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across or projecting into any channel, watercourse or regulatory flood hazard area which
may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water, or that is
placed where the flow of water might carry the same downstream to the damage of life or property.
100-Year Flood: A flood which is representative of large regional floods known to have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic
of what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year recurrence interval as determined by the use of the 100-
year flood profile and other supporting technical data in the Flood Insurance Study, or in any other officially adopted City flood study.
Reach: A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a stream or river influenced by the natural or manmade obstruction. In an
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 213/497
urban area, the segment of a stream or river between two (2) consecutive bridge crossings would be typical of a reach.
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation: A point not less than one foot (1') above the water surface profile associated with the 100-year flood as
determined by the use of the 100-year flood profile and supporting technical data in the Flood Insurance Study plus any increase in flood heights
attributable to encroachments on the floodplain. It is the elevation to which uses regulated by this title are required to be elevated or floodproofed.
Structure: Anything erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground or in the ground in the
case of earth sheltered buildings. Among other things, structures include buildings, factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured
homes, walls, fences, billboards, poster panels and other similar items.
GOVERNING BODY: The Otsego City Council.
KEY MAP: A small scale map which definitively shows the area proposed to be platted in relation to known geographical features (e.g., regional feature,
community centers, lakes and streets).
LOT: A parcel or portion of land in a subdivision or plat of land separated from other parcels or portions by description, as on a subdivision or record of
survey map, for the purpose of sale or lease or separate use thereof.
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) streets, the interior angle of such intersection not exceeding one hundred thirty five degrees
(135°).
LOT IMPROVEMENT: Any building, structure, work of art, or other object, or improvement of the land on which they are situated constituting a physical
betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment.
METES AND BOUNDS DESCRIPTION: A description of real property which is not described by reference to a lot or block shown on a map, but is
described by starting at a known point and describing the bearings and distances of the lines forming the boundaries of the property or delineating a
fractional portion of a section, lot or area by described lines or portions thereof.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING: A dwelling containing more than two (2) separate living units.
NATURAL WATERWAY: A natural passageway on the surface of the earth, so situated and having such a topographical nature that surface water flows
through it from other areas before reaching a final ponding area. The term also shall include all drainage structures that have been constructed or placed
for the purpose of conducting water from one place to another.
OUTLOT: A lot remnant or parcel of land left over after platting, which is intended as open space or other future use, for which no building permit shall be
issued.
OWNER: An individual, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity holding an equitable or legal ownership interest in
the land sought to be subdivided.
PARCEL: An individual lot or tract of land.
PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS: Public land and open space in the City dedicated or reserved for recreational purposes.
PEDESTRIANWAY: A public right-of-way or easement across a block or within a block to provide access for pedestrians and which may be used for the
installation of paths or trails.
PERCENTAGE OF GRADE: Along a centerline of a street, the change in vertical elevation in feet and tenths of a foot for each one hundred feet (100') of
horizontal distance, expressed as a percentage.
PERSON: Any individual or legal entity.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The Otsego Planning Commission.
PRELIMINARY PLAT: A detailed drawing or map of a proposed subdivision meeting the requirements herein enumerated submitted to the Planning
Commission and Governing Body for their consideration, in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan, along with the required supporting data.
PRIVATE STREET: A street serving as vehicular access to two (2) or more parcels of land which is not dedicated to the public and is owned by one or
more private parties.
PROTECTIVE COVENANTS: Contracts entered into between all owners and holders of mortgage constituting a restriction on the use of property within a
subdivision for the benefit of the property owners.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT: Any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water system, sidewalk, pedestrianway, tree, lawn,
off street parking area, lot improvement or other facility for which the City may ultimately assume ownership, responsibility for maintenance and operation,
or which may affect an improvement, for which local government responsibility is or may be established.
QUADRAMINIUMS: Single structures which contain four (4) subdivided dwelling units all of which have individually separate entrances from the exterior of
the structure.
RESERVE STRIPS: A narrow strip of land placed between lot lines and streets to control access.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: Land acquired by reservation or dedication intended for public use, and intended to be occupied or which is occupied by a street, trail,
railroad, utility lines, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary sewer, storm sewer or other similar uses.
ROADWAY: The portion of street right-of-way improved for vehicular travel.
RURAL SERVICE AREA: That portion of the City, as defined by the Comprehensive Plan, which is currently and is intended to remain rural and
agricultural in character and development.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 214/497
SETBACK: The distance between a building and the property line nearest thereto.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING: A dwelling which is designed and constructed for and occupied by not more than one family and surrounded by
open space or yards and which is not attached to any other dwelling by any means.
SKETCH PLAN: A drawing showing the proposed subdivision of property. This plan shall be drawn to scale and dimensioned; however, exact accuracy is
not a requirement.
STREET: A public right-of-way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a highway, thoroughfare, arterial, parkway, collector, throughway, road, avenue,
boulevard, lane, place, drive, court or otherwise designated, which has been or is proposed to be dedicated or deeded to the public for public use and
which affords principal means of access to abutting property.
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH: The shortest distance between the lines delineating the right-of-way of a street.
STREETS, ARTERIAL: Those streets carrying larger volumes of traffic and serving as links between various subareas of the City. Arterial streets are
intended to provide for collection and distribution of traffic between highways and collector streets; hence regulation of direct access to property is critical.
STREETS, COLLECTOR: Those streets which carry traffic from local streets to the major system of arterials and highways. Collector streets primarily
provide principal access to residential neighborhoods, including, to a lesser degree, direct land access.
STREETS, CUL-DE-SAC: A local street with only one outlet and having an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
STREETS, LOCAL: A street whose primary function is to provide direct access to abutting property containing single-family dwellings and which, by
design, is usually a two (2) lane road with parking permitted within the roadway.
STREETS, MARGINAL ACCESS (FRONTAGE ROAD): Those local streets which are parallel and adjacent to high volume arterial streets and highways,
and which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
STRUCTURE: Anything erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground or in the ground.
Among other things, structures include buildings, manufactured homes, walls, fences, billboards, swimming pools, and poster panels.
SUBDIVIDING: The process of effecting a subdivision.
SUBDIVISION: The separation of an area, parcel or tract of land under single ownership into two (2) or more parcels, tracts, lots or long term leasehold
interests where the creation of the leasehold interest necessitates the creation of streets, roads or alleys for residential, commercial, industrial or other use
or any combination thereof. This term includes resubdivision and, where appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land
subdivided. Subdivision shall apply as outlined herein except for these separations:
A. Where the resulting parcels, tracts, lots or interests will be twenty (20) acres or larger in size and five hundred feet (500') in width for residential uses
and five (5) acres or larger in size for commercial and industrial uses.
B. Creating cemetery lots.
C. Resulting from court orders or the adjustment of a lot line by the relocation of a common boundary.
SURVEYOR: A land surveyor registered under Minnesota State laws.
TOWNHOUSES: Structures housing three (3) or more dwelling units contiguous to each other only by the sharing of one common wall, such structures to
be of the townhouse or rowhouse type as contrasted to multiple apartment structures.
TRACING: A plat or map drawn on transparent paper, film, or cloth which can be reproduced by using regular reproduction procedure.
TREE PRESERVATION RELATED:
Diameter: The measurement of a tree trunk measured four and one-half feet (41/2') above the ground.
Drip Line: The farthest distance away from the trunk of a tree that rain or dew will fall directly to the ground from the leaves or branches of the tree.
Significant Tree: A healthy tree measuring six inches (6") in diameter or greater.
Tree Preservation Plan: A plan certified by a forester or landscape architect indicating all of the significant trees in the proposed development or on
the lot. The tree preservation plan shall include the size, species and location of all significant trees proposed to be saved and removed on the area
of development, and the measures proposed to protect the significant trees to be saved.
Tree Protection: Snow fencing or polyethylene laminar safety netting placed at the drip line of the significant trees to be preserved. The tree
protection measures shall remain in place until all grading and construction activity is terminated.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING: A dwelling designed exclusively for occupancy by two (2) families living independently of each other.
UNIT LOTS: Lots created from the subdivision of single-family attached dwellings having different minimum lot size requirements than the conventional
base lot within the zoning district.
URBAN SERVICE AREA: That portion of the City, as geographically defined by the Comprehensive Plan, which is or has the future potential for
development at urban densities and/or urban uses and in which urban improvements may be required.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 215/497
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The person duly appointed by the City Council as the individual charged with the responsibility of administering and enforcing
this title.
ZONING ORDINANCE: The zoning ordinance or resolution controlling the use of land as adopted by the City. (Prior Code § 21-1-11)
Chapter 3
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
10-3-1: ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL:
This title shall be administered by the Zoning Administrator who is appointed by the City Council. (Prior Code § 21-1-3)
10-3-2: ACCEPTANCE OF PLATS; UNAPPROVED PLATS:
A. Acceptance Of Plats:
1. Before any plat or subdivision of land shall be recorded or be of any validity, it shall be referred to the City Planning Commission and approved by
the City Council as having fulfilled the requirements of this title. (Prior Code § 21-1-5)
2. No plat or subdivision shall be entitled to be recorded in the Wright County Recorder's Office or have any validity until the plat thereof has been
prepared, approved, and acknowledged in the manner prescribed by this title. (Prior Code § 21-1-6)
B. Unapproved Plats:
1. No conveyance of land to which this title is applicable shall be filed or recorded if the land is described in the conveyance by metes and bounds or by
reference to an unapproved registered land survey made after June 4, 1971, or to an unapproved plat made after such regulations become effective.
This subsection B1 does not apply to a conveyance if the land described: (Prior Code § 21-10-3)
a. Was a separate parcel of record on the effective date hereof under Minnesota Statutes sections 394.21 to 394.37; (Prior Code § 21-10-3; amd.
2018 Code)
b. Was the subject of a recorded written agreement to convey entered into prior to such time;
c. Was a separate parcel of not less than five (5) acres and having a width of not less than three hundred feet (300'); or
d. Was zoned for residential use and approved by the Wright County Board and a conditional use permit approved by the Wright County Planning
Commission.
2. Building permits shall be withheld for buildings on tracts which have been subdivided and conveyed by the metes and bounds method, except as set
out in subsection B1 of this section.
3. The City may refuse to take over tracts as streets or roads or to improve, repair or maintain any such tracts. Past City repair or maintenance of any
such tracts does not obligate the City to continue the same in the future.
4. In any case in which compliance with the foregoing restrictions will create an unnecessary hardship and failure to comply does not interfere with the
purposes of the subdivision regulations, the City Council may waive such compliance under the provisions of this title and the conveyance may then
be filed or recorded. (Prior Code § 21-10-3)
10-3-3: BUILDING PERMITS:
No building permit shall be issued for any construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, demolition or moving of any building or structure on any lot or
parcel until all the requirements of this title have been fully met or exceptions from these requirements have been formally established by a development
contract. (Prior Code § 21-10-5)
10-3-4: AMENDMENTS:
The provisions of this title shall be amended by the City following a legally advertised public hearing before the Planning Commission and in accordance
with the law, including the rules and regulations of any applicable State or Federal agency. (Prior Code § 21-1-4)
10-3-5: VARIANCES:
A. Findings: The City Council may approve a variance from the minimum standards of this title (not procedural provisions) when, in its opinion, exceptional
and undue hardship may result from strict compliance. In approving any variance, the City Council shall prescribe any conditions that it deems
necessary to or desirable to the public interest. In making its approval, the City Council shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land
and the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision and the probable effect of the proposed
subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. A variance shall only be approved when the City Council finds that each and every one of the following
apply:
1. That there are special circumstances or highly unique conditions affecting the property such that the strict application of the provisions of this title
would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 216/497
2. That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which
property is situated.
3. That the granting of the variance will not increase the flood hazard or flood damage potential.
4. That the use proposed by the applicant would not result in a stage increase violating the requirements of Minnesota Statutes chapters 104 and 105,
as such chapters may be amended or replaced from time to time, and any applicable requirements imposed by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
5. That the variance is to correct inequities resulting from an extreme physical hardship such as topography.
6. Hardships relating to economic difficulties shall not be considered for the purpose of granting a variance.
7. That the hardship is not a result of an action or actions by the owner, applicant or any agent thereof. (Prior Code § 21-10-4)
B. Procedures:
1. Request For Variance: Request for variances, as provided in this section, shall be filed with the City on an official application form. Such application
shall be accompanied by a fee as provided by section 3-1-2 of this Code. Such application shall also be accompanied by five (5) copies large scale
and thirteen (13) reduced scale (not less than 11 inches by 17 inches) copies of detailed written and graphic materials fully explaining the proposed
change, development, or use. If, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, reduced scale drawings (11 inches by 17 inches) are determined to be
illegible, the submission of larger scale materials shall be required. The scale of such materials shall be the minimum necessary to ensure legibility.
The request for variance shall be placed on the agenda of the first possible Planning Commission meeting occurring after fifteen (15) working days
from the date of submission of the application. The request shall be considered as being officially submitted when there is compliance with all the
information requirements. (Prior Code § 21-10-4; amd. 2018 Code)
2. Proof Of Ownership Or Authorization: The applicant shall supply proof of title and the legal description of the property for which the variance is
requested, consisting of an abstract of title or registered property abstract currently certified, together with any unrecorded or equitable ownership
interest and as applicable supply documented authorization from the owner(s) of the property in question to proceed with the requested variance.
3. Public Hearing; Notice Requirements:
a. Upon receipt of said application, the City shall set a public hearing following property hearing notification as applicable. The Planning Commission
shall conduct the hearing and report its findings and make recommendations to the City Council. Notice of said hearing shall consist of a legal
property description and description of request, and be published in the official newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Written
notification of said hearing shall be mailed to surrounding area property owners at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Requests affecting and
located within platted areas of the City shall be noticed to all property owners within three hundred fifty feet (350') of the property in question.
Requests affecting and located within nonplatted areas of the City shall be noticed to all property owners within five hundred feet (500') of the
property in question. A copy of the notice and a list of the property owners and addresses to which the notice was sent shall be attested and made
a part of the records of the proceeding.
b. For properties within the Shoreland Overlay Districts, the Wild and Scenic River Corridor District, and/or the Floodway or Flood Fringe Overlay
Districts, the City shall submit to the Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the application for proposed variances sufficiently in advance
so that the Commissioner will receive at least ten (10) days' notice of the hearing.
c. Failure of a property owner to receive said notice shall not invalidate any such proceedings as set forth within this section, provided a bona fide
attempt has been made to comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.
4. Recommendation To City Council:
a. The Zoning Administrator shall instruct the appropriate staff persons to prepare technical reports where appropriate, and provide general
assistance in preparing a recommendation on the action to the Council.
b. The City Council, Planning Commission, and City staff shall have the authority to request additional information from the applicant concerning
operational factors or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant concerning operational factors, said
information to be declared necessary to establish performance conditions in relation to all pertinent sections of this title. Failure of an applicant to
supply all necessary supportive information may be grounds for denial of the request.
c. The applicant or a designated representative thereof shall appear before the Planning Commission to answer questions concerning the proposed
variance.
d. The Planning Commission shall make findings of fact and recommend approval or denial of the request. The Planning Commission shall reach a
decision within sixty (60) days after the first regular meeting at which the variance request was considered by the commission. The commission's
recommendation and the City staff's report shall be presented to the Council.
C. City Council Action:
1. The City Council shall not act upon a variance or appeal until they have received a report and recommendation from the Planning Commission or
until sixty (60) days after the first regular Planning Commission meeting at which the request was considered.
2. Upon completion of the report and recommendation by the Planning Commission, the request shall be placed on the agenda of the City Council for
the next regular meeting. Such reports and recommendations shall be entered in and made part of the permanent written record of the City Council
meeting.
3. Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission and the City staff, the City Council shall have the option to set and hold
a public hearing if deemed necessary.
4. If, upon receiving said reports and recommendations of the Planning Commission, the City Council finds that specific inconsistencies exist in the
review process and thus the final recommendation of the City Council will differ from that of the Planning Commission, the City Council may, before
taking final action, refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for further consideration. The City Council shall provide the Planning
Commission with a written statement detailing the specific reasons for referral. This procedure shall be followed only one time on a singular action.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 217/497
5. A variance of this title shall require passage by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the entire City Council.
D. Additional Variance Requests: Whenever an application for a variance has been considered and denied by the City Council, a similar application and
proposal for the variance affecting the same property shall not be considered again by the Planning Commission or City Council for at least one year
from the date of its denial except as follows:
1. Applications are withdrawn prior to the City Council taking action on the matter.
2. If the City Council determines that the circumstances surrounding a previous application have changed significantly.
3. If the City Council decides to reconsider such matter by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the entire City Council. (Prior Code § 21-10-4)
10-3-6: FEES, CHARGES, AND EXPENSES:
A. Fees And Charges: Fees and charges, as well as expenses incurred by the City for engineering, planning, attorney, and other services related to the
processing of applications required by this title, as well as for public hearings, special meetings, or other such City Council or Planning Commission
actions as are necessary to process applications, shall be as set out in section 3-1-2 of this Code.
B. Escrow: An escrow deposit required in section 3-1-2 of this Code shall be used for payment of all costs incurred for City in the processing of an
application required by this title:
1. All costs incurred for City staff and consultants directly related to processing of an application required by this title including preparation of reports or
studies, attendance at staff or public meetings, and any other expenses incurred with processing of an application.
2. The property owner shall reimburse the escrow account for any deficits caused if the amount actually expended by or billed to the City exceeds the
fund balance.
3. The City shall refund any amount deposited in the escrow account not expended within ninety (90) calendar days after final action on the application.
C. Development Application: Fees, charges, and estimated expenses for the processing of a development application required by this shall be collected
prior to City action on any application. The fees shall be deposited in City accounts. The applicant shall not be paid interest on the fees required by this
section.
D. Fees And Expenses To Be Paid: All fees and expenses incurred by the City are to be paid whether the application is approved or denied.
E. Owner Of The Property: The owner of the property subject to the application required by this title shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the City in
processing said application and enforcing the terms of any agreements relating to the application in accordance with Minnesota Statutes chapter
462.353, subd. 4a.
F. Unpaid Expenses:
1. All unpaid expenses incurred by the City under this Code not covered by the escrow will be charged against the property subject to the application
and will be the responsibility of the property owner pursuant to Minnesota Statutes chapter 462.353.
2. The property owner shall be invoiced for the City's costs to where Property Tax statements are sent by the County to be paid within thirty (30) days
of the date of the invoice.
3. Should the property owner not reimburse the City as required by this section, the City shall be authorized to certify said unreimbursed costs plus
interest to the County Auditor for payment with the property owner's Property Taxes with interest and said certified amounts shall constitute a lien
against the property that shall be collected and enforced in the same manner as general Property Taxes pursuant to Minnesota Statutes chapter
429.101. (Ord. 2019-04, 2-11-2019)
10-3-7: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
A. Violations:
1. Sale Of Lots From Unrecorded Plats: It shall be a misdemeanor to sell, trade, or otherwise convey any lot or parcel of land as a part of, or in
conformity with, any plan, plat or replat of any subdivision or area located within the jurisdiction of this title unless said plan, plat or replat shall have
first been recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds of Wright County.
2. Receiving Or Recording Unapproved Plats: It shall be unlawful for a private individual to receive or record in any public office any plans, plats of land
laid out in building lots and streets, alleys or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated to public or private use, or for the use of purchasers
or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent thereto, and located within the jurisdiction of this title, unless the same shall bear thereon, by endorsement
or otherwise, the approval of the City Council.
3. Misrepresentations: It shall be a misdemeanor for any person owning an addition or subdivision of land within the City to represent that any
improvement upon any of the streets, alleys or avenues of said addition or subdivision or any sewer in said addition or subdivision has been
constructed according to the plans and specifications approved by the City Council, or has been supervised or inspected by the City, when such
improvements have not been so constructed, supervised or inspected.
B. Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day during which compliance is delayed or such
violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense and may be prosecuted as such. (Prior Code § 21-10-6)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 218/497
Chapter 4
MINOR SUBDIVISIONS
10-4-1: QUALIFICATION:
This chapter shall apply to the following applications:
A. In the case of a request to divide a portion of a lot where the division is to permit the adding of a parcel of land to an abutting lot so that no additional
lots are created and both new lots conform to zoning ordinance lot size minimum standards.
B. In the case of a request to combine two (2) existing platted lots.
C. In the case of a request to divide a lot from a larger tract of land and thereby creating no more than two (2) lots, both of which conform to the zoning
ordinance minimum standards. To qualify, the parcel of land shall not have been part of a minor subdivision within the last five (5) years.
D. In the case of a request to divide a base lot which is a part of a recorded plat on which has been constructed a two-family dwelling, townhouse or
quadraminium, where the division is to permit individual private ownership of a single dwelling unit within such a structure and the newly created
property lines will not cause any of the unit lots or the structure to be in violation of this title, the zoning ordinance, or the State Building Code. (Prior
Code § 21-2-1)
10-4-2: CONTENT AND DATA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Certificate Of Survey: The requested minor division shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor in the form of a Certificate of Survey.
B. Property Description And Submission Information: The data and supportive information detailing the proposed subdivision shall be the same as required
for a preliminary plat as described in chapter 7 of this title. Exceptions, as stipulated in writing, may be granted by the Zoning Administrator. (Prior Code
§ 21-2-2)
C. Fee: Submission of an application for minor subdivision approval shall include a fee as established by section 3-1-2 of this Code. (Ord. 2018-13, 12-10-
2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
10-4-3: DESIGN STANDARDS:
The minor subdivision shall conform to all design standards as specified in this title. Any proposed deviation from said standards shall require the
processing of a variance request. (Prior Code § 21-2-3)
10-4-4: PROCESSING:
A. If the land division involves property which has been previously platted, or the total property area included is greater than ten (10) acres, the Zoning
Administrator may approve the subdivision; provided, that it complies with applicable provisions of this title.
B. In the case of applications involving property lying within the Urban Service Area, which has not been previously platted, and is less than ten (10) acres
in total area, applicable processing provisions of section 10-5-2 of this title shall be followed.
C. In the case of applications involving property lying within the Rural Service Area which has not been previously platted and is less than ten (10) acres in
total area, the Zoning Administrator may approve the subdivision, provided it complies with applicable provisions of this title. (Prior Code § 21-2-4)
Chapter 5
FILING AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
10-5-1: PREAPPLICATION MEETING:
A. Prior to the preparation of a preliminary plat, the applicant shall meet with the proper City officials in order to be made aware of all applicable
ordinances, regulations and plans in the area to be subdivided. At such time or at subsequent meetings, the applicant shall submit four (4) large scale
copies and one reduced scale (81/2 inches by 11 inches) copy of a sketch plan of the proposed subdivision to include future phases and an estimated
time table for development.
B. In cases when the sketch plan is referred to the Planning Commission and City Council, the applicant shall submit five (5) large scale and thirteen (13)
reduced scale (not less than 11 inches by 17 inches) copies of the sketch plan. If, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, reduced scale drawings
(11 inches by 17 inches) are determined to be illegible, the submission of larger scale materials shall be required. The scale of such materials shall be
the minimum necessary to ensure legibility. The plan shall show the proposed layout of streets to include adjacent or connecting streets, lots, proposed
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 219/497
playgrounds and parks, unique land characteristics, general topography, 100-year flood contour line, major drainage patterns, and demonstrate that the
proposed subdivision has shown consideration to the adjacent land uses and community facilities that would serve it. Additional written data shall
include approximate number of lots, typical lot width and depth, and what zoning changes would be required.
C. The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to refer the sketch plan to the Planning Commission and/or City Council for review and informal
comment. (Prior Code § 21-3-1)
10-5-2: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
A. Review Of Sketch Plan; Application:
1. After the preapplication meeting and following City review of the sketch plan, the applicant shall prepare a request for subdivision, as provided within
this title, which shall be filed with the City on an official application form. (Prior Code § 21-3-2)
2. The application shall be accompanied by a fee as provided in section 3-1-2 of this Code. Such application shall also be accompanied by five (5)
large scale copies and thirteen (13) reduced scale (not less than 11 inches by 17 inches) copies of a preliminary plat and supportive information in
conformity with requirements of this title. If, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, reduced scale drawings (11 inches by 17 inches) are
determined to be illegible, the submission of larger scale materials shall be required. The scale of such materials shall be the minimum necessary to
ensure legibility. The request for subdivision shall be placed on the agenda of the first possible Planning Commission meeting occurring after fifteen
(15) working days from the date of submission. (Prior Code § 21-3-2; amd. 2018 Code)
3. The applicant shall supply proof of title and the legal description of the property for which the subdivision is requested, consisting of an abstract of
title or registered property abstract currently certified, together with any unrecorded documents whereby the petitioners acquire a legal ownership or
equitable ownership interest and as applicable, supply documented authorization from the owner(s) of the property in question to proceed with the
requested subdivision.
4. The applicant shall submit any necessary applications for variances from the provisions of this title, as set out in section 10-3-5 of this title. The
preliminary plat shall be considered as being officially submitted only when there is compliance with all of the information requirements and the
appropriate fees paid.
B. Public Hearing; Notice Requirements: Upon receipt of the completed application as outlined in subsection A of this section, the City Clerk shall set a
public hearing for public review of the preliminary plat by the Planning Commission. The hearing shall be within forty five (45) days of the completed
filing of the application. Notice of the hearing may be a legal or display advertisement and shall consist of a legal property description and description of
request and shall be published in the official newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Written notification of the hearing shall be mailed at
least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Requests affecting and located within platted areas of the City shall be noticed to all property owners within
three hundred fifty feet (350') of the property in question. Requests affecting and located within nonplatted areas of the City shall be noticed to all
property owners within five hundred feet (500') of the property in question. A copy of the notice and a list of the property owners and addresses to
which the notice was sent shall be attested and made a part of the records of the proceeding. Failure of a property owner to receive said notice shall
not invalidate any such proceedings as set forth in this chapter, provided a bona fide attempt has been made to comply with the notice requirements of
this chapter.
C. Technical Reports: The Zoning Administrator shall instruct the staff, as appropriate, to prepare technical reports and provide general assistance in
preparing a recommendation on the action to the City Council. This may include the City Planner, City Engineer, City Building Official, City Attorney, or
public or private utility departments, among others.
D. Recommendation To City Council:
1. The City shall refer copies of the preliminary plat to County, State or other public jurisdictions for their review and comment, where appropriate and
when required.
2. The City Council, Planning Commission, and City staff shall have the authority to request additional information from the applicant concerning the
proposed subdivision and its operational factors or impact, or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant
concerning operational factors or impacts, when said information is to be declared necessary to establish performance conditions in relation to all
pertinent sections of this title. Failure on the part of the applicant to supply all necessary supportive information may be grounds for denial of the
request.
3. The applicant or a designated representative thereof shall appear before the Planning Commission at the public hearing in order to answer questions
concerning the proposed request.
4. The Planning Commission shall report its findings and make its recommendation to the City Council no later than forty (40) days after the close of
public hearing described in subsection B of this section. If the Planning Commission has not acted upon the preliminary plat within forty (40) days
following the close of public hearing, the Council may act on the preliminary plat without the Planning Commission's recommendation.
E. City Council Action:
1. Upon completion of the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, the request shall be placed on the agenda of the City Council.
Such reports and recommendations shall be entered in and made part of the permanent written record of the City Council meeting.
2. Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission and City staff, the City Council shall have the option to set and hold a
public hearing if deemed necessary and shall make a recorded finding of fact and may impose any condition it considers necessary to protect the
public health, safety and welfare.
3. The Council shall approve or disapprove the preliminary plat within one hundred twenty (120) days following delivery of an application completed in
compliance with this title unless an extension of the review period has been agreed to by the applicant and the City.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 220/497
4. If, upon receiving said reports and recommendations of the Planning Commission and City staff, the City Council finds that specific inconsistencies
exist in the review process and thus the final decision of the City Council will differ from the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City
Council may, before taking final action, refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for further consideration. The City Council shall provide the
Planning Commission with a written statement detailing the specific reasons for referral. This procedure shall be followed only one time on a singular
action.
5. If the preliminary plat is not approved by the City Council, the reasons for such action shall be recorded in the proceedings of the Council and shall
be transmitted to the applicant. If the preliminary plat is approved, such approval shall not constitute final acceptance of the design and layout.
Subsequent approval will be required of the engineering proposals and other features and requirements as specified by this title to be indicated on
the final plat. The City Council may impose such conditions and restrictions as it deems appropriate or require such revisions or modifications in the
preliminary plat or final plat as it deems necessary to protect the health, safety, comfort, general welfare and convenience of the City.
6. The City Council reserves the right to decline approval of a preliminary plat if due regard is not shown for the preservation of all natural features,
such as topography, trees, watercourses, scenic points, prehistoric and historical spots, and similar community assets which, if preserved, will add
attractiveness and stability to the proposed development of the property.
F. Filing Final Plat: Following City Council approval of a preliminary plat, the applicant must submit a final plat to the City within one hundred (100) days of
preliminary approval unless otherwise specified as part of a development agreement. If this procedure is not followed, then approval of the preliminary
plat shall be considered void, unless a request for time extension is submitted in writing by the applicant thirty (30) days prior to the lapse of approval
and subsequently approved by the City Council. (Prior Code § 21-3-2)
G. Amendments To Preliminary Plat: Should the applicant desire to amend a preliminary plat as approved, an amended preliminary plat may be submitted.
The City may require the applicant to follow the same procedure as a new preliminary plat. No public hearing will be required unless the amendment, in
the opinion of the City, is of such scope as to constitute a new preliminary plat. A filing fee as established in section 3-1-2 of this Code shall be charged
for the amendment processing. (Prior Code § 21-3-2; amd. 2018 Code)
10-5-3: FINAL PLAT:
A. Submission:
1. After the preliminary plat has been approved, a final plat shall be submitted for review as set forth in this section. The City may agree to review the
preliminary and final plats simultaneously. The final plat shall incorporate all changes, modifications and revisions required by the City. Otherwise, it
shall strictly conform to the approved preliminary plat.
2. All final plats shall comply with the provisions of Minnesota State Statutes and requirements of this title.
3. An applicant shall submit with the final plat a current Abstract of Title or Registered Property Certificate, along with any unrecorded documents, and
an Opinion of Title. (Prior Code § 21-3-3)
4. Submission of an application for final plat approval shall include a fee as established by section 3-1-2 of this Code. (Ord. 2018-13, 12-10-2018, eff.
1-1-2019)
B. Review And Approval: Review of a final plat shall be as follows:
1. Five (5) large scale copies of the final plat and thirteen (13) reduced scale (not less than 11 inches by 17 inches) copies of the final plat shall be
submitted by the applicant. If, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, reduced scale drawings (11 inches by 17 inches) are determined to be
illegible, the submission of larger scale materials shall be required. The scale of such materials shall be the minimum necessary to ensure legibility.
In the event that the final plat is referred to the Planning Commission for recommendation, additional large scale copies of the plat may be required.
Upon receipt of a final plat, copies shall be referred to the City Council, appropriate City staff, and to all applicable utility companies and County and
State agencies. One copy, with Abstract of Title or Registered Property Certificate and Opinion of Title shall be referred to the City Attorney.
2. The City Council may refer the final plat to the Planning Commission for recommendation if they find the proposed final plat is substantially different
from the approved preliminary plat or the requirements of the preliminary plat are not resolved. In such cases, the Planning Commission shall submit
a report thereon to the City Council within forty five (45) days.
3. The City staff receiving final plat copies shall, as appropriate, submit reports to the City Council within ten (10) working days, documenting and
expressing their recommendation on the final plat.
4. Prior to approval of a final plat, the applicant shall have executed a development agreement with the City, which controls the installation of all
required improvements and assures compliance with all conditions of approval. Said agreement will require all improvements and approval
conditions to comply with approved engineering standards and applicable regulations.
5. The City Council shall take action on a final plat not more than sixty (60) days after the plat is filed with the City. If the final plat is not approved, the
reasons for such action shall be recorded in the official proceedings of the City and shall be transmitted to the applicant.
6. Upon receiving an approved final plat in conformance with the requirements of the City, the designated representatives of the City shall sign the plat,
and the applicant, as a condition of approval, shall record the approved and signed final plat with the County Registrar of Deeds within sixty (60)
days, or the approved final plat shall be considered void.
7. The applicant shall, within thirty (30) days of recording, furnish the City with three (3) blue or black line prints and one mylar of the final plat showing
evidence of the recording. Failure to furnish such copies shall be grounds for refusal to issue building permits for lots within a plat.
8. Upon receiving approval of a final plat for a portion of an approved preliminary plat, a continuation of the recognition of the preliminary plat is not
required to maintain its approval. In the event a zoning ordinance amendment is adopted which requires a larger minimum lot size for land not yet
platted and recorded, the larger minimum lot size may be required for any additional platting. If the applicant is unable to file a final plat application
within the required one hundred (100) days, such person shall file a written request for an extension of the preliminary plat approval with the City
Clerk and receive City Council approval prior to the end of the one hundred (100) days. Said applicant's request shall specify and the City Council
shall, if approved, determine the length of time for filing and for the preliminary plat to remain in full force and effect. (Prior Code § 21-3-3)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 221/497
Chapter 6
PREMATURE SUBDIVISIONS; DENIAL OF PLATS
10-6-1: PREMATURE SUBDIVISIONS:
A. Denial Of Premature Subdivision: Any preliminary plat of a proposed subdivision deemed premature for development shall be denied by the City
Council. (Prior Code § 21-4-1)
B. Condition Establishing Premature Subdivision: A subdivision may be deemed premature should any one or more of the conditions set forth in the
following provisions exist:
1. Lack Of Adequate Drainage:
a. A condition of inadequate drainage shall be deemed to exist if:
(1) Surface or subsurface water retention/detention and runoff is such that it constitutes a danger to the structural security of the proposed
development, or flood of the subdivision or downstream property.
(2) The proposed subdivision will cause pollution of water sources or damage from erosion and siltation on downhill or downstream land.
(3) The proposed site grading and development will cause siltation on downstream land.
b. Factors to be considered in making these determinations shall include, but shall not be limited to: average rainfall for the area; the relation of the
land to floodplains; the nature of soils and subsoils and their ability to adequately support surface water runoff and waste disposal systems; the
slope of the land and its effect on effluents; and the presence of streams as related to effluent disposal.
2. Lack Of Adequate Water Supply: A proposed subdivision shall be deemed to lack an adequate water supply if the proposed subdivision does not
have adequate sources of water to serve the proposed subdivision if developed to its maximum permissible density without causing an unreasonable
depreciation of existing water supplies for surrounding areas.
3. Lack Of Adequate Roads Or Highways To Serve Subdivision: A proposed subdivision shall be deemed to lack adequate roads or highways to serve
the subdivision when:
a. Roads which serve the proposed subdivision are of such a width, grade, stability, vertical and horizontal alignment, site distance and surface
condition that an increase in traffic volume generated by the proposed subdivision would create a hazard to public safety and general welfare, or
aggravate an already hazardous condition, and when, with due regard to the advice of the City Engineer, Wright County, and/or the Minnesota
Department of Transportation, said roads are inadequate for the intended use; or
b. The traffic volume generated by the proposed subdivision would create unreasonable traffic congestion or unsafe conditions on highways existing
at the time of the application or proposed for completion within the next two (2) years.
4. Lack Of Adequate Waste Disposal Systems: A proposed subdivision shall be deemed to lack adequate waste disposal systems if:
a. In subdivisions for which sewer lines are proposed, there is inadequate sewer capacity in the present system to support the subdivision if
developed to its maximum permissible density indicated in the Otsego Comprehensive Plan, as amended.
b. Soil tests, drain field areas or other such factors relating to on site waste disposal systems are judged as inadequate for the use proposed.
5. No Public Improvements: If public improvements, such as recreational facilities, streets and utilities, reasonably necessitated by the subdivision,
which must be provided at public expense, cannot be provided within the next two (2) fiscal years.
6. Threat To Environmentally Essential Areas: The proposed subdivision is inconsistent with policies and standards of the City, the County, the State, or
Federal government relating to environmentally sensitive areas and protections.
7. Inconsistency With Comprehensive Plan: The proposed subdivision is inconsistent with the purposes, objectives and recommendations of the duly
adopted Comprehensive Plan of Otsego, as amended. (Prior Code § 21-4-2)
C. Burden Of Establishing Premature Subdivision: The burden shall be upon the applicant to show that the proposed subdivision is not premature. (Prior
Code § 21-4-3)
10-6-2: DENIAL OF PLATS:
The Planning Commission may recommend denial and the City Council may deny the subdivision if it makes any one or more of the following findings:
A. That the proposed subdivision is in direct conflict with adopted applicable general and specific Comprehensive Plans of the City, County, or region;
B. That the physical characteristics of the site, including, but not limited to, topography, percolation rate, soil conditions, susceptibility to erosion and
siltation, susceptibility to flooding, water storage, drainage and retention, are such that the site is not suitable for the type of development, design, or
use contemplated;
C. That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development;
D. That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements is likely to cause substantial environmental damage;
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 222/497
E. That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems;
F. That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements of record or with easements established by judgment of a
court;
G. That the proposed subdivision, its site, or its design adversely affects the flood carrying capacity of the floodway, increases flood stages and velocities,
or increases flood hazards within the floodway fringe or within other areas of the City;
H. The proposed subdivision is inconsistent with the policies and standards of the Wild and Scenic River District or the State defined Shoreland Districts
and Wetland Districts. (Prior Code § 21-5-1)
Chapter 7
PLAT AND DATA REQUIREMENTS
10-7-1: SKETCH PLAN:
The sketch plans shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:
A. Plat boundary.
B. North arrow.
C. Scale.
D. Street names and the layout on and adjacent to the proposed plat.
E. Designation of land use and current and proposed zoning.
F. Significant topographical or physical features.
G. General lot locations and layout.
H. Preliminary evaluation by the applicant that the subdivision is not classified as premature based upon criteria established in subsection 10-6-1B of this
title. (Prior Code § 21-6-1)
10-7-2: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
The applicant shall prepare and submit a preliminary plat, together with any necessary supplementary information. The preliminary plat shall contain the
information set forth in this section. (Upon specific request, the City may exempt an applicant from the submission of data which is not considered relevant
to the application.) The items listed in this section shall be in conformance with all other applicable sections of this title.
A. General Requirements:
1. The proposed name of the subdivision. Names shall not duplicate or be alike in pronunciation to the name of any plat theretofore recorded in the
County.
2. Location of boundary lines in relation to a known section, quarter section or quarter-quarter section lines comprising a legal description of the
property.
3. Name, address and phone number of the record owner(s), any agent having control of the land, the applicant, land surveyor, engineer and designer
of the plan.
4. Graphic scale of one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100') except as specifically approved by the Zoning Administrator.
5. North point and key map of the area, showing well known geographical points for orientation within a one-half (1/2) mile radius.
6. Date of preparation.
B. Existing Conditions:
1. Boundary lines to include bearings, distances, curve data, and total acreage of proposed plat, clearly indicated.
2. Existing zoning classifications for land in and abutting the subdivision.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 223/497
3. Total area of the proposed plat.
4. Location, right-of-way width and names of existing or platted streets or other public ways, parks and other public lands, permanent buildings and
structures, easements and section, corporate and school district lines within the plan, to a distance one hundred fifty feet (150') beyond the plat.
5. Location, size, and elevations of existing sewers, water mains, culverts or other underground facilities within the preliminary plat area and to a
distance of one hundred fifty feet (150') beyond. Such data as top grades and locations of catch basins, manholes, elevations, invert elevations,
hydrants and the street pavement width and type also shall be shown.
6. Boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or subdivided land, within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the plat, identified by name and ownership,
including all contiguous land owned or controlled by the applicant.
7. Topographic data, including contours at vertical intervals of not more than one foot (1') shown on a contour/topographic map. Watercourses,
marshes, wooded areas, rock outcrops, power transmission poles and lines, and other significant features also shall be shown. USGS datum shall
be used for all topographic mapping.
8. Subsurface conditions on tracts for subdivisions utilizing individual water and sewage disposal systems; location and results of tests to ascertain
subsurface soil, rock and groundwater conditions and availability; location and results of soil percolation tests.
9. 100-year flood elevations, the regulatory flood protection, and boundaries of floodway and flood fringe areas, if known, taking into consideration the
Flood Insurance Study and Flood Insurance Rate Map.
10. A statement certifying the environmental condition of the site including the presence of any hazardous substance as defined in Minnesota Statutes
section 115B.02, subdivision 8. Such statement may be required to be based upon an environmental assessment of the site by an environmental
engineering firm acceptable to the City.
11. Geotechnical data prepared by a qualified soils engineer showing surface and subsurface soils and groundwater in sufficient detail to show the site
to be suitable for the development proposed.
C. Proposed Design Features:
1. Layout of proposed streets showing the right-of-way widths, centerline gradients, roadway widths, typical cross sections, and proposed names of
streets in conformance with City and County street identification policies. The name of any street heretofore used in the City or its environs shall not
be used unless the proposed street is a logical extension of an already named street, in which event, the same name shall be used.
2. Locations and widths of proposed alleys and pedestrianways.
3. Locations and size of proposed sewer lines and water mains.
4. Gradients of proposed streets, sewer lines and water mains, as requested.
5. Location, dimension and purpose of all easements.
6. Layout, numbers, lot areas and preliminary dimensions of lots and blocks, and outlots.
7. Minimum front and side street building setback line.
8. When lots are located on a curve, the width of the lot at the building setback line.
9. Building pads intended for construction.
10. Areas, other than streets, alleys, bikeways, pedestrianways and utility easements, intended to be dedicated or reserved for public use, including the
size of such area or areas in acres.
11. a. The location and sizing of proposed on site water systems.
b. If applicable, the proposed location and sizing of public water system mains and service connections to be provided as part of initial construction
or to be provided at a later date.
12. a. The location and size of proposed on site waste disposal systems.
b. If applicable, the proposed location and routing of public sewer mains and service connections proposed as part of initial construction or to be
provided at a later date.
13. Grading plan with minimum one foot (1') contours which shall include the proposed grading and drainage of the site, including provisions for surface
water ponding and drainage. Also to be stipulated are the garage floor, first floor, and basement elevations of all structures.
14. Proposed fill, levees, channel modifications, and other methods to overcome flood or erosion hazard areas in accordance with the zoning ordinance
and by use of the 100-year flood profile and other supporting technical data in the Flood Insurance Study.
D. Supplementary Information: Any or all of the supplementary information requirements set forth in this subsection shall be submitted when deemed
necessary by the City staff, consultants, advisory bodies and/or City Council to adequately address the application and site in question:
1. Proposed protective covenants or private restrictions.
2. A tree preservation plan as outlined in this title.
3. Statement of the proposed use of lots stating type of buildings with number of proposed dwelling units or type of business or industry, so as to reveal
the effect of the development on traffic, fire hazards, and congestion of population. The City may require the applicant to have formal traffic or other
studies performed to the City's satisfaction which show the effect of the proposed development on traffic, fire hazards, congestion, or other matters of
public concern.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 224/497
4. If any zoning changes are contemplated, the proposed zoning plan for the areas, including dimensions, shall be shown. Such proposed zoning plan
shall be for information only and shall not vest any rights in the applicant.
5. Where the applicant owns property adjacent to that which is being proposed for the subdivision, it shall be required that the applicant submit a sketch
plan of the remainder of the property so as to show the possible relationships between the proposed subdivision and the future subdivision. In any
event, all subdivisions shall be required to relate well with existing or potential adjacent subdivisions and land uses.
6. Where structures are to be placed on large or excessively deep lots which are subject to potential replat, the preliminary plat shall indicate a logical
way in which the lots could possibly be resubdivided in the future.
7. A plan for soil erosion and sediment control both during construction and after development has been completed. The plan shall include gradients of
waterways, design of velocity and erosion control measures, design of sediment control measures, and landscaping of the erosion and sediment
control system. Such plans are to be in accordance with the technical standards and specifications of the Soil Conservation Service, as provided by
the Wright County Soil and Water Conservation District Office.
8. An environmental assessment worksheet shall be submitted if the City, City consultants, Minnesota Environmental Quality Board or other groups or
agencies determine that one is required by law.
9. Applications, statements and supporting documentation and plans for rezoning, variances, conditional use permits or planned unit development
approvals being sought for the subdivision.
10. Such other applicable information as may be required by the City. (Prior Code § 21-6-2)
10-7-3: FINAL PLAT:
The applicant shall submit a final plat, together with any necessary supplementary information. The final plat, prepared for recording purposes, shall be
prepared in accordance with provisions of Minnesota State Statutes and Wright County regulations, and such final plat or accompanying submittals shall
contain the following information:
A. Name of the subdivision, which shall not duplicate or too closely approximate the name of any existing plat theretofore recorded in the County and
which shall be subject to City Council approval.
B. Location by section, township, range, county and state, and including descriptive boundaries of the subdivision, based on an accurate traverse, giving
angular and linear dimensions.
C. The location of monuments shall be shown and described on the final plat. Locations of such monuments shall be shown in reference to existing official
monuments on the nearest established street lines, including true angles and distances to such reference points or monuments. The applicant shall
provide coordinating data on all subdivision monumentation in a format approved by the City Engineer.
D. Location of lots, outlots, streets, public highways, alleys, and parks and other features, with accurate dimensions in feet and decimals of feet, with the
length of radii and/or arcs of all curves, and with all other information necessary to reproduce the plat on the ground shall be shown. Dimensions shall
be shown from all angle points of curve to lot lines.
E. Lots shall be numbered clearly, blocks are to be numbered, with numbers shown clearly in the center of the block.
F. A drawing or listing of total square footage per lot, acreage per block and total acres in the plat.
G. The exact locations, widths and names of all streets to be dedicated.
H. Location, purpose and width of all easements to be dedicated.
I. Name, address and phone number of surveyor making the plat.
J. Scale of the plat to be one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100' - the scale to be shown graphically on a bar scale), date and north arrow.
K. A current abstract of title or a registered property certificate along with any unrecorded documents to be certified by the City Attorney.
L. Deed restrictions and protective covenants which involve a matter of public concern.
M. Statement dedicating all easements as follows: Easements for installation and maintenance of utilities and drainage facilities are reserved over, under
and along the designated areas marked "drainage and utility easements".
N. Statement dedicating all streets, alleys and other public areas not previously dedicated as follows: Streets, alleys and other public areas shown on this
plat and not heretofore dedicated to public use hereby so dedicated.
O. A development plan in accordance with FHA standards, including, but not limited to, building area and spot elevations, storm drainage and storm sewer
by area, house pad area and locations, and the like.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 225/497
P. Such other information that may be required by the City. (Prior Code § 21-6-3)
10-7-4: CERTIFICATION REQUIRED:
A. Certification by registered surveyor in the form required by Minnesota Statutes section 505.03, as amended.
B. Execution of all owners of any interest in the land and holders of a mortgage thereon of the certificates required by Minnesota Statutes section 505.03,
as amended, and which certificate shall include a dedication of the utility easements and other public areas in such form as approved by the City
Council.
C. Space for certificates of approval and review to be filled in by the signatures of the Mayor and City Clerk in the form:
For Approval of the City:
This plat of (name of plat) was approved and accepted by the City of Otsego, Minnesota, at a regular meeting thereof held this day of, A.D. 20 .
CITY COUNCIL OF OTSEGO, MINNESOTA
BY: Mayor
BY: City Clerk
(Prior Code § 21-6-4)
Chapter 8
DESIGN STANDARDS
10-8-1: COMPLIANCE WITH COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND ZONING ORDINANCE:
A proposed subdivision shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan, to related policies adopted by the City, and to the official zoning ordinance of the City.
(Ord. 2019-06, 2-25-2019)
10-8-2: LAND REQUIREMENTS:
A. Land shall be suited to the purpose for which it is to be subdivided. No plan shall be approved if the site is not suitable for the purposes proposed by
reason of potential flooding, topography or adverse soil or rock formation.
B. Land subject to hazards to life, health, or property shall not be subdivided until all such hazards have been eliminated or unless adequate safeguards
against such hazards are provided by the subdivision plan.
C. Proposed subdivisions shall be coordinated with surrounding jurisdictions and/or neighborhoods, so that the City as a whole may develop efficiently and
harmoniously. (Ord. 2019-06, 2-25-2019)
10-8-3: BLOCKS:
Block length and width or acreage within bounding streets shall be such as to accommodate the size of residential lots required in the area by the zoning
ordinance and to provide for convenient access, circulation control and safety of street traffic.
A. Length: In general, intersecting streets shall be provided at such intervals so as to serve cross traffic adequately and to meet existing streets. Where no
existing plats control, the blocks in residential subdivisions should not exceed one thousand two hundred feet (1,200') nor be less than three hundred
feet (300') in length, except where topography or other conditions justify a departure from this minimum. In blocks longer than nine hundred feet (900'),
thirty foot (30') wide outlots and/or easements through the block for public trails may be required in locations deemed necessary for the public health,
convenience and necessity.
B. Width: The width of the block shall normally be sufficient to allow two (2) tiers of lots of minimum depth as required by the zoning ordinance except
adjoining a lake, stream, river, railroad or arterial or where one tier or lot is necessary because of topographic conditions. Blocks intended for business
or industrial uses shall be of such width as to be considered most suitable for their respective use, including adequate space for off street parking,
deliveries and loading. Such facilities shall be provided with safe and convenient limited access to the street system. (Ord. 2019-06, 2-25-2019)
10-8-4: LOTS:
A. Minimum Dimensions: The minimum lot area, width and depth shall not be less than that established by the zoning ordinance in effect at the time of
adoption of the final plat.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 226/497
B. Side Lot Lines: Side lines of lots shall be at right angles to street lines, radial to curved street lines, or radial to lake or stream shores unless topographic
conditions necessitate a different arrangement or the City Engineer finds such deviation acceptable.
C. Double Frontage Lots:
1. Double frontage, or lots with frontage on two (2) parallel or nonintersecting streets, shall not be permitted, except:
a. Where lots back on arterial or collector streets; or
b. Where topographic or other conditions render subdividing otherwise unreasonable.
2. Such double frontage lots shall have an additional depth of at least ten feet (10') or a reserve strip shall be created in order to allow space for screen
planting along the rear lot line.
D. Setback Lines: Setback or building lines shall be shown on all lots and shall not be less than the setback required by the zoning ordinance.
E. Building Sites: Each lot shall provide an adequate building site at least eighteen inches (18") above the top of the adjacent curb unless approved by the
City Engineer upon the basis of plans submitted showing alternative, acceptable surface drainage measures.
F. Watercourses: Lots abutting a watercourse, wetland, ponding area, drainageway, channel, or stream shall have additional depth and width, as required
to comply with the approved drainage plan for the subdivision and to meet the provisions of the City zoning ordinance to assure building sites that are
not subject to flooding.
G. River Frontage Lots: River frontage lots shall be designed so that the lot lines extended shall maintain the closest approximation to riparian rights.
H. Features: In the subdividing of any land, due regard shall be shown for all natural features, such as tree growth, watercourses, historic spots or similar
conditions which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and stability to the proposed development.
I. Lot Remnants: All remnants of lots below minimum size for the respective zoning district in which they are located must be added to abutting lots or lots
immediately adjoining. For remnants separated by a public right-of-way, the lot remnants shall be designated an outlot. Lot remnants may be allowed if
a plan for future use is found acceptable by the City Council.
J. Outlots: The creation of outlots is to be discouraged. In such cases where outlots are created or exist, their area shall not be utilized in calculating
minimums for buildable lot area requirements.
K. Access: Each lot shall directly access a public street. In cases where special conditions require an alternative means of access, it shall be subject to the
review and approval of the City Council.
L. Turnaround Access: Where proposed residential lots abut an arterial or collector street, they shall be platted in such a manner as to encourage
turnaround access and egress on each lot and discourage direct access onto such streets.
M. Access To Arterial Streets And Major Collector Streets: In the case where a proposed plat is adjacent to a limited access highway, other major highway,
or other arterial street, said streets to be defined by the City Comprehensive Plan, there shall be no direct vehicular access from individual lots to such
streets and roads. In the platting of small tracts of land fronting on limited access highways or arterial streets where there is no other alternative, a
temporary entrance may be granted, subject to terms and conditions defined by the City Council and applicable County or State agencies. As
neighboring land becomes subdivided and more preferable access arrangements become possible, such temporary access permits shall become void.
N. Access To Minor Collector Streets: Direct vehicular access from individual lots to minor collector streets shall be prohibited where determined necessary
by the City Engineer.
O. Political Boundaries: Where a singular plat extends over school district boundaries, no individual lot may extend over said school district boundary.
(Ord. 2019-06, 2-25-2019)
10-8-5: STREETS:
A. General Provisions:
1. Proposed Streets: Proposed streets shall conform to State, County and City transportation plans that have been prepared, adopted and/or filed as
prescribed by law.
2. Local Streets: Local streets shall be logically related to the topography, so as to produce usable lots and reasonable grades and to discourage their
use by through traffic.
3. Arrangement: The arrangement of arterial and collector streets shall be considered in their relation to the reasonable circulation of traffic, to
topographic conditions, to runoff of stormwater, to public convenience and safety, to their appropriate relationship to the proposed uses of the area to
be served.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 227/497
4. Access And Reserve Strips: Access shall be given to all lots and portions of the tract in a subdivision and to adjacent unsubdivided parcels, unless
the topography clearly indicates that such connection is not feasible. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except under
conditions accepted by the City Council.
5. Larger Than Normal Building Lots Or Parcels: When a tract is subdivided into larger than normal building lots or parcels which have the potential for
further subdivision with the installation of public utilities, such lots or parcels shall be so arranged as to permit the logical location and openings of
future streets and appropriate resubdivision, with provision for adequate utility connections for such resubdivision.
6. Dead End Streets: Dead end streets shall be prohibited, except as to permit future street extension into adjoining tracts with temporary cul-de-sacs,
or when designed as cul-de-sac streets.
7. Future Streets:
a. The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the appropriate continuation of existing streets in adjoining areas and
construction of said streets shall be at least to the boundary of the plat.
b. The street design shall not be such as to cause hardship to adjoining property in platting of the land and providing convenient access thereto.
c. A temporary turnaround facility shall be provided at the closed end of a street to be extended, in conformance with subsection B of this section.
B. Street Design:
1. Widths: Street right-of-way widths shall be as determined in the Comprehensive Plan and official map, and where applicable, shall conform to
County and State standards for trunk highways. In cases where no standard is provided, the following minimum standards shall apply:
Industrial/commercial collector 100 feet 56 feet
Industrial/commercial local 80 feet 46 feet
MSA collector 80 feet Per MSA Rules for Urban or Suburban Street
Major collector 60 feet 46 feet
Minor collector 66 feet 36 feet
Local residential 60 feet 28 feet
Local rural cluster 60 feet 24 feet
2. Additional Widths: Additional right-of-way and roadway widths may be required by the City Engineer to promote public safety and convenience when
special conditions, such as turn and/or by-pass lanes, require it.
3. Street Sections: The street section shall comply with design standards as set forth in the City Engineering Manual and all street designs are subject
to the review and approval of the City Engineer.
4. Intersections:
a. Insofar as practical, streets shall intersect at right angles. In no case shall the angle formed by the intersection of two (2) streets be less than
seventy five degrees (75°). Intersections having more than four (4) corners shall be prohibited. Adequate land for future intersections and
interchange construction needs shall be dedicated.
b. Street intersections with centerline offsets of less than two hundred feet (200') shall be prohibited.
c. Intersections of local streets onto collector streets shall be discouraged at intervals of less than five hundred feet (500').
d. Intersections of local streets onto arterial streets shall be discouraged at intervals of less than six hundred sixty feet (660').
5. Tangents: A tangent of at least one hundred feet (100') shall be introduced between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets.
6. Deflections: When connecting street lines deflect from each other at one point by more than ten degrees (10°), they shall be connected by a curve
with a radius adequate to ensure a sight distance of not less than five hundred feet (500') for arterials, three hundred feet (300') for collectors, and
two hundred feet (200') for all other streets. The City Council may allow greater or lesser sight distances.
7. Centerline Gradients: All centerline gradients shall be at least sixth-tenths percent (0.6%) and shall not exceed the following:
a. Arterials and collector streets: Seven percent (7%).
b. Local streets and frontage roads: Seven percent (7%).
8. Centerline Curvature: The minimum horizontal curvature of streets shall be in accordance with the MnDOT Highway Design Manual for the type of
street and design speed. The minimum curvature shall be a two hundred fifty foot (250') radius, except that a ninety foot (90') radius may be allowed
subject to approval by the City Engineer.
9. Corner Radii:
a. Local street intersections shall be rounded by a radius of not less than twenty feet (20') with the right-of-way rounded by a five foot (5') radius.
b. Corners at entrances to the turnaround portions of cul-de-sacs shall be rounded by a radius of not less than sixty feet (60').
Street Right-Of-Way Width
Paved Roadway
Width Back Of Curb
To Back Of Curb
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 228/497
c. Corner radius for a local street to arterial and collector streets shall be not less than thirty feet (30') with the right-of-way rounded by a fifteen foot
(15') radius.
10. Existing Streets: Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing street of inadequate width, sufficient additional width shall be provided to meet
the standards of this title.
11. Half Streets: Half streets shall be prohibited except where it will be practical to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is
subdivided, in which case, the dedication of a half street may be permitted. The probable time elapsing before dedication of the remainder shall be
considered in this decision. All undeveloped lots, outlots or parcels having access only from a half street are prohibited from being eligible for building
permits except as may be allowed by the zoning ordinance.
12. Streets In Flood Hazard Areas: No street shall be approved if its final surface is at a lower elevation than two feet (2') below the regulatory flood
protection elevation. The City Council may require profiles and elevations of finished streets for areas subject to flooding. Fill may be used for streets,
provided such fill does not unduly increase flood heights and provided any such fill would not result in a stage increase violating the requirements of
Minnesota Statutes chapters 104 and 105, as such chapters may be amended, supplemented, or replaced from time to time, and any applicable
requirements imposed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency pursuant to its rules and regulations. Drainage openings shall not restrict the
flow of water so as to unduly increase flood heights and provided any such drainage opening would not violate the requirements of Minnesota
Statutes chapters 104 and 105, as such chapters may be amended, supplemented, or replaced from time to time, and any applicable requirements
imposed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency pursuant to its rules and regulations.
13. Street Designation: Streets shall be designated pursuant to established City and County standards. The following policies may be generally applied
when designating awkward street and avenue configurations.
a. Cul-de-sacs shall assume the designation of the street they intersect and be designated as court or circle.
b. No street names shall be used that will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets.
c. Loops shall be designated avenues, streets or a combination of both, depending on the depth of the configuration. Generally, the longer the length
or depth, the greater the applicability for a separate street and avenue designation. For short loops, the word "circle" shall be used to indicate the
configuration.
d. Names of new streets shall not duplicate existing or platted street names, unless a new street is a continuation of or in alignment with the existing
or platted street. In that event, it shall bear the same name of the existing or platted street. Street names shall conform to the City's Street Naming
and Property Numbering System as applicable.
14. Dedication: All proposed streets shown on the plat shall be in conformity to City, County and State plans and standards and be offered for
dedication as public streets unless otherwise determined by the City Council.
C. Cul-De-Sac Streets:
1. Permanent Cul-De-Sacs: Permanent cul-de-sac streets shall only be allowed where one or more of the following criteria have been met:
a. Area topography or other physical site conditions warrant a dead end street design.
b. A through street is not physically feasible.
c. Lots on the cul-de-sac turnaround shall exceed the zoning district minimum lot width (frontage) requirement by twenty five percent (25%).
2. Length: Cul-de-sac streets permanently designed as such shall not be less than one hundred fifty feet (150') or exceed five hundred feet (500') in
length, including a terminal turnaround which shall be provided at the closed end, with a right-of-way radius of not less than sixty feet (60'). The
length shall be measured along the centerline from the nearest intersection to the center point of the cul-de-sac.
3. Temporary Cul-De-Sacs:
a. Where a street is terminated pending future extension in conjunction with future subdivision and there is more two (2) dwelling units accessed
between the dead end and the nearest intersection, a temporary turnaround shall be provided at the closed end in conformance with cul-de-sac
requirements.
b. A temporary cul-de-sac shall be placed inside a temporary roadway easement if it is located outside street right-of-way.
c. A temporary cul-de-sac shall be located within a side or rear yard, versus a front yard, wherever practical.
d. A temporary cul-de-sac shall not have concrete curb and gutter, and the construction standards shall be established by the City Engineer.
D. Sidewalks And Trails:
1. Pedestrian Movement: The subdivider shall provide for adequate pedestrian movement within the subdivision, along the subdivision, and to adjoining
property which shall be provided in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan, policies established by the City Council, and this section.
2. Sidewalks:
a. Concrete sidewalks shall be constructed along one side of all local residential streets.
b. Concrete sidewalks shall be constructed along both sides of residential minor collector streets and commercial/industrial/institutional streets,
except where a trail is determined to be required by the City.
c. A sidewalk shall not be required along cul-de-sac streets unless necessary to provide access to a public park, open space, or other sidewalk or
trail.
3. Trails: Trails shall be constructed along collector streets, arterial streets, and other roadways as designated by the Comprehensive Plan.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 229/497
4. Compliance: Construction of sidewalks or trails shall be in compliance with the specifications established by the Engineering Manual, subject to
approval of the City Engineer. (Ord. 2019-06, 2-25-2019)
10-8-6: PUBLIC UTILITIES:
A. Water Supply: Extensions of the public water supply system, when available, shall be designed so as to provide public water service to each lot.
B. Sewage Disposal: Extension of the public sanitary sewer system, when available, shall be designed so as to provide public sewer service to each lot.
(Ord. 2019-06, 2-25-2019)
10-8-7: SEWAGE DISPOSAL WITH NO CENTRAL OR PUBLIC SERVICES:
In areas being platted without central or public sewers, the on site sewer system, including the size and relative location of same, shall be in conformance
with City, State and Federal requirements including specifically any FEMA rules and regulations pertinent to on site sewer and water. When such
requirements conflict, the most restrictive shall apply. In addition to those standards, the following requirements shall also apply unless in conflict with a
more restrictive requirement referenced above:
A. The subdivision shall be subject to soil and percolation tests being made to determine whether or not the lot sizes proposed will meet minimum
standards of health and sanitation due to limitations of soils as shown on existing soils maps. Such tests shall be made at the expense of the applicant,
and a sketch map shall be submitted with the preliminary plat to identify the specific locations where tests were made.
B. No cesspools or seepage pits shall be allowed.
C. The City may prohibit installation of sewage disposal facilities requiring soil absorption systems where such systems will not function due to high
groundwater, flooding, or unsuitable soil characteristics. (Ord. 2019-06, 2-25-2019)
10-8-8: AREAS SUBJECT TO FLOODING:
A. Conditions In Flood Hazard Areas: All developments in flood hazard areas shall include:
1. Construction and modification of sewage, water supply, and drainage facilities to meet the standards of this Code to promote the health, safety and
general welfare.
2. Construction of channel modifications, dikes, levees and other protective measures to include filling in.
3. Establishment of flood warning systems.
4. Imposition of operational controls, sureties and deed restrictions enforceable by the City to restrict the type and design of uses. Such restrictions
shall include floodproofing of intended uses mandated by the Minnesota State Building Code. Structurally dry floodproofing standards for
construction shall be in accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code.
B. Warning Signs In Flood Prone Areas: The limits of the areas which have been or would be inundated by the 100-year flood shall be delineated as
reasonably practical at three hundred foot (300') intervals by means of firmly placed markers of sufficient size to be easily read from a distance of
twenty feet (20'). The markers shall record the maximum known depth of flooding or height to the flood protection level, whichever is greater. All flood
warning signs in flood prone areas shall be in accordance with the above requirements or any other additional requirements as provided by the use of
the 100-year flood profile and other supporting technical data in the Flood Insurance Study and the Flood Insurance Rate Map. The subdivision
markers shall meet the following specifications:
1. The markers shall be on substantial permanent metal posts.
2. The marker(s) shall have notification painted white and shall be stenciled or otherwise lettered with the inscription "100-year flood elevation". This
lettering is to be of a permanent nature.
3. The marker shall be firmly placed in the ground and be at least two feet (2') above the ground.
4. The cost of preparing and installing such markers shall be the responsibility of the subdivider, and the markers shall be installed prior to the sale of
lots and construction of any buildings or structures. (Ord. 2019-06, 2-25-2019)
10-8-9: DRAINAGE:
A complete and adequate drainage system design in compliance with local and regional drainage plans, title 9, chapter 7 of this Code, and Otsego
Engineering Manual shall be required for the subdivision and may include a storm sewer system or system of open ditches, culverts, pipes, catch basins
and ponding areas, or a combination thereof.
A. Stormwater drainage facilities shall be provided and designed to meet all Minnesota Pollution Control Agency National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) and Municipal Stormwater (MS4) requirements.
B. Stormwater drainage facilities, where required, shall be designed to convey the flow of surface waters without damage to persons or property. The
system shall ensure drainage at all points along streets, and provide positive drainage away from buildings and on site waste disposal to accommodate
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 230/497
frequent floods. The facilities shall be designed to protect against surface erosion and siltation of surface water and to prevent the discharge of excess
runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. All developments are responsible for control of surface or stormwater to equal or improve predevelopment conditions:
1. Developmental drainage systems shall be provided that accept flow from upstream areas, that control, convey, and pond developmental runoff, that
limit outflow to the natural predevelopment rate, and that do not have detrimental impacts on downstream properties.
2. All pipe conveyance shall be to 10-year design return frequency.
3. Flood protection shall be provided for 100-year design return frequency. Flood protection for public and personal property shall be one and one-half
feet (1.5') plus any encroachment above the floodplain.
4. All ponding, detention or retention shall be designed for 100-year frequency storm condition with a positive outlet. All storm runoff shall be calculated
by the Soil Conservation Service Method TR55 using Atlas 14 storm events. (Ord. 2019-06, 2-25-2019)
10-8-10: EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL:
The following guidelines shall be applied in the subdivision:
A. Erosion and sediment control devices and Best Management Practices shall be provided for all soil disturbing activities in accordance with title 9,
chapter 7 of this Code and Minnesota Pollution Control Agency requirements.
B. The development shall conform to the natural limitations presented by topography and soil so as to create the least potential for soil erosion.
C. Land shall be developed in increments of workable size such that adequate erosion and siltation controls can be provided as construction progresses.
Appropriate control measures shall be installed prior to development when necessary to control erosion. The smallest practical area of land shall be
exposed at any one period of time.
D. When soil is exposed, the exposure shall be for the shortest feasible period of time, as specified in the development agreements.
E. Where the topsoil is removed, sufficient arable soil shall be set aside for respreading over the areas to be planted. The soil shall be restored to a
minimum depth of four inches (4") or a depth as may be established by the City Engineer and shall be of a quality at least equal to the soil quality prior
to development.
F. Natural vegetation shall be protected wherever possible.
G. The City shall have the authority to remove the topsoil for its own purposes from all dedicated streets within its corporate boundaries. Said topsoil shall
be utilized in the development project from which it is taken unless otherwise specified as part of a development agreement.
H. All erosion and sediment control measures shall comply with title 9, chapter 6 of this Code. (Ord. 2019-06, 2-25-2019)
10-8-11: WETLANDS:
The following requirements shall be the minimum protection for natural wetlands:
A. Runoff must not be discharged directly into wetlands without appropriate quality and quantity runoff control, depending on the individual wetland's
vegetation sensitivity, subject to approval of the City Engineer.
B. Wetlands must not be drained or filled, wholly or partially, unless replaced by either restoring or creating wetland areas of at least equal public value.
Compensation, including the replacement ratio and quality of replacement, should be consistent with the requirements outlined in the rules adopted by
the Board of Water and Soil Resources to implement the Wetland Conservation Act of 1991, as amended.
C. Work in and around wetlands must be guided by the following principles in descending order of priority:
1. Avoid both the direct and indirect impact of the activity that may destroy or diminish the wetland.
2. Minimize the impact by limiting the degree or magnitude of the wetland related activity and its implementation.
3. Rectify the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected wetland environment with one of at least equal public value.
4. Reduce or eliminate the adverse impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the activity.
5. Compensate for the impact by replacing or providing approved substitute wetland resources or environments.
D. A protective buffer of natural vegetation at least twenty feet (20') wide from the delineated edge at the time of development shall surround all wetlands
within parcels preliminarily platted, developed, or redeveloped after October 14, 2002. The City Engineer may require a larger buffer than the minimum
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 231/497
based upon site specific design issues. The design criteria should follow common principles and the example of nearby natural areas. The site should
be examined for existing buffer zones and mimic the slope structure and vegetation as much as possible.
1. Grading, construction, or vegetation alteration/disturbance within this buffer is prohibited.
2. Buffer design and protection during construction shall accomplish any or all of the following:
a. Slow water runoff.
b. Enhance water infiltration.
c. Trap sediment, fertilizers, pathogens, heavy metals, blowing snow and soil, and act as corridors for wildlife.
d. Drain tiles shall be identified and rendered inoperable.
3. The wetland and buffer shall be platted as an outlot deeded to the City.
E. Basins established for stormwater drainage purposes are exempt from the provisions of this section. (Ord. 2019-06, 2-25-2019)
10-8-12: EASEMENTS:
All easements shall be dedicated by appropriate language on the final plat as required by law and provisions of this title.
A. Drainage And Utility Easements: Easements of a minimum of ten feet (10') wide or a width equal to the required side yard setback established by the
respective zoning district in which the property is located, whichever is least, centered on rear and other lot lines, shall be provided for drainage and for
public and private utilities. Lot easements shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') when no easement exists on the adjoining parcels. When it is not
practical to center easements, the fully required easement width may be required along one property line. Said easements shall have continuity of
alignment from block to block. The easements, when approved, shall not thereafter be changed without the approval of the City Council pursuant to
established City Code procedures, as amended.
B. Drainage Easements: Easements shall be provided along each side of the centerline of any natural watercourse or drainage channel to a width
sufficient to provide proper maintenance and protection and to provide for stormwater runoff. Where necessary, drainage easements corresponding
with lot lines shall be provided. Such easements for drainage purposes shall not be less than twenty feet (20') in width or a width equal to the required
side yard setback established by the respective zoning district in which the property is located, whichever is less.
C. Sight Easements: Sight easements beyond required zoning setback regulations may be required by the City, Wright County, and/or Minnesota
Department of Transportation to protect major intersections on the street and highway system.
D. Outlot Alternative: For single- and two-family lot subdivisions not platted as base and unit lots or for other land uses as determined by the City,
stormwater basins, drainageways, wetlands, and wetland buffers water bodies or other natural features subject to dedication of easements in
accordance with this chapter shall instead be included within outlots having access to a public street as determined necessary by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 2019-06, 2-25-2019)
10-8-13: PROTECTED AREAS:
A. Where land proposed for subdivision is deemed environmentally sensitive by the City, due to the existence of wetlands, drainageways, watercourses,
floodable areas, vegetation, or steep slopes, the design of said subdivision shall clearly reflect all necessary measures of protection to ensure against
adverse environmental impact.
B. Based upon the necessity to control and maintain certain sensitive areas, the City shall determine whether said protection will be accomplished through
lot enlargement and redesign or dedication of those sensitive areas in the form of outlots.
C. In general, measures of protection shall include design solutions that allow for construction and grading involving a minimum of alteration to sensitive
areas. Such measures, when deemed appropriate by the City, may include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
1. The enlargement of lots or redesign of the subdivision.
2. The establishment of buffers designed consistent with adopted management plans, easements and/or outlots over wetlands, drainageways and
watercourses.
3. The implementation of flood control measures, including stormwater basins and infiltration design standards as specified in adopted management
plans.
4. The submission of a tree preservation plan subject to the review of the Parks, Recreation, and Natural Resources Committee and the approval of the
City Council.
5. The utilization of appropriate erosion control measures subject to approval by the City Engineer.
6. Soil testing to determine the ability of the proposed subdivision to support development.
7. The limitation of development on slopes steeper than four-to-one (4:1), except where slopes of three-to-one (3:1) are approved by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 2019-06, 2-25-2019)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 232/497
10-8-14: TREE PRESERVATION:
The following process for preserving significant trees shall be required for subdivisions:
A. Preserve Healthy Trees: Subdividers and home builders on custom graded lots are encouraged to preserve all healthy trees of significant value even if
the trees are less than six inches (6") in diameter.
B. Subdividers:
1. Subdividers shall:
a. Prepare a tree preservation plan which shall be incorporated on the grading plan.
b. Ensure the tree preservation plan is followed during the plan development (mass grading).
c. Submit a five hundred dollar ($500.00) security for the preparation of individual lot tree preservation plans for each mass graded lot with at least
one significant tree to be saved and for each custom graded lot with at least one significant tree. The security will be included in the development
contract.
2. The tree preservation plan must be certified by a forester or landscape architect indicating on the plan the following items:
a. Mass graded areas.
b. Custom graded lots approved as part of the overall grading and drainage plans.
c. Size, species, and location of all significant trees within the construction areas impacted by grading.
d. Identification of all significant trees proposed to be saved and significant trees proposed to be removed.
e. Measures proposed to protect significant trees shall include, but are not limited to:
(1) Installation of snow fencing or polyethylene laminar safety netting at the drip line.
(2) Placing fill against the trunk of the tree, on the root crown, and under the drip line of the tree shall be prohibited.
(3) Installation of erosion control measures.
(4) Prevention of change in soil chemistry due to concrete washout and leakage or spillage of toxic materials such as fuels or paints.
(5) Pruning of oak trees must not take place from April 15 through July 1. If wounding of oak trees occurs, a nontoxic tree wound dressing must be
applied immediately. Excavators must have a nontoxic tree wound dressing with them on the development site.
3. During preliminary plat review, the tree preservation plan will be reviewed according to the best available layout to preserve significant trees and the
efforts of the subdivider to mitigate damage to significant trees. If two (2) or more trees are preserved on each lot (preferably the front yard of the lot),
the landscape plan requirements of two (2) 2-inch caliper trees is waived.
4. The subdivider shall provide a financial guarantee as part of the development contract to ensure protection of all significant trees which were to have
been saved but were actually destroyed or damaged. The subdivider shall provide a financial security for each mass graded lot with at least one
significant tree to be saved and a financial security for each custom graded lot with at least one significant tree as part of the development contract to
ensure tree protection. The financial security, generally one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per lot, will be determined by the Zoning Administrator
based on the number and size of trees to be saved. The security will be included in the erosion control section of the development contract.
5. After the mass grading has been completed and streets and utilities installed, the forester or landscape architect shall:
a. Certify in writing to the City the tree preservation plan was followed.
b. Certify in writing to the City the tree protection measures were installed.
c. Indicate which significant trees proposed to be saved have been destroyed or damaged.
6. If a significant tree indicated to be saved on the tree preservation plan is destroyed or damaged, the tree replacement policy will be enforced by the
City in accordance with subsection D of this section.
7. The financial security will be released upon:
a. Certification in writing by the forester or landscape architect indicating that tree protection measures were installed on mass graded lots and tree
replacement is completed; and/or
b. The builders have posted security for the custom graded lots. The location of the trees being replaced will be determined on the individual lot tree
preservation plan.
8. Tree preservation measures shall require written approval from the City Engineer prior to removal and shall not be removed from the site until the
City Engineer has approved the grading as built plans for a mass graded site nor prior to the release of financial securities held by the City.
C. Home Builders On Custom Graded Lots:
1. The City will require an individual lot tree preservation plan prepared and incorporated on the required site survey for each custom graded lot with at
least one significant tree. The plan shall be consistent with the original tree preservation plan for the plat. The homeowner, builder and the forest or
landscape architect shall meet prior to the development of the individual lot tree preservation plan to determine the placement of the home where the
fewest significant trees would be destroyed or damaged. The builder will be responsible for ensuring the tree preservation plan is followed during
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 233/497
building construction. On mass graded lots with at least one significant tree to be saved, builders are required to follow the tree preservation plan for
the plat.
2. The individual lot tree preservation plan must be certified by a forester or landscape architect and signed by the homeowner in accordance with the
provisions outlined in subsection B2 of this section.
3. Home builders will be required to furnish the following items for tree preservation at the time the building permit application is submitted for all lots
with at least one significant tree:
a. Security of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per lot per tree for protection requirements.
b. Certification from a forester or landscape architect indicating tree protection measures are installed.
c. Builders are liable for subcontractors which destroy or damage significant trees which were indicated to be saved on the individual lot tree
preservation plan.
4. Building inspectors will monitor the tree protection measures at the time of routine inspections.
5. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and release of tree preservation security, the forester or landscape architect shall certify to the City
in writing that all the tree protection measures identified on the tree preservation plan were installed from the start of construction to the end of
construction and tree replacement is completed, is necessary.
D. Tree Replacement Policy:
1. Subdividers and builders shall be required to replace the significant trees which were indicated on the tree preservation plan to be saved but
ultimately were destroyed or damaged. The subdivider and builder shall be required to replace each of the significant trees destroyed or damaged
with two (2) replacement trees. Replacement trees must consist of nursery stock and be no less than the following sizes:
a. Deciduous trees: No less than two inches (2") in diameter.
b. Coniferous trees: No less than six feet (6') high.
2. Replacement trees shall be species similar to the trees which were destroyed or damaged and can include those species shown on the following
table:
Deciduous trees:
Birch
Ginkgo (male only)
Green ash
Hackberry
Honey locust
Kentucky coffee tree
Linden (Basswood)
Maple
Oak
Coniferous trees:
Austrian pine Pinus nigra
Black Hills spruce Picea abies
Colorado blue and green spruce Picea pungens
Fir Abie (all varieties)/pseudotsuga
White pine Pinus strobus
3. Replacement trees shall not be placed on easements or street rights-of-way. If tree replacement is required on the individual lot because the builder
destroyed or damaged a tree which was to be saved, the forester or landscape architect shall determine where the replacement trees shall be
installed. (Ord. 2019-06, 2-25-2019)
10-8-15: PARK DEDICATION:
A. Dedication: As a condition of subdivision approval, subdividers shall dedicate a reasonable portion of the buildable land, excluding only existing
wetlands and right-of-way for arterial or collector roadways, in the proposed subdivision for conservation purposes or for public use as parks,
recreational facilities as defined and outlined in Minnesota Statutes section 471.191, playgrounds, trails, wetlands, or open space; provided that the
City may choose to accept an equivalent amount in cash for part or all of the portion required to be dedicated based on the fair market value of the land
at the time of final approval.
Common Name Scientific Name
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 234/497
B. Suitability: The land dedicated for parks and trails shall be in addition to property dedicated for streets, easements, or other public ways. Land to be
dedicated shall be reasonably suitable for its intended use as determined by the City and shall be at a location convenient to the public to be served.
Factors used in evaluating the adequacy of proposed park and recreation areas shall include size, shape, topography, geology, hydrology, tree cover,
access and location. Areas of wetlands, ponding areas, and drainageways accepted by the City shall not be considered in the park land dedicated to
the City.
C. Recommendation: The applicant shall confer with City staff and the Parks and Recreation Commission at the time the preliminary plat is under
consideration, to secure a recommendation as to the location of any property that should be dedicated to the public, such as parks, playgrounds or
other public property. The preliminary plat shall show the location and dimensions of all areas to be dedicated in this manner. Such contribution
requirement recommendation(s) will be sent to the Planning Commission for review and comment and subsequently to the City Council for their
approval.
D. Proposed Park, Playground, Recreational Area Or Other Public Ground: When a proposed park, playground, recreational area, or other public ground
has been indicated in the City's official map or Comprehensive Plan and is located in whole or in part within a proposed plat, it shall be dedicated to the
appropriate governmental unit. If the applicant elects not to dedicate an area in excess of the land required hereunder for a proposed public site that
the City feels is in the public interest to acquire, the City may consider acquiring the excess land through purchase or condemnation.
E. Requirements: Land area conveyed or dedicated to the City shall not be used in calculating density requirements of the City zoning ordinance and shall
be in addition to and not in lieu of open space requirements for planned unit developments.
F. Private Open Space: Where private open space for park and recreation purposes is provided in a proposed subdivision, such areas shall not be used for
credit against the requirement of dedication for park and recreation purposes, unless the City Council finds it is in the public interest to do so.
G. Cash Contribution: The City, upon consideration of the particular type of development, may require that a lesser parcel of land should be dedicated due
to particular features of the development. In such cases, a cash contribution shall be required above the land dedication to ensure that compensation is
received for the full amount of the impact on the City's park and trail system.
H. Land Dedication:
1. In residential subdivisions where land dedication is to be required, the following table will be used to determine the dedication requirement:
Density (Units Per
Buildable Acre)
Land Dedication
Percentage
0.00 to less than 2.39 10
2.40 to less than 4.79 13
4.80 to less than 7.99 17
8.00 and over 20
2. In all commercial, industrial or institutional subdivisions where land dedication is required, ten percent (10%) of the buildable area of the land being
subdivided shall be dedicated for public parks, trails, or open space.
I. Fee In Lieu Of Land: When a subdivision is proposed, the developer shall make a dedication of land for public park use, or the City may require a fee as
set forth in section 3-1-2 of this Code in lieu of such land dedication, which is the City's best estimate of the effect of the subdivision on the City's park
system.
J. City May Elect: The City may elect, at its sole discretion, to receive land, a cash fee in lieu of land, or a combination of cash, land, and development of
the land for park use. The potential cash donation generated by the dedicated land and/or the value of the development of land shall be calculated.
That amount shall be subtracted from the cash contribution required by subsection I of this section.
K. Planned Unit Developments: Planned unit developments with mixed land uses shall make cash and/or land contributions in accordance with this section
based upon the percentage of land devoted to the various uses.
L. Timing: Park cash contributions are to be calculated and established at the time of final plat approval. The Council may require the payment at the time
of final plat approval or at a later time under terms agreed upon in the development agreement. Delayed payment may include interest at a rate set by
the City.
M. Cash Contributions: Cash contributions for parks and trails shall only be used for park acquisition or development and trail acquisition or development
as determined by the City anywhere within the City park and trail systems.
N. Replatting: Property being replatted with the same number of lots and same number of dwelling units shall be exempt from all park land dedication
requirements. If the number of lots or the number of dwelling units is increased, or if land outside the previously recorded plat is added, then the park
land dedication and/or park cash contributions shall be based on the additional lots and on the additional land being added to the plat. If the additional
land does not create additional lots, then each one-third (1/3) acre added shall be considered a new lot for purposes of calculating the dedication
requirements.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 235/497
O. Maintenance: When land is dedicated and deeded to the City for park purposes, it shall be the responsibility of the City to maintain such dedicated
property.
P. Form: Land dedication to the City shall be in the form of lots or outlots as determined by the City.
Q. Option Of Study: If the applicant or developer does not believe that the estimates contained in this section fairly and accurately represent the effect of
the subdivision on the park or trail system of the City, the applicant or developer may request that the City prepare an in depth study of the effect of the
subdivision on the park and trail system and an estimate of that effect in money and/or land. All costs of such study shall be borne by the developer or
applicant. If the developer or applicant requests the preparation of such a study, the request must be made at the time the development application is
submitted. No application for development that is submitted shall be deemed complete until the requested study has been completed and a
determination is made as to the appropriate amount of land or money necessary to offset the effects of the subdivision. (Ord. 2019-06, 2-25-2019)
10-8-16: MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE OPEN SPACE:
In the event certain land areas or structures are provided within the subdivision for private recreational use or as service facilities, the owner of such land
and buildings shall enter into an agreement with the City to assure the continued operation and maintenance to a predetermined reasonable standard.
These common areas may be placed under the ownership of one of the following depending upon which is most appropriate:
A. Dedicated to the public where a communitywide use would be anticipated;
B. Applicant's ownership and control; or
C. Property owners' association ownership and control, provided all of the following conditions are met:
1. The property owners' association must be established prior to the sale of any lot;
2. Membership must be mandatory for each owner and any successor in interest;
3. The open space restrictions must be in perpetuity not for a given period of years;
4. The association must be responsible for liability insurance, local taxes and the maintenance of the recreational area and facilities;
5. Landowners (homeowners) must pay their prorated share of the cost and any assessment levied by the association that can become a lien on the
property in accordance with law; and
6. The association must be able to adjust the assessment to meet changed needs. (Ord. 2019-06, 2-25-2019)
10-8-17: MINIMUM DESIGN FEATURES:
The design features set forth in this chapter are minimum requirements. The City may impose additional or more stringent requirements concerning lot
size, streets, and overall design as deemed appropriate considering the property being subdivided based upon site considerations and the Comprehensive
Plan. (Ord. 2019-06, 2-25-2019)
Chapter 9
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
10-9-1: MONUMENTS:
A. Monuments shall be placed at all block and lot corners, angle points, points of curves in streets and at intermediate points as shall be required by the
City. Monuments shall be metal and shall be placed by a registered engineer or registered land surveyor. Monument placement shall meet the current
accepted standards of practice for surveying including the Wright County surveyor requirements.
B. All lot corners and survey control monuments shall be set and in place at the time the plat is recorded. An exception to this requirement may be granted
for up to one year by the City Council, provided such approval is made part of the development contract and a financial guarantee in a form determined
by the City Attorney is provided.
C. Stakes showing the locations of easements shall be provided by the applicant upon request of the City. The stakes shall be wood laths and will be used
only to ensure the proper location of utilities on the easements. The stakes shall not be intended to be permanent survey monuments. (Prior Code
§ 21-8-1)
10-9-2: STREETS AND ALLEYS:
A. Grading: The full width of the right-of-way of each street and alley dedicated in the plat shall be cleared and graded in accordance with the plan
approved by the City Engineer. Boulevards shall be graded to an approved gross slope not less than two percent (2%) nor more than six percent (6%).
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 236/497
B. Paving: All streets and alleys shall be improved with a concrete or bituminous surface. Streets to be paved shall be surfaced for a nine (9) ton axle
weight capacity using current Minnesota Highway Department design standards and in accordance with City standard design detail plates. Streets not
to be paved shall be improved in accordance with the City standards. No building permit shall be issued for any lot or parcel in a subdivision prior to the
installation of the first lift (wearing course) of bituminous surfacing or concrete surfacing on the streets thereof. Exceptions to this subsection may be
granted by the City Council at their discretion as part of a development contract.
C. Soil Investigation:
1. To determine subgrade soils classification and bearing capacity of the soils in the proposed development, a soil investigation report shall be
prepared under the supervision of a soils engineer associated with a qualified soils testing service.
2. Report of the results of the soils investigation shall be provided to the City Engineer. The report shall contain the design recommendation for street
section based on nine (9) ton design. In proposed streets, soils investigation shall be performed at intervals not to exceed three hundred (300) linear
feet. The soil borings completed during the investigation shall be at least ten feet (10') in depth below the proposed finished grade. Groundwater
levels shall be reported at each boring. Elevations shall be in mean sea level datum. Locations of borings shall be measured in the field and
accurately shown on the plans.
D. Concrete Curb And Gutter: All curb shall be concrete with integral gutter. The standard curb shall be vertical face (type B-6-18) in accordance with City
standard design templates. In new residential developments where access locations to lots are not known, a surmountable curb in accordance with
City standard design templates may be used subject to the approval of the City Council if the radius of curvature of the street is two hundred feet (200')
or larger and except at intersections and catch basin inlets.
E. Boulevards: All boulevards shall have four inches (4") of topsoil (black dirt) placed on them and then shall be sodded or seeded. (Prior Code § 21-8-2)
10-9-3: SIDEWALKS:
Sidewalks shall be concrete, a minimum of five feet (5') in width, and shall be constructed in accordance with the City standard design detail plates. (Prior
Code § 21-8-3)
10-9-4: PUBLIC UTILITIES:
A. Water Mains:
1. Water main size shall be a minimum of six inches (6") in diameter. Water main size up to eight inches (8") may be utilized as a standard along with a
minimum distribution size of six inches (6"). Water main shall be ductile iron pipe and shall meet all the requirements of the City Engineer's
Association of Minnesota Standard Utility Specification for Water Main and Service Line Installation and American Water Works Association
standard. (Prior Code § 21-8-4; amd. 2018 Code)
2. Mains shall be valved at intervals not to exceed eight hundred feet (800'). Wedge gate valves shall be installed as main valves. Valves shall also be
installed at street intersections and branches in the distribution system or in locations as determined by the City Engineer.
3. "Dead end" mains shall be looped if exceeding the allowed length of a cul-de-sac. The distribution system may require installing a larger main to
benefit the entire water service in the City. The City Engineer shall determine the location and size of a main larger than six inches (6") or eight
inches (8") in residential areas. In commercial/industrial areas, a water main up to twelve inches (12") may be required to meet normal distribution
required in the development. The cost of normal distribution size and appurtenances shall be the responsibility of the developer. Size of pipe over
and above the normal shall be installed and financed in accordance with City policy.
B. Fire Hydrants:
1. Installation shall be pursuant to plans approved by the City Engineer and local firefighting authority and shall be located in accordance with
Insurance Service Office (ISO) standards.
2. Hydrants shall be placed at the end of all "dead ends" and cul-de-sacs and at intersections. All hydrants shall have wedge gate valves and shall be
easily accessible to firefighting personnel and equipment. The single hydrant style shall be throughout the distribution system and that type is shown
on the City standard plates.
C. Sanitary Sewers:
1. Sanitary sewers shall be a minimum of eight inch (8") pipe and shall be of a material approved for use in the City by the City Engineer. Sanitary
sewer grades and installation shall conform to the Recommended Standards for Sewage Works, latest edition, by the Great Lakes - Upper
Mississippi River Board of State Sanitary Engineers and the City Engineer's Association of Minnesota Standard Utilities Specification for Sanitary
Sewer. Main size will be determined by the sewage flow and grade in accordance with the City Sanitary Sewer Comprehensive Plan.
2. Size of pipe shall be determined by lateral service and/or trunk service. Trunk service shall be the responsibility of the property served, and the City
Council shall establish cost distribution policy. Lateral service shall be the responsibility of the property serviced, and cost shall be borne by the
serviced property.
3. Sanitary sewer service shall be a minimum of four inches (4") and shall be installed in accordance with the City's standard detail templates.
D. House Services: Each house service shall be run from the main to the property line, where a cap or plug shall be placed until the service is extended to
the structure. A one inch (1") type K copper water service, or approved equal; corporation cock, curb box and stop; and four inch (4") PVC plastic pipe,
or approved equal, sewer service shall be the minimum requirements.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 237/497
E. As Built Drawings: Reproducible as built drawings showing all utilities and improvements shall be furnished to the City by the applicant of all required
improvements in developments where the applicant has been responsible for improvements. Such as built drawings shall be certified to be true and
accurate by the registered engineer responsible for the installation of the improvements. (Prior Code § 21-8-4)
10-9-5: SANITATION:
Water and sewer lines shall be installed and connected to the public system to serve all lots within the proposed subdivision under the provisions of
applicable statutes and ordinances. The City Council shall require the installation of water and sewer mains, at the applicant's expense or under the
provisions of applicable statutes and ordinances, unless said applicant can prove to the City Council that extension of the existing water system is not
feasible in the development of the subdivision and that adequate water facilities will be otherwise provided, in which case, the Council may permit the
installation of individual wells. (Prior Code § 21-8-5)
10-9-6: WATER SUPPLY:
An individual well, if permitted by the City Council, shall be constructed in accordance with the Minnesota State Well Code. The applicant shall provide
evidence that lots proposed for individual wells will have a good chance of securing an adequate supply of potable water. (Prior Code § 21-8-6)
10-9-7: SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
A. All residential, commercial and industrial units within the sanitary sewer service area as defined in the Comprehensive Plan shall be served by sanitary
sewer and shall be connected to the public collection and treatment facilities.
B. When a subdivision will be able to be served by sanitary sewer within six (6) years, the City may require that sewer mains and service connections be
installed within the subdivision and the entire system connected to a temporary, private central sewage treatment mechanism. The cost for such
improvements is to be borne by the applicant.
C. In areas being developed for building sites with lots totaling twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or more for soil absorption sewage disposal and the
City does not have plans to provide public sewer and water within six (6) years, individual on site sewage disposal systems may be provided for each
lot.
D. There shall be no overflow outlets from septic tanks or seepage pits allowing effluent to flow to any waterway, drainageway or roadside ditch.
E. The applicant or owner shall be required to provide appropriate soil borings and percolation tests in order to determine proper sewage system design.
Where on site residential sewer systems are to be installed, the rules and regulations of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, Minnesota Individual
Sewage Treatment Systems Standards (Minnesota Rules chapter 7080), as amended.
F. Any means or methods of sewage disposal including septic tanks and seepage pits in the subdivision shall be allowed to exist only if in compliance with
FEMA rules and regulations, requirements of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, and Minnesota Rules 7080, as amended. (Prior Code § 21-8-7)
10-9-8: DRAINAGE:
All surface and underground drainage systems shall be installed by the applicant to adequately remove all natural drainage that accumulates on the
developed property. All such systems shall provide complete removal and a permanent solution for the removal of drainage water and shall be subject to
City review and approval. (Prior Code § 21-8-8)
10-9-9: BUILDING SITE IMPROVEMENTS FOR FLOOD PRONE AREAS:
A. No lot will be sold or building constructed in an area subject to flood prior to completion of all flood protection works or measures planned for such lot
and necessary facilities.
B. No subdivision shall be approved for floodway areas if anticipated levees, fill, structures or other features will individually or collectively increase flood
flows or damages. The City Council shall reasonably assume an equal degree of encroachment on the opposite side of the watercourse in calculating
possible effects of the proposed uses.
C. New building sites for any structures, residences, motels, resorts and all manufactured home parks/subdivisions, and similar uses for human occupation
shall not be permitted in floodway areas. These uses may be permitted outside the floodway if building sites are filled to a height not more than one
foot (1') above the regulatory flood protection elevation for the particular area. Required fill areas must extend fifteen feet (15') beyond the limits of
extended structures. If the subdivision is not to be serviced with sewer, it must include areas for on site waste disposal at or above the flood protection
elevation in accordance with FEMA rules and regulations.
D. Building sites for structures other than those used for human occupancy outside of floodway areas shall ordinarily be filled as provided above. However,
the City Council may allow subdivision of areas for commercial and industrial use at a lower elevation if the applicant protects the areas to the
regulatory flood protection elevation by levees, floodwalls, channel modifications or other protective techniques, or if the applicant agrees to protect
uses through structural floodproofing, flood warning systems or other techniques specified in this title.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 238/497
E. Should the City Council determine that only a part of a proposed plat can be safely developed, it shall limit development to that part and require that the
specifications for development be consistent with its determination.
F. When someone other than the applicant intends to develop the plat, and the City Council determines that additional use controls are required to ensure
safe development, it may require the applicant to impose appropriate deed restrictions on the land. Such deed restrictions shall be inserted in every
deed and noted on the face of the final recorded plat. (Prior Code § 21-8-9)
10-9-10: UNDERGROUND UTILITIES:
Except as expressly allowed by the City, all utilities shall be placed underground. All underground work shall be completed prior to street surfacing. All
utility lines for telephone and electrical service shall be placed in rear line easements when carried on overhead poles. (Prior Code § 21-8-10)
10-9-11: STREET LIGHTING:
The minimum requirement for street lighting facilities shall be one (1) 8,000-lumen light, or equal, at each street intersection within or abutting the
subdivision. At least one streetlight shall be erected within blocks having a length of nine hundred feet (900') or greater, and no streetlight shall be located
within two hundred fifty feet (250') of another streetlight except for white way areas. Light standards shall be approved by the City. (Prior Code § 21-8-11)
10-9-12: INSPECTIONS:
All required improvements shall be inspected by the City Engineer or City approved consultant during construction, at the expense of the applicant. (Prior
Code § 21-8-12)
10-9-13: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the City building official for any building in the subdivision prior to all improvements outlined in the
development contract having been installed. Exceptions to this provision may be granted by the City Council at their discretion as part of the development
contract. (Prior Code § 21-8-13)
Chapter 10
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS
10-10-1: IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED:
Prior to the approval of a final plat by the City Council, the applicant shall have agreed, in the manner set forth below, to install the following improvements
on the site, in conformity with approved construction plans and in conformity with all applicable standards and ordinances:
A. Monuments: Monuments are to be placed in the subdivision in accordance with section 10-9-1 of this title.
B. Grading: The full width of the right-of-way of each street dedicated in the plat shall be cleared and graded as outlined in subsection 10-9-2A of this title.
C. Pavement: All streets and alleys shall be improved with concrete or bituminous surface, except as may be approved by action of the City Council as
part of a development contract. Pavement standards are outlined in subsection 10-9-2B of this title.
D. Curb And Gutter: There shall be concrete curb and gutter installed along both sides of all streets and alleys to the standards listed in subsection 10-9-
2D of this title. Alleys may be exempt upon approval by the City Engineer.
E. Water Mains: In the case where mains from a public water system are available, the applicant shall be required to install water mains in the plat and
connect the same to the public water system.
F. Public Sanitary Sewer: In all cases where trunk line sanitary sewer facilities are available, the applicant shall be required to install sanitary sewers in the
plat and connect the same to the trunk line sewers.
G. Drainage Facilities: Drainage facilities and easements shall be installed under City approval as will adequately provide for the drainage of surface
waters, and a storm sewer system may be required. Drainageway easements or land dedication may be required when such easements or land is
needed in the public interest for purposes of floodplain management, proper drainage, prevention of erosion, pedestrian access to water bodies, or
other public purpose.
H. Miscellaneous Facilities: Tree planting, street name signs, traffic control signs, oversized utility trunk lines, pedestrianways, bikeways, pavement
marking and other improvements may be required. (Prior Code § 21-9-1)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 239/497
10-10-2: CONSTRUCTION PLANS, INSPECTION AND WARRANTY:
A. Construction Plans: Construction plans for the required improvements conforming in all respects with the standards and ordinances of the City shall be
prepared at the applicant's expense by a professional engineer who is registered in the State of Minnesota, and said plans shall contain professional
certification. Such plans, together with the quantities of construction items, shall be submitted to the City Engineer for approval and for an estimate of
the total costs of the required improvements. Upon approval, such plans shall become a part of the required written agreement. The tracings of the
plans approved by the engineer, plus two (2) prints, shall be furnished to the City to be filed as a public record.
B. Inspections: All required improvements on the site that are to be installed under the provisions of this title shall be inspected during the course of
construction by the City Engineer at the applicant's expense, and acceptance by the City shall be subject to the City Engineer's certificate of
compliance with the contract.
C. Warranty: The applicant and/or developer shall provide to the City a written warranty that all required improvements on the site meet or exceed all City
standards and that such improvements have been inspected and tested in regards to the City standards. The applicant and/or developer shall be
responsible for having all such inspections and testing completed at their expense. (Prior Code § 21-9-2)
10-10-3: PAYMENT FOR INSTALLATION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
The required improvements as listed elsewhere are to be furnished and installed at the sole expense of the applicant. If any improvement installed within
the subdivision will be of substantial benefit to lands beyond the boundaries of the subdivision, provision may be made for causing a portion of the cost of
the improvement, representing the benefit to such lands, to be allocated in accordance with City policies. (Prior Code § 21-9-3)
10-10-4: IMPROVEMENT INSTALLATION AGREEMENTS:
A. Private Installation:
1. Prior to the installation of any required improvements by the applicant and prior to approval of the plat, the applicant shall enter into an agreement in
writing with the City requiring the applicant/developer to furnish and construct said improvements at their sole cost and in accordance with plans and
specifications and usual contract conditions. This shall include provision for supervision of details of construction by the City Engineer and shall grant
to the City Engineer authority to coordinate the work and improvements to be done under said contract by any subcontractor authorized to proceed
thereunder and with any other work being done or contracted by the City in the vicinity. The agreement shall require all public and private utility
material standards and installation requirements be met and shall be approved by the City Engineer.
2. The agreement shall require the applicant to make an escrow deposit or furnish an irrevocable letter of credit or a certified check as is determined by
the City. The amount of the deposit or penal amount of the security is to be based on the City Engineer's estimate of the total cost of the
improvements to be furnished under the contract, including the cost of inspection. The deposit or penal amount shall equal one hundred percent
(100%) of the City Engineer's estimate.
3. On request of the applicant, but at the sole discretion of the City, the contract may provide for completion of part or all of the improvements covered
thereby prior to acceptance of the plat. In such event, and if evidence is presented that the described work and improvements have been paid for, the
amount of the deposit or bond may be reduced in a sum equal to the estimated cost of the improvements so completed prior to the acceptance of the
plat.
4. The time for completion of the work and the several parts thereof shall be determined by the City Council, upon recommendation of the engineer
after consultation with the applicant. It shall be reasonable with relation to the work to be done, the seasons of the year, and proper coordination with
construction activities in the plat and subdivision.
5. Improvements shall be constructed only in platted real estate.
6. No applicant/developer shall be permitted to start work on any other subdivision improvements without special written approval of the City Council.
(Prior Code § 21-9-4)
B. Installation By City:
1. Any person desiring to have utility and street improvements installed may request the City to install them, subject to the following conditions and to
the approval and authorization thereof by the City Council and as authorized by State law.
2. If so approved by the City Council, the person requesting the installation of said utility and street improvements shall supply a security approved by
the City running to the City guaranteeing payment for the installation of the improvements in an amount based on the City Engineer's estimate of the
total cost of the improvements to be installed. The deposit or penal amount shall equal one hundred percent (100%) of the City Engineer's estimate
of the cost of installation of the improvements. The security to be supplied the City shall be payable on such terms and conditions as found by the
City Council to be reasonable and necessary to ensure that the costs of the improvements are properly secured and paid.
3. Improvements shall be constructed only in platted real estate.
4. The provisions of this subsection do not apply to any improvement installed in a platted block upon which at least fifty percent (50%) of the lots
thereof have a dwelling or other building constructed and occupied.
5. No applicant/developer shall be permitted to start work on any other subdivision improvements without special approval of the City Council. (Prior
Code § 21-9-5)
10-10-5: FINANCIAL GUARANTEE:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 240/497
The contracts provided in section 10-10-4 of this chapter shall require the applicant to make an escrow deposit or provide a certified check or irrevocable
letter of credit as determined by the City. The escrow deposit, certified check or irrevocable letter of credit shall conform to the requirements of this section.
A. Escrow Deposit Or Certified Check:
1. If an escrow deposit or certified check is required, the escrow deposit or certified check shall be made with the City Treasurer in a sum equal to the
total costs calculated as provided in section 10-10-4 of this chapter, as estimated by the City for all the improvements to be furnished and installed by
the applicant pursuant to the contract, which have not been completed prior to approval of the plat. The total costs shall include costs of inspection
by the City.
2. The City shall be entitled to reimburse itself out of said deposit or check for any cost and expense incurred by the City for completion of the work in
case of default of the applicant under said contract, and for any damages sustained on account of any breach thereof.
3. Upon completion of the work and termination of any liability, the balance remaining in said deposit or check from this subsection A shall be refunded
to the applicant.
B. Irrevocable Letter Of Credit:
1. If the applicant is required to furnish an irrevocable letter of credit, the penal sum shall be payable to the order of the City and delivered to the City in
an amount calculated as provided in section 10-10-4 of this chapter, as estimated by the City Engineer, of all the improvements to be furnished and
installed by the applicant pursuant to the contract, which have not been completed prior to the approval of the plat. The total costs shall include costs
of inspection by the City.
2. The irrevocable letter of credit shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney and filed with the City Clerk.
3. The City shall be entitled to reimburse itself out of said letter of credit for any cost and expense incurred by the City for completion of the work in
case of default of the applicant under said contract, and for any damages sustained on account of any breach thereof. (Prior Code § 21-9-6)
10-10-6: IMPROVEMENTS COMPLETED PRIOR TO APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT:
Improvements within a subdivision which have been completed prior to application for approval of the final plat, or execution of the contract for installation
of the required improvements, shall be accepted as equivalent improvements in compliance with these requirements only if the City Engineer certifies that
the existing improvements conform to applicable standards and is evidence of payment for the work that has been completed is presented in such form as
the City reasonably requires. (Prior Code § 21-9-7)
10-10-7: TRUNK FACILITIES:
Where a larger size water main, sanitary sewer, storm drain or similar facility is required to serve areas outside the subdivision, the larger facility required
shall be constructed. Additional costs shall be allocated pursuant to established City policies. (Prior Code § 21-9-8)
10-10-8: ALTERNATE INSTALLATION:
The City may elect to install any or all of the required improvements pursuant to a cash escrow agreement or other financial arrangements with the
applicant. (Prior Code § 21-9-9)
Title 11
ZONING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
PURPOSE; AUTHORITY; APPLICATION, INTERPRETATION AND COMPLIANCE
11-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited as the ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF OTSEGO. (Prior Code § 20-1-1)
11-1-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this title is to promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare, by regulating the location and size of buildings and other
structures; the percentage of a lot which may be occupied; the size of yards and other open spaces; the density and distribution of population; the uses of
buildings and structures for trade, industry, residence, recreation, public activities or other purposes; and the use of land for trade, industry, residence,
recreation, agriculture, forestry, soil conservation, water supply conservation, conservation of shorelands, flood control and other purposes, and
establishing standards and procedures regulating such uses. (Prior Code § 20-1-2)
11-1-3: RELATION TO COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 241/497
It is the policy of the City that the enforcement, amendment, and administration of this title be accomplished with due consideration of the
recommendations contained in the City Comprehensive Plan as developed and amended from time to time by the Planning Commission and City Council.
The City Council recognizes the City Comprehensive Plan as the policy for guiding land use and development in accordance with the policies and purpose
herein set forth. (Prior Code § 20-1-3)
11-1-4: APPLICATION, INTERPRETATION AND COMPLIANCE:
A. More Restrictive Provisions To Govern: Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this title are either more restrictive or less restrictive than
comparable conditions imposed by any other law, ordinance, code, statute, resolution or regulation, the regulations which are more restrictive or
impose higher standards or requirements shall prevail.
B. Minimum Requirements: The standards set forth in this title are minimum requirements. The City may impose additional or more stringent zoning
requirements as deemed appropriate to promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the community.
C. Compliance With Provisions: No building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered, and no
building, structure or land shall be used for any purpose nor in any manner which is not in conformity with the provisions of this title and without a
building permit being issued when required by this Code.
D. Building Occupancy: Except as herein provided, no building, structure or premises shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building permit shall be
granted that does not conform to the requirements of this title.
E. Nonreduction Of Yards Or Lots: No yard or lot existing at effective date hereof shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements
set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date hereof shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this title.
F. Regulation Application: In their application, these regulations shall not abrogate any easement, covenant, or any other private agreement where such is
legally enforceable; provided, that where the regulations of this title are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such
easements, covenants, or other private agreements, the requirements of this title shall be controlling. (Prior Code § 20-1-4)
11-1-5: USES NOT PROVIDED WITHIN ZONING DISTRICTS:
Whenever in any zoning district a use is neither specifically permitted nor denied, the use shall be considered prohibited. In such cases, the City Council or
the Planning Commission, on their own initiative or upon application by a property owner, may conduct a study to determine if the use is acceptable and, if
so, what zoning district would be most appropriate and the determination as to conditions and standards relating to development of the use. The City
Council, Planning Commission, or property owner, upon receipt of the staff study shall, if appropriate, initiate an amendment to this title to provide for the
particular use under consideration or shall find that the use is not compatible for development within the City. (Prior Code § 20-1-5)
11-1-6: CONDITIONAL AND INTERIM USES:
Any established use or building legally existing prior to the effective date hereof and which is now classified as a conditional or interim use may be
continued in like fashion and activity and shall automatically be considered as having received conditional or interim use permit approval. Any change to
such a use, or any other subsequently approved conditional or interim use, shall, however, require a new conditional or interim use permit to be processed
according to this title. (Prior Code § 20-1-6)
11-1-7: SEPARABILITY:
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City that the several provisions of this title are separable in accordance with the following:
A. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this title to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions of this title
not specifically included in said judgment.
B. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this title to a particular property, building, or other structure,
such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other property, building, or structure not specifically included in said judgment.
(Prior Code § 20-1-7)
11-1-8: FEES, CHARGES, AND EXPENSES:
A. Fees And Charges: Fees and charges, as well as expenses incurred by the City for engineering, planning, attorney, and other services related to the
processing of applications required by this title, as well as for public hearings, special meetings, or other such City Council or Planning Commission
actions as are necessary to process applications, shall be as set out in section 3-1-2 of this Code.
B. Escrow: An escrow deposit required in section 3-1-2 of this Code shall be used for payment of all costs incurred for City in the processing of an
application required by this title:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 242/497
1. All costs incurred for City staff and consultants directly related to processing of an application required by this title including preparation of reports or
studies, attendance at staff or public meetings, and any other expenses incurred with processing of an application.
2. The property owner shall reimburse the escrow account for any deficits caused if the amount actually expended by or billed to the City exceeds the
fund balance.
3. The City shall refund any amount deposited in the escrow account not expended within ninety (90) calendar days after final action on the application.
C. Development Application: Fees, charges, and estimated expenses for the processing of a development application required by this title shall be
collected prior to City action on any application. The fees shall be deposited in City accounts. The applicant shall not be paid interest on the fees
required by this section.
D. Fees And Expenses To Be Paid: All fees and expenses incurred by the City are to be paid whether the application is approved or denied.
E. Owner Of The Property: The owner of the property subject to the application required by this title shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the City in
processing said application and enforcing the terms of any agreements relating to the application in accordance with Minnesota Statutes chapter
462.353, subd. 4a.
F. Unpaid Expenses:
1. All unpaid expenses incurred by the City under this Code not covered by the escrow will be charged against the property subject to the application
and will be the responsibility of the property owner pursuant to Minnesota Statutes chapter 462.353.
2. The property owner shall be invoiced for the City's costs to where Property Tax statements are sent by the County to be paid within thirty (30) days
of the date of the invoice.
3. Should the property owner not reimburse the City as required by this section, the City shall be authorized to certify said unreimbursed costs plus
interest to the County Auditor for payment with the property owner's Property Taxes with interest and said certified amounts shall constitute a lien
against the property that shall be collected and enforced in the same manner as general Property Taxes pursuant to Minnesota Statutes chapter
429.101. (Ord. 2019-04, 2-11-2019)
11-1-9: STATUTE AUTHORITY:
This title is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the Municipal Planning Act, Minnesota Statutes sections 462.351 to 462.363. (Prior Code § 20-1-
9)
Chapter 2
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
11-2-1: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION:
For the purposes of this title, certain terms and words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:
A. The word "person" includes an owner or representative of the owner, firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation as well
as an individual.
B. The present tense includes the future tense.
C. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive.
D. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
E. All measured distances expressed in feet shall be to the nearest tenth of a foot.
F. When calculating parking stall requirements, any fraction of a number shall constitute an additional parking space.
G. When calculating residential density, any fraction of a number shall not constitute an additional dwelling unit.
H. For terminology not defined in this chapter, the most current Webster's Dictionary shall be used to define such terms. (Prior Code § 20-2-1)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-07 - SMALL CELL WIRELESS FACILITIES . Go to new ordinance.
11-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 243/497
The following words and terms, when used in this title, shall have the following meanings:
ABUTTING: Making contact with or separated only by public right-of-way, railroad, public utility right-of-way or navigable waters.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE: A subordinate building or use which is located on the same lot on which the main building or use is situated and which
is reasonably necessary and incidental to the conduct of the primary use of such principal building or primary use.
ADDITION: Any physical enlargement of an existing structure.
ADJACENT: In close proximity to or neighboring, not necessarily abutting.
ADULT USES: Include adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult motion picture sales/rentals, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult massage
parlors, adult steam room/bathhouse/sauna facilities, adult companionship establishments, adult rap/conversation parlors, adult health/sport clubs, adult
cabarets, adult novelty businesses, adult motion picture arcades, adult modeling studios, adult hotels/motels, adult body painting studios, and other
premises, enterprises, establishments, businesses or places open to some or all members of the public, at or in which there is an emphasis on the
presentation, display, depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas which are capable of being seen by members of
the public. Activities classified as obscene, as defined by Minnesota Statutes section 617.241, as amended, are not included.
Adult Uses, Accessory: The offering of retail goods for sale which are classified as adult uses on a limited scale and which are incidental to the
primary activity and goods and/or services offered by the establishment. Examples of such items include the sale of adult magazines, the sale and/or
rental of adult motion pictures, the sale of adult novelties, and the like.
Adult Uses, Principal: The offering of goods and/or services which are classified as adult uses as a primary or sole activity of a business or
establishment and include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. Adult Use, Body Painting Studio: An establishment or business which provides the service of applying paint or other substance, whether
transparent or nontransparent, to or on the body of a patron when such body is wholly or partially nude in terms of specified anatomical areas.
B. Adult Use, Bookstore: A building or portion of a building used for the barter, rental or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides,
records, audio tape, videotape, or motion picture film if such building or portion of a building is not open to the public generally but only to one or
more classes of the public excluding any minor by reason of age or if a substantial or significant portion of such items are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
C. Adult Use, Cabaret: A building or portion of a building used for providing dancing or other live entertainment, if such building or portion of a
building excludes minors by virtue of age or if such dancing or other live entertainment is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the
presentation, display, depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
D. Adult Use, Companionship Establishment: A companionship establishment which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides the
service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion between an employee of the establishment and a customer, if such service is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
E. Adult Use, Conversation/Rap Parlor: A conversation/rap parlor which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides the service of
engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, or discussion, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
F. Adult Use, Health/Sport Club: A health/sport club which excludes minors by reason of age, or if such club is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
G. Adult Use, Hotel Or Motel: Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel from which minors are specifically excluded from patronage and wherein
material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
H. Adult Use, Massage Parlor, Health Club: A massage parlor or health club which restricts minors by reason of age, and which provides the
services of massage, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
I. Adult Use, Mini-Motion Picture Theater: A building or portion of a building with a capacity for less than fifty (50) persons used for presenting
material if such building or portion of a building, as a prevailing practice, excludes minors by virtue of age, or if such material is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
J. Adult Use, Modeling Studio: An establishment whose major business is the provision, to customers, of figure models who are so provided with
the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and who engage in specified sexual activities or display
specified anatomical areas while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted by
such customers.
K. Adult Use, Motion Picture Arcade: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin operated or slug operated or electronically,
electrically or mechanically controlled or operated still or motor picture machines, projectors or other image producing devices are maintained to
show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
L. Adult Use, Motion Picture Theater: A building or portion of a building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons used for presenting material if
such building or portion of a building, as a prevailing practice, excludes minors by virtue of age, or if such material is distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
M. Adult Use, Novelty Business: A business which has as a principal activity the sale of devices which stimulate human genitals or devices which
are designed for sexual stimulation.
N. Adult Use, Sauna: A sauna which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose
of bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided by the sauna is
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 244/497
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
O. Adult Use, Steam Room/Bathhouse Facility: A building or portion of a building used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for
the purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent if such building or
portion of a building restricts minors by reason of age or if the service provided by the steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Specified Anatomical Areas: A. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breast(s) below a
point immediately above the top of the areola; and
B. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
Specified Sexual Activities: A. Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical
stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a
sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio,
necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or
B. Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or
C. Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; or
D. Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breast; or
E. Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes, and who are
engaged in activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other physical restraint of any such persons; or
F. Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or
G. Human excretion, urination, menstruation or vaginal or anal irrigation.
AGRICULTURAL BUILDING: All buildings, other than dwellings and accessory garages, which are incidental for agricultural purposes, including, but not
limited to, barns, granaries, silos, farm implement storage buildings, and milk houses.
AGRICULTURAL PURPOSES: The raising, cultivation, drying, or storage of agricultural products for sale, or the storage of machinery or equipment used
in support of agricultural production by the same farm entity. For a property to be classified as agricultural based only on the drying or storage of
agricultural products, the products being dried or stored must have been produced by the same farm entity as the entity operating the drying or storage
facility.
ALLEY: A public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal access is
on a public street.
AMUSEMENT PARK: The permanent use of land for the purpose of providing a variety of amusement facilities to the public for compensation either in the
form of admission fees and/or fees for use of separate amusement facilities.
ANIMALS:
Domestic Animals: House pets such as dogs, cats, traditional and typical animal pets, and birds (not including pigeons, chickens, geese, turkeys or
other domestic fowl) which can be contained within a principal structure throughout the entire year; provided, that the containment can be
accomplished without special modification to the structure requiring a building permit from the City. In addition, the term includes rabbits normally
sheltered outside the home.
Farm Animals: Cattle, hogs, bees, sheep, goats, chickens, turkeys, horses and other animals traditionally and commonly accepted as farm animals
in the State of Minnesota.
ANTENNA, PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE: A device consisting of a metal, carbon fiber, or other electromagnetically conducive rods or elements,
usually arranged in a circular array on a single supporting pole or other structure, and used for the transmission and reception of wireless communication
radio waves including cellular, personal communication service (PCS), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging and similar services and
including the support structure thereof.
ANTENNA, PUBLIC UTILITY MICROWAVE: A parabolic dish or cornucopia shaped electromagnetically reflective or conductive element used for the
transmission and/or reception of point to point UHF or VHF radio waves in wireless telephone communications, and including the supporting structure
thereof.
ANTENNA, RADIO AND TELEVISION, BROADCAST TRANSMITTING: A wire, set of wires, metal or carbon fiber rod or other electromagnetic element
used to transmit public or commercial broadcast radio or television programming, and including the support structure thereof.
ANTENNA, RADIO AND TELEVISION RECEIVING: A wire, set of wires, metal or carbon fiber element(s), other than satellite dish antennas, used to
receive radio, television, or electromagnetic waves, and including the supporting structure thereof.
ANTENNA, SATELLITE DISH: A device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured and is in the shape of a shallow dish,
cone, horn, or cornucopia. Such device is used to transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or orbitally based uses.
This definition shall include, but not be limited to, what are commonly referred to as satellite earth stations, TVROs (television, receive only) and satellite
microwave antennas and support structures thereof.
ANTENNA, SHORT WAVE RADIO TRANSMITTING AND RECEIVING: A wire, set of wires or a device, consisting of a metal, carbon fiber, or other
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 245/497
electromagnetically conductive element used for the transmission and reception of radio waves used for short wave radio communications, and including
the supporting structure thereof.
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE: Any pole, telescoping mast, tower, tripod, or any other structure which supports a device used in the transmitting or
receiving of radio frequency energy.
APARTMENT: A portion of a building consisting of a room or suite of rooms which is designed for, intended for, or used as a residence by a single family or
an individual, and is equipped with cooking facilities. Includes dwelling unit and efficiency unit.
APARTMENT BUILDING: Three (3) or more dwelling units or apartments grouped in one building, with each unit sharing a common area for ingress and
egress.
APPLICANT: The owner, his agent or other person having legal control, ownership and/or interest in land which the provisions of this title are being
considered for or reviewed.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR: General repair, rebuilding or reconditioning engines, motor vehicles or trailers; collision service, including body, frame or
fender straightening or repair; overall painting or paint job; vehicle steam cleaning.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR: Installation, including cellular telephones, audio systems, and minor repairs, upholstering, replacement of parts (tires,
glass, etc.) and minor motor services to passenger automobiles and trucks not exceeding twelve thousand (12,000) pounds' gross weight, but not
including any operation specified under the definition of "automobile repair, major" in this section.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building between floor and ceiling, which is partly below and partly above grade, but so located that the vertical distance
from grade to the floor below is less than the vertical distance from grade to ceiling. See definition of story.
BAY: Cantilevered area of a room.
BOARDER: One who receives regular meals and/or regular meals and lodging for pay.
BOARDING (HOUSE) HOME, FOSTER CHILDREN: A family dwelling where children out of their own homes are cared for.
BOARDING (LODGING) HOUSE: A building other than a hotel where, for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals or lodging and
meals are provided to three (3) or more persons, not of the principal family therein, pursuant to previous arrangements and not to anyone who may apply,
but not including a building providing these services for more than ten (10) persons.
BOUNDARY LINES: Any line indicating the bounds or limits of any tract or parcel of land; also a line separating the various use districts as shown on the
City Zoning Map.
BREW ON PREMISES: A facility that provides the ingredients and equipment for a customer to use to brew malt liquor at the store. Alcoholic beverages
may not be sold or otherwise provided to customers of a brew on premises store, unless the owner of the brew on premises store holds the appropriate
liquor license. Customers using the brew on premises store must be of the minimum age required to purchase intoxicating liquor. Malt liquor brewed by a
customer in the store must not be sold and must be used by the customer solely for personal or family use.
BREWERY: A facility that produces beer, ale or other beverages made from malt by fermentation and containing not less than one-half of one percent
(0.5%) alcohol by volume.
BREWERY, SMALL: A brewery that produces not more than twenty thousand (20,000) barrels of malt liquor in a calendar year as regulated by Minnesota
Statutes, as amended.
BREWPUB: A small brewery with a restaurant use operated on the same premises as the brewery.
BUFFER: The use of land, topography, difference in elevation, space, fences or landscape plantings to screen or partially screen a use or property from
the vision of another use or property.
BUILDABLE AREA: The space remaining on a lot after the minimum setback and open space requirements of this title have been met and excluding
easements.
BUILDING: Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or moveable property of any kind, and includes any
structure.
BUILDING COVERAGE: The ratio of the horizontal area measured from the exterior surface of the exterior walls of the ground floor of all principal and
accessory buildings on a lot to the total lot area.
BUILDING FOOTPRINT: The horizontal area of a building measured from the exterior surface of the exterior walls of the ground floor.
BUILDING HEIGHT: A. The vertical distance above a reference datum measured to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a
mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof. The reference datum shall be selected by either of the following,
whichever yields a greater height of building:
1. The elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface within a five foot (5') horizontal distance of the exterior wall of the building when
such sidewalk or ground surface is not more than ten feet (10') above lowest grade.
2. An elevation ten feet (10') higher than the lowest grade when the sidewalk or ground surface described in subsection A1 of this definition is more
than ten feet (10') above lowest grade.
B. The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum height of any segment of the building.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 246/497
BUILDING LINE: A line parallel to the street right-of-way, or the ordinary high water level at any story level of a building and representing the minimum
distance which all or any part of the building is set back from said right-of-way.
BUILDING MATERIAL RELATED: For the purposes of this title, the following building materials or finishes shall be defined as:
Acid Etch: A finish achieved by casting concrete against a smooth, hard surface. After removal from the form, the element is allowed to harden to a
uniform hardness. The element is then washed with an acid solution and scrubbed to remove the cement surface to a sand level resulting in a
smooth, sand textured surface.
Brick: The conventional molded rectangular block of baked clay, nominal four inch (4") width. Thin brick veneer, faux brick, or decorative brick shall
not be permitted as a building material for nonresidential structures.
Brick Face: A precast panel with a cavity cast in, or a plate cast in if the brick runs to the bottom of the edge so that the brick can be set in the panel
after its removal from the form.
Cast Stone: A finish achieved by ramming moist zero slump concrete against smooth rigid formwork until the product is densely compacted and
ready for removal from the form. After curing, the panel may be hand rubbed or acid etched.
Exposed Aggregate: A finish achieved by:
A. Casting against a form surface that has been painted with retarder that retards the set of the concrete at its surface.
B. Application of a chemical retarder to the surface of the form. The retarder prevents the matrix from hardening at the surface of the panel to a
specific depth, controlled by the strength of the retarder. After curing, the unhardened layer of matrix at the surface of the panel is removed by a
high pressure water washing, thus, exposing the aggregate used in the concrete.
C. Casting concrete against a smooth hard surface. After removal from the form, the finished surface is sandblasted to remove the matrix and
expose, as well as etch, the coarse aggregate.
Form Liners: A finish achieved by the use of plaster, rubber, grained wood, rope or other material as a liner in the casting form to impart a particular
finish to the face of the panel.
Light Sandblast: A finish achieved by casting concrete against a smooth, hard surface. After removal from the form, the element is given a light
sandblasting removing the cement skin from the surface resulting in a smooth, sand textured surface.
Natural Stone Veneer: A finish achieved by placing natural stone pieces into a form and casting concrete behind it resulting in a precast panel having
a natural stone face.
Smooth As Cast: Concrete placed against a hard, smooth formwork to achieve a smooth "as cast" finish on the precast element.
Tooled: A finish achieved by casting concrete against a smooth or specifically textured or patterned formwork. After removal from the form, the
hardened surface is treated mechanically to create the desired effect such as "fractured fin" or "bush hammered".
BUILDING SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between the building and the lot line.
BUSINESS: Any establishment, occupation, employment or enterprise where merchandise is manufactured, exhibited or sold, or where services are
offered for compensation.
CARPORT: A canopy constructed of metal or other materials supported by posts either ornamental or solid and completely open on one or more sides.
CELLAR: That portion of a building between the floor and ceiling which is wholly or partly below grade and is so located that the vertical distance from
grade to the floor below is equal to or greater than the vertical distance from grade to ceiling.
CEMETERY: A site or property set apart for the burial or interment of the dead.
CHANNEL: A natural or artificial depression of perceptible extent, with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct water either continuously or
periodically.
CHURCH: A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where persons regularly assemble for religious purposes and which building,
together with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain religious ceremonies and purposes.
CITY COUNCIL: The Governing Body for the City of Otsego.
CLEAR CUTTING: The removal of an entire stand of trees and/or vegetation.
CLUB OR LODGE: A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members paying annual dues, with the use of the premises being restricted to
members and their guests.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT: The development patterns and techniques whereby structures are arranged in closely related groups to make the most
efficient use of the natural amenities of the land as accomplished through a planned unit development.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION: Bowling alley, cart track, golf, billiards (pool) hall, dance hall, skating, firearms range, boat rental, amusement rides,
campgrounds, private park, and similar uses.
COMMERCIAL STABLE: An agricultural use involving the keeping of horses or other farm animals, in numbers that do not constitute an animal feedlot, by
providing services and facilities for boarding and care of animals not belonging to the property owner or tenant, breeding, and recreational or therapeutic
riding programs for hire as part of a commercial enterprise.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 247/497
COMMON OPEN SPACE: Any privately owned open space including private parks, nature areas, playgrounds, trails, and recreational buildings and
structures which is an integral part of a development and is not owned on an individual basis by each owner of the dwelling unit.
COMMUNITY CENTER: A building or a room or group of rooms within a building designed specifically as a gathering place for the general public or for a
specific segment of the general public and operated on a nonprofit basis.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: A Comprehensive Plan prepared and approved by the City, including a compilation of policy statements, goals, standards,
fiscal guidelines, and maps indicating the general locations recommended for the various functional classes of land use, places and structures, and for the
general physical development of the City, including any unit or part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof.
CONCEPT PLAN: A report in map and text form submitted as the first phase of a planned unit development (PUD) proposal, depicting the location,
general purpose, general type of land use and circulation patterns, primary relationships between site elements and between the proposed development
and surrounding development, proposed general schedule of development, and information on the applicant.
CONDITIONAL USE: Those occupations, vocations, skills, arts, businesses, professions, or uses and/or related building/structures, or improvements
specifically designated in each zoning use district or by this title, which, for the respective conduct or performance, may require reasonable, but special,
peculiar, unusual or extraordinary limitations on facilities, plans, structures, conditions, modifications, or regulations for the promotion or preservation of the
general public welfare, health, convenience and integrity of the City Comprehensive Plan and this title.
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT: A permit issued by the City Council in accordance with procedures specified in this title, as a flexibility device to enable the
City Council to assign dimensions to a proposed use or development or conditions surrounding it after consideration of adjacent uses and their functions
and the special problems which the proposed use presents.
CONDOMINIUM: A multiple dwelling or development containing individually owned dwelling units and jointly owned and shared areas and facilities, which
dwelling or development is subject to the provisions of the Minnesota Condominium Law, Minnesota Statutes sections 515A.1-101 to 515A.4-118.
CONVENIENCE (FAST) FOOD ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment which serves food in or on disposable or edible containers in individual servings for
consumption on or off the premises. See also definition of drive-in restaurant.
CURB LEVEL: The elevation of the established curb in front of a building measured at the center of such front. Where no curb level has been established,
the City Engineer shall determine a curb level or its equivalent for the purpose of this title.
DAYCARE FACILITY: Any facility licensed by the State Department of Human Services, public or private, which, for gain or otherwise, regularly provides
one or more persons with care, training, supervision, habilitation, rehabilitation or developmental guidance on a regular basis, for periods of less than
twenty four (24) hours per day, in a place other than the person's own home.
Daycare, In Home: Any State licensed facility where childcare is provided to fourteen (14) or fewer children in the principal residence, as regulated by
Minnesota State Statutes and Minnesota Rules.
Group Daycare Center: Any location other than a residence which provides care for six (6) or more unrelated children at one time, for compensation,
and which is licensed to provide such services by the Minnesota Department of Human Services. The term shall include, but is not limited to, uses
such as nursery schools, day nurseries, childcare centers and drop in care centers.
DECK: A horizontal, unenclosed platform with or without attached railings, seats, trellises, or other features, attached or functionally related to a principal
use or site and at any point extending more than three feet (3') aboveground.
DENSITY, RESIDENTIAL: A number expressing the relationship of the number of dwellings to an acre of land as established in the Comprehensive Plan.
DEPOSITION: Any rock, soil, gravel, sand or other material deposited naturally or by man into a water body or watercourse, floodplains or wetlands.
DISTILLERY: A facility that produces ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, spirits of wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or other distilled spirits, including all
dilutions and mixtures thereof for nonindustrial use.
DIVERSION: A channel that intercepts surface water runoff and that changes the accustomed course of all or part of a stream.
DRAINING: The removal of surface water or groundwater from land.
DREDGING: To enlarge or clean out a water body, watercourse, or wetland.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT: Any place or premises used for sale, dispensing or serving of food, refreshments or beverages on the premises, typically eaten
in the customer's vehicle. See also definition of convenience (fast) food establishment.
DWELLING: A building, or portion thereof, designated exclusively for residential occupancy, including one-family, two-family, and multiple-family dwellings,
but not including hotels, motels, boarding houses, or manufactured housing.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE (APARTMENT): A building designed with three (3) or more dwelling units exclusively for occupancy by three (3) or more families
living independently of each other, but sharing hallways and main entrances and exits. A two-family dwelling (duplex) with a separate rooming unit(s) shall
be considered and classified as a multiple-family dwelling.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A dwelling unit designed exclusively for occupancy by one family.
Attached: A dwelling which is joined to another at one or more sides by a party wall.
Detached: A dwelling unit not attached to another dwelling or structure or is entirely surrounded by open space.
DWELLING SITE: A designated location for residential use by one or more persons using temporary or moveable shelter, including camping and
recreational vehicle sites.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 248/497
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A residence designed for or occupied by two (2) families only, with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each. A
two-family dwelling (duplex) with a separate rooming unit(s) shall be considered and classified as a multi-family dwelling.
Double Bungalow: A two-family dwelling with two (2) units side by side.
Duplex: A two-family dwelling unit with one unit above the other.
DWELLING UNIT: A residential building or portion thereof intended for occupancy by one or more persons with facilities for living, sleeping, cooking and
eating, but not including hotels, motels, nursing homes, seasonal cabins, boarding or rooming houses, resorts, tourist homes, or trailers.
DWELLING UNIT OCCUPANCY: Occupancy of a dwelling unit for the purpose of enforcing provisions of this title shall be limited by restrictions as
included in the definition of family in this section.
DWELLING UNIT, TEMPORARY: A residence allowed for a specific time which is intended for occupancy by one or more persons with facilities for living,
sleeping, cooking and eating. Temporary dwelling units shall not include garages, tents, or accessory buildings.
EARTH BERM (HOUSE CONSTRUCTION): An earth covering on the above grade portions of the building walls.
EARTH SHELTERED BUILDING: A building so constructed that fifty percent (50%) or more of the completed structure is covered with earth. Earth
covering is measured from the lowest level of the livable space in residential units and of usable space in nonresidential buildings. An earth sheltered
building is a complete structure that does not serve just as a foundation or substructure for above grade construction. A partially completed building shall
not be considered earth sheltered.
EASEMENT: A grant by an owner of land for a specific use by persons other than the owner.
EFFICIENCY APARTMENT (DWELLING UNIT): A one room dwelling unit consisting of one principal room having cooking facilities and used for combined
living, dining and sleeping purposes.
ELDERLY (SENIOR CITIZEN) HOUSING: A public agency owned or controlled multiple dwelling building with open occupancy limited to persons over
sixty two (62) years of age.
ENGINEER: The registered engineer employed or retained by the City, unless otherwise stated.
EROSION: The wearing away of land surface by the action of natural elements.
ESSENTIAL SERVICE: The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or Municipal departments of underground or overhead
telephone, gas, electrical, communication, water or sewer transmission, distribution, collection, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires, mains,
drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories in
connection therewith for the furnishing of adequate service by such private or public utilities or Municipal departments. Transmission/reception support
structures and antennas shall not be considered an essential service.
ESSENTIAL SERVICE STRUCTURES: Structures and buildings necessary for the operation of essential services, including, but not limited to: telephone
buildings, telephone booths, gas regulator stations, substations, electrical stations, water tanks, and lift stations.
EXCAVATION: Any removal of the natural surface of the earth, whether sod, dirt, soil, sand, gravel, stone or other material creating a depression or
depressions.
EXCAVATION FOR TRANSPORT: The practice of excavating material for transport of said material off of the land on which the excavation occurs that is
not related to development for an approved subdivision or site plan.
EXTERIOR STORAGE: The storage of goods, materials, equipment, manufactured products and similar items not fully enclosed by a building.
EXTRACTIVE USE: The use of land for surface or subsurface removal of sand, gravel, rock, industrial minerals, other nonmetallic minerals, and peat not
regulated under Minnesota Statutes sections 93.44 to 93.51.
FAMILY: An individual or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, or a group of not more than three (3) persons who need not be
related by blood or marriage, living together in a dwelling unit. (The number of persons herein defined is the basis upon which performance standards are
established within this title.)
FARM: An unplatted tract of land containing at least ten (10) acres or more, or two (2) or more abutting parcels under the same ownership having an area
of at least ten (10) acres, measured from the centerline of abutting roads, usually with a house and other buildings, which is principally used for
commercial agricultural activities such as raising cash crops and/or livestock in numbers which do not constitute an animal feedlot, unless the operation is
allowed to keep a larger number of animals pursuant to rights as specified in chapters 15 and 27 of this title.
FARM, HOBBY: A platted or unplatted tract of land generally consisting of ten (10) or less acres in size with a house and accessory buildings on which
crops and often livestock are raised but not as a principal or major source of income. A hobby farm shall not qualify for exemptions provided in this title for
farms.
FARM WINERY: A winery operated by the owner of a Minnesota farm producing table, sparkling or fortified wines from grapes, grape juice, other fruit
bases or honey with a majority of the ingredients produced on the premises.
FARMING: The process of operating a farm for the growing and harvesting of crops which shall include those necessary buildings related to operating the
farm, and the limited keeping of animals which does not constitute an animal feedlot, unless the operation is allowed to keep a larger number of animals
pursuant to rights as specified in chapter 15 of this title.
FARMSTEAD: A dwelling unit surrounded by or connected to a farming operation, all under single ownership.
FEEDLOT RELATED:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 249/497
Animal Feedlot Permit: A permit issued by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) when the potential pollution hazard will not be corrected
within ten (10) months of the date of permit issuance or when manure is not used as domestic fertilizer. This permit shall contain such conditions and
requirements as the agency deems necessary in order to ensure compliance with applicable State rules.
Animal Unit (AU): A. A unit of measure used to compare differences in the production of animal manures that employs as a standard the amount of
manure produced on a regular basis by a slaughter steer or heifer. For purposes of this title, the following equivalents shall apply:
Animal AU Per Animal
1 mature dairy cow 1.40
1 slaughter steer or heifer 1.00
1 horse 1.00
1 swine over 55 pounds 0.40
1 duck 0.20
1 sheep 0.10
1 swine under 55 pounds 0.05
1 turkey 0.018
1 chicken 0.01
B. For animals not listed in subsection A of this definition, the number of animal units shall be defined as the average weight of the animal divided
by one thousand (1,000) pounds.
Domestic Fertilizer: A. Animal manure that is put on or injected into the soil to improve the quality or quantity of plant growth; or
B. Animal manure that is used as compost, soil conditioners or specialized plant beds.
Earthen Basin: A dike or excavated structure, often lined with clay or synthetic liner, in which manure is stored. The basin is emptied at least once
each year. It is designed by a professional engineer or Natural Resources Conservation Service/Soil and Water Conservation District (NRCS/SWCD)
technician.
Feedlot, Animal: A lot or building, or combination of lots and buildings, intended for the confined feeding, breeding, raising, or holding of animals and
specifically designed as a confinement area in which manure may accumulate, or where the concentration of animals is such that a vegetative cover
cannot be maintained within the enclosure. For purposes of these parts, open lots used for feeding and rearing of poultry (poultry ranges) and barns,
dairy farms, swine facilities, beef lots and barns, horse stalls, mink ranches and zoos, shall be considered to be animal feedlots. Pastures shall not
be considered animal feedlots under these parts, nor shall any area as above described which contains ten (10) animal units or less.
Feedlot, New Animal: An animal feedlot constructed and operated at a site where no animal feedlot existed previously or where a preexisting animal
feedlot has been abandoned or unused for a period of five (5) years or more.
Feedlot, Operator: An individual, a corporation, a group of individuals, a partnership, joint venture, owner or any other business entity having charge
or control of one or more livestock feedlots, poultry lots or other animal lots.
Interim Permit: A permit issued by the MPCA which expires no later than ten (10) months from the date of issuance.
Lagoon: A manure treatment structure, typically earthen. Lagoons can be aerobic, anaerobic, or facultive depending on their design. An anaerobic
lagoon is different from an earthen storage basin in that the lagoon is managed for manure treatment. Anaerobic lagoons are only partially emptied
each year whereas earthen storage basins are emptied once or twice a year.
Manure, Animal: The fecal and urinary excretions of livestock and poultry. Manure can include bedding material and water used for livestock. Types
of manure have descriptive names such as liquid, slurry and solid. Manure that has a content of more than ninety six percent (96%) moisture is
liquid. Manure with a moisture content between ninety percent (90%) and ninety six percent (96%) is referred to as slurry. A moisture content of less
than eighty four percent (84%) is considered solid.
Pastures: Areas where grass or other growing plants are used for grazing and where the concentration of animals is such that a vegetation cover is
maintained during the growing season except in the immediate vicinity of temporary supplemental feeding or water devices.
FENCE: Any partition, structure, wall or gate erected as a dividing mark, barrier or enclosure.
Fence, Boundary Line: All fences located within five feet (5') of a property line.
Fence Height: The distance from the adjacent finished grade to the highest projection of a fence structure, not including support posts; provided, that
the support posts are no more than four inches (4") above the fence structure.
Fence, Interior Yard: All fences located five feet (5') from a property line.
FILLING: The act of depositing any rock, soil, gravel, sand or other material so as to fill natural topography, a water body, watercourse, or wetland.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 250/497
FLOOD RELATED:
Equal Degree Of Encroachment: Method of determining the location of encroachment lines so that the hydraulic capacity of floodplain lands on each
side of a stream is reduced by an equal amount when calculating the increases in flood stages due to floodplain encroachments.
FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Flood: A temporary rise in stream flow or stage that results in inundation of the areas adjacent to the channel.
Flood Frequency: The average frequency, statistically determined, for which it is expected that a specific flood stage or discharge may be equaled or
exceeded.
Flood Fringe: That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway. Flood fringe is synonymous with the term "floodway fringe" used in the Flood
Insurance Study for the City.
Flood Hazard Areas: The areas included in the floodway and flood fringe as indicated on the Official Zoning Map and the Flood Insurance Study and
Flood Insurance Rate Map which have been officially adopted by the City.
Flood Insurance Rate Map: The Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency for the City and, as applicable
and allowed by law, the Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency for Wright County.
Flood Insurance Study: The Flood Insurance Study prepared for the City by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and, as applicable and
allowed by law, the Flood Insurance Study prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency for Wright County.
Floodplain: The areas adjoining a watercourse which has been or hereafter may be covered by the 100-year flood as determined by the use of the
100-year flood profile and other supporting technical data in the Flood Insurance Study.
Floodproofing: A combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding primarily for the
reduction or elimination of flood damages to properties, water and sanitary facilities, structures and contents of buildings in a flood hazard area in
accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code.
Floodway: The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplains which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the
regional flood determined by the use of the 100-year flood profile and other supporting technical data in the Flood Insurance Study.
Obstruction: Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel rectification, culvert, building, wire,
fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across or projecting into any channel, watercourse or regulatory flood hazard area which
may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water, or that is
placed where the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water, or that is placed where the flow of water might
carry the same downstream to the damage of life or property.
100-Year Flood: A flood which is representative of large regional floods known to have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic
of what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year recurrence interval as determined by the use of the 100-
year flood profile and other supporting technical data in the Flood Insurance Study.
Reach: A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a stream or river influenced by the natural or manmade obstruction. In an
urban area, the segment of a stream or river between two (2) consecutive bridge crossings would most typically constitute a reach.
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation: A point not less than one foot (1') above the water surface profile associated with the 100-year flood as
determined by the use of the 100-year flood profile and supporting technical data in the Flood Insurance Study plus any increase in flood heights
attributable to encroachments on the floodplain. It is the elevation to which uses regulated by this title are required to be elevated or floodproofed.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of the building or portion thereof devoted to a particular use, including
accessory storage areas located within selling or working space such as activities, to the production or processing of goods, or to business or professional
offices. However, the floor area shall not include: basement or cellar floor area other than area devoted to retailing activities, the production or processing
of goods, or to business or professional offices. The floor area of a residence shall not include the cellar area.
FRONTAGE: That boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated public street, watercourse or similar barrier.
GARAGE, PRIVATE (RESIDENTIAL): An accessory building or accessory portion of the principal building which is intended for and used to store the
private passenger vehicles and noncommercial trucks not exceeding twelve thousand (12,000) pounds' gross weight of the family or families resident upon
the premises and in which no business service or industry is carried on unless specifically authorized by this title.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: Any garage other than a private garage. May also mean parking ramp.
GAS STATION: See definition of motor fuel station.
GOVERNING BODY: The Otsego City Council.
GRADE (ADJACENT GROUND ELEVATION): The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving or sidewalk within the area
between the building and the property line, or when the property line is more than five feet (5') from the building, between the building and line five feet (5')
from the building.
GRADING: Changing the natural or existing topography of land.
GUESTROOM: A room occupied by one or more guests for compensation and in which no provision is made for cooking, but not including rooms in a
dormitory for sleeping purposes primarily.
HALFWAY HOUSE: See definition of residential care facility.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 251/497
HEALTH CLUB: A facility which provides athletic activities such as tennis, handball, racquetball, track, basketball, exercise devices, etc., and such
incidental services as whirlpool, sauna or massage service for members and guests.
HERITAGE PRESERVATION COMMISSION: The Otsego Heritage Preservation Commission.
HERITAGE PRESERVATION SITE: Any area, place, building, landmark, structure, lands, districts, or other objects which have been duly designated
heritage preservation sites pursuant to chapter 96 of this title.
HOME EXTENDED BUSINESSES: A business conducted as part of a residential use which is beyond the limits and scope of activities for home
occupations as defined by this section.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any occupation or profession engaged in by the occupant of a residential dwelling unit which is clearly incidental and secondary to
the residential use of the premises and does not change the character of said premises.
HOTEL: Any building or portion thereof occupied as the more or less temporary abiding place of individuals and containing six (6) or more guestrooms,
used, designated, or intended to be used, let or hired out to be occupied, or which are occupied by six (6) or more individuals for compensation, whether
the compensation be paid directly or indirectly.
HOUSING SHELTER; TEMPORARY HOUSING: A facility operated by the public or a nonprofit charitable group or institution which provides one or more
transient/homeless persons with lodging and meals for short periods of time in a place other than a person's own home.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: An artificial or natural surface through which water, air, or roots cannot penetrate.
IMPORTATION OF FILL: The transport of sod, dirt soil, sand, gravel, stone or other material natural to the surface of the earth, but not including mixed
Municipal solid waste, construction debris, recyclable metal, plastic, glass or paper material or other waste, brought onto a land as part of a grading
operation not related to development for an approved subdivision or site plan.
INTERIM USE: A temporary use of property until a particular date, until the occurrence of a particular event, or until zoning regulations no longer allow it.
JUNKYARD: An open area where waste, used, or secondhand materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled,
including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other materials, paper rags, rubber, tires, lumber, and bottles. A junkyard includes an auto wrecking yard, but
does not include uses established entirely within closed buildings nor sanitary landfills.
KENNEL: Any lot, premises, dwelling or dwelling unit in which three (3) or more dogs over the age of six (6) months are kept, harbored, owned or
otherwise possessed, either on a commercial basis or scale for boarding or breeding, or on a private basis for personal use, enjoyment or profit.
LAND RECLAMATION: The process of the reestablishment of acceptable topography (i.e., slopes), vegetative cover, soil stability and the establishment of
safe conditions appropriate to the subsequent use of the land.
LANDSCAPING: Plantings such as trees, flowers, grass and shrubs and improvements directly related thereto.
LOADING SPACE: A space or berth on the same lot with a building, or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial
vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials and which abuts upon a street, alley or other appropriate means of access.
LODGING ROOM: A room rented as sleeping and living quarters, but without cooking facilities and with or without an individual bathroom. In a suite of
rooms without cooking facilities, each room which provides sleeping accommodations shall be counted as one lodging room.
LOT: A parcel or portion of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage and area, and to provide such yards and
other open spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on an improved public street.
LOT AREA: The total land area of a horizontal plane within the lot lines.
LOT, BASE: Lots meeting all specifications in the zoning district prior to being subdivided into a two-family dwelling, townhome, or quadraminium unit lot
subdivision.
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) streets, the interior angle of such intersection not exceeding one hundred thirty five degrees
(135°).
LOT DEPTH: The distance between the midpoints of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rear most points of
the side lot lines in the rear.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: An interior lot having frontage on two (2) streets.
LOT, FRONT: The front of a lot shall be considered to be that boundary abutting a public right-of-way having the least width.
LOT IMPROVEMENT: Any building, structure, place, work of art, or other object, or improvement of the land on which they are situated constituting a
physical betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot, other than a corner lot, including through or double frontage lots.
LOT LINE: A property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate ownership; except, that where any portion of the lot extends into the abutting
street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed to be the street or alley right-of-way.
LOT LINE, REAR: That boundary of a lot which is opposite the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less than ten feet (10') in length, or if the lot forms a point
at the rear, the rear lot line shall be a line ten feet (10') in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: Any lot which is legally established according to applicable regulations at the time of its creation, which is one unit of a plat heretofore
duly approved and filed, or one unit of an auditor's outlot or a registered land survey, or a parcel of land not so platted, subdivided or registered but for
which a deed, auditor's subdivision or registered land survey has been recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds or Registrar of Titles for Wright
County, Minnesota, prior to the effective date hereof.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 252/497
LOT, REVERSED FRONTAGE: A lot in which the frontage is at right angles, or approximately right angles, to the general pattern in the area involved. A
reversed frontage lot may be a corner lot or an interior lot.
LOT, SUBSTANDARD: A lot or parcel of land for which a deed has been recorded in the Office of the Wright County Recorder upon or prior to the effective
date hereof which does not meet the minimum lot area, structure setbacks or other dimensional standards of this title.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot fronting on two (2) parallel streets.
LOT, UNIT: Lots created from the subdivisions of a base lot for a two-family dwelling, townhome, or quadraminium dwelling having different minimum lot
size requirements than the conventional base lots within the zoning district.
LOT WIDTH: The minimum required horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth at the minimum building
setback line. If no setback line is established, the distance between the side lot lines measured along the public right-of-way.
MANOR HOME: A residential structure with five (5) to eight (8) units with each unit having a separate entrance/exit. There may be more than one floor and
an attached garage space.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty
(40) body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis
and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing,
heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except, that the term includes any structure which meets all the requirements and with
respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary and complies with the standards established under Minnesota
Statutes chapter 327.
MANUFACTURED HOME LOT: A section of ground in a manufactured home park designated as the location of one housing unit, and all other necessary
improvements required by this title.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: Any site, lot, field or tract of land upon which two (2) or more occupied manufactured homes are located, either free of
charge or for compensation, and includes any building, structure, tent, vehicle or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the equipment of the
manufactured home park.
MEDICAL AND DENTAL CLINICS: A structure intended for providing medical and dental examinations and service available to the public. This service is
provided without overnight care available.
METES AND BOUNDS DESCRIPTION: A description of real property which is not described by reference to a lot or block shown on a map, but is
described by starting at a known point and describing the bearings and distances of the lines forming the boundaries of the property or delineating a
fractional portion of a section, lot or area by described lines or portions thereof.
MICRO-DISTILLERY: A distillery producing premium distilled spirits in total quantity not to exceed forty thousand (40,000) proof gallons in a calendar year
as regulated by Minnesota Statutes, as amended.
MINERALS: Soil, clay, stone, sand and gravel and other similar solid material or substance to be mined from natural deposits.
MINING: All or part of the process involved in the extraction of minerals by removing the overburden and extracting directly from the mineral deposits
thereby exposed.
MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION: A subdivision containing a minimum of ten (10) lots, allowing both conventional homes and mobile homes. Existing
subdivisions containing a minimum of thirty percent (30%) mobile homes shall be defined as mobile home subdivisions.
MODEL HOME: A home which is similar to others in a development and which is open to public inspection for the purpose of selling said other homes.
MOTEL/MOTOR HOTEL: A building or group of detached, semidetached or attached buildings containing guestrooms or units, each of which has a
separate entrance directly from the outside of the building, or corridor, with garage or parking space conveniently located to each unit, and which is
designed, used or intended to be used primarily for the accommodation of transient guests traveling by automobile.
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL: A building or area in which freight brought by motor truck is assembled and/or stored for routing in intrastate or interstate
shipment by motor truck.
MOTOR FUEL STATION: A place where gasoline is stored only in underground tanks for operation of automobiles and retailed directly to the public on
premises, and including minor accessories, but not including truck stops.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE, USE OR LOT - ILLEGAL: A lot, building, structure, premises, or use unlawfully established and in violation of
regulations applicable at the time of development or initiation.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE, USE OR LOT - LEGAL: A lot, building, structure, premises, or use lawfully established prior to the effective date
hereof or any amendment hereto which does not now conform with the applicable conditions or provisions of this title for the district in which the structure
or use is located.
NOXIOUS MATTER: Any solid, liquid, or gaseous material including, but not limited to, gases, vapors, odor, dusts, mists, or combinations thereof, the
emission of which is detrimental to or endangers the public health, safety, comfort or general welfare or causes damage to property.
NURSERY, LANDSCAPE: A business growing and selling trees, flowering and decorative plants, and shrubs.
NURSING HOME: A private building with facilities for the care of children, the aged, or the infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders, but
not containing equipment for surgical care or for treatment of disease or injury. The nursing home shall be licensed by the State Board of Health as
provided in Minnesota State Statutes.
OCCUPANCY: The purpose for which a building is used or intended to be used. The term shall also include the building or room housing such use.
Change of occupancy is not intended to include change of tenants or proprietors.
OFF STREET PARKING SPACE: An area of such shape and dimensions as provided by this title, enclosed in the principal building, in an accessory
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 253/497
building, or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one motor vehicle, which has adequate access to a public street or alley, and permitting satisfactory
ingress and egress of an automobile.
OPEN SALES LOT: Land devoted to the display of goods for purchase, sale, rent, lease or trade where such goods are not enclosed within a building, and
for the storage of same prior to sale.
OPEN SPACE: Any open area not covered by structures, but not limited to the following uses: required or established yard areas, parking areas,
sidewalks, school walks, trails, recreation areas, water bodies, shorelands, watercourses, wetlands, groundwater recharge areas, floodplain, floodway,
flood fringe, erodible slopes, woodland, and soils with severe limitation for development.
OPEN SPACE CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT RELATED:
Building Envelope: The boundaries on a home site lot within which all construction requiring a building permit may occur.
Cluster; Cluster Development; Neighborhood Cluster: A grouping of residential or other structures arranged with the expressed intent of preserving
open spaces and natural resources for community use, establishing a sense of community among residents, and reducing the costs and impact of
infrastructure development and service delivery.
Neighborhood: A district, or area, distinguishable by some identifiable feature or point of reference, in which people live in close proximity to one
another.
Open Space: Undeveloped land of the subdivided property providing visual expanses and recreational areas clear of obstructions other than natural
vegetation, or structures directly related to the use and enjoyment of these spaces. Open spaces may include natural habitats, places for
neighborhood recreation, and pedestrian corridors.
Open Space, Natural Habitat: Contiguous, connected areas preserved or restored in their natural condition where indigenous plants and animals live,
or fields and pastures associated with agricultural uses.
Open Space, Neighborhood Recreation: Specific areas, such as playground parks, greens, and commons, spatially defined and maintained for
human recreational activity.
Open Space, Pedestrian Corridors: Linear areas for pedestrian travel between open spaces or places of destination, such as walking trails and
bicycle paths.
Open Space, View Shed: A directional view or vista of an open space from a specified location.
OPEN STORAGE: Storage of material outside of a building.
OUT PATIENT CARE: Medical examination or service available to the public. This service is provided without overnight care and shall be considered a
separate, independent, principal use when combined or operated in conjunction with a hospital.
OUTLOT: A lot remnant or parcel of land left over after platting, which is intended as open space or other future use, for which no building permit shall be
issued.
OVERBURDEN: The earth, rock and other materials that lie above a natural deposit of mineral.
OWNER: An individual, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity holding an equitable or legal ownership interest in
land, buildings, structures, dwelling unit(s) or other property.
PARCEL: An individual lot or tract of land.
PARTY WALL: A common wall which divides two (2) independent structures by a fire wall.
PAWNSHOP: The location at which or premises in which a pawnbroker regularly conducts business.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD: Criterion established for setbacks, fencing, landscaping, screening, drainage, accessory buildings, outside storage and to
control noise, odor, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or glare or heat or other nuisance elements generated by or inherent in
uses of land or buildings.
PERMITTED USE: A use which may be lawfully established in a particular district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations, and
performance standards (if any) of such districts and this title.
PERSON: Any individual or legal entity.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A. As a conditional use permit, a development procedure whereby internal site design standard deviations from this title
may be allowed in order to accommodate two (2) or more principal structures, or flexibility for established lot requirements, setbacks, building requirements
or other performance standards for improved site design and operation.
B. As a zoning district, a development procedure whereby a mixing of buildings and uses can occur which cannot be otherwise addressed under this
title, and/or whereby internal site design standard deviations from this title may be allowed to improve site design and operation.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The Otsego Planning Commission.
POLE BUILDINGS: Any structure possessing the following characteristics: structural wood poles or timbers buried in ground on individual footings; metal
wall coverings hung vertically of less than twenty eight (28) gauge. This definition shall not include or apply to decks, sign supports, earth retention
structures, playground equipment, electric utilities, or any similar structure not covering or enclosing a specific area.
PREFABRICATED HOME: See definition of manufactured home.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 254/497
PRINCIPAL USE: The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from subordinate or accessory uses. A "principal use" may be a permitted, interim, or
conditional use.
PROCESSING FACILITY: A building or enclosed space used for the collection and processing of recyclable materials. Processing does not include end
use manufacturing or industrial use but may include the preparation of material for efficient shipment or end-user's specifications, by such means as
baling, briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding, cleaning, and remanufacturing.
Heavy Processing Facility: Any processing facility other than a light processing facility and may shred, compact, or bale ferrous metals other than
food and beverage containers.
Light Processing Facility: Occupies an area of under forty five thousand (45,000) square feet of gross collection, processing and storage area and
has up to an average of two (2) outbound truck shipments per day. Light processing facilities are limited to baling, briquetting, crushing, compacting,
grinding, shredding and sorting of source separated recyclable materials and repairing of reusable materials. A light processing facility shall not
shred, compact, or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers.
PROTECTIVE COVENANTS: Contracts entered into between all owners and holders of mortgage constituting a restriction on the use of property within a
subdivision for the benefit of the property owners, and providing mutual protection against undesirable aspects of property value and economic integrity of
any given area.
PUBLIC USES: Uses owned or operated by Municipal, school districts, County, State, or other governmental units.
PUBLIC UTILITY: Any person, firm, corporation, Municipal department or board fully authorized and furnishing under Municipal regulation to the public
electricity, gas, communication services, transportation, water or the like.
PUBLICATION: Notice placed in the official City newspaper stating time, location and date of meeting and description of the topic.
QUADRAMINIUMS: Single structures which contain four (4) subdivided dwelling units all of which have individually separate entrances from the exterior of
the structure.
RAILROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY: A strip of land with railway tracks and auxiliary facilities for track operation.
RECREATION FIELD OR BUILDING: An area of land, water, or any building in which amusement, recreation or athletic sports are provided for public or
semipublic use, whether temporary or permanent, except a theater, whether provision is made for the accommodation of an assembly or not. A golf
course, arena, baseball park, stadium, circus or gymnasium is a recreation field or building for the purpose of this title.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Includes manufactured homes less than thirty five feet (35') in overall length, including those with telescope or fold down,
chassis, mounter campers, house cars, motor homes, tent trailers, slip in campers (those mounted in a pickup truck or similar vehicle), converted buses,
and converted vans used primarily for recreational purposes. Cars used for racing shall not be included within this definition.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Materials that are separated from mixed Municipal solid waste for the purpose of recycling, including paper, glass, metals,
automobile oil, batteries and other specifically allowed items. Refuse derived material or other material that is destroyed by incineration is not a recyclable
material.
RECYCLING FACILITY: A center for the collection, processing or repair of recyclable materials for reuse in their original form or use in manufacturing
processes. Recycling facilities may include the following:
Collection Facility: A place where the public may donate, redeem, or purchase recyclable materials. Collection facilities may include vending
machines, mobile units, unattended containers placed for the donation of recyclable materials and permanent structures.
A. Mobile Recycling Unit: An automobile, truck, trailer or van which is used for the collection of recyclable materials. A mobile recycling unit also
means the bins, boxes or containers transported by trucks, vans, or trailers, used for the collection of recyclable materials.
B. Reverse Vending Machines: An automated mechanical device which accepts at least one or more types of empty beverage containers
including, but not limited to, aluminum cans and glass and plastic bottles, and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip. A reverse vending
machine may sort and process containers mechanically provided that the entire process is enclosed within the machine.
Designated Recycling Center: A recycling facility which has complied with the permitting rules of the Pollution Control Agency and is open a
minimum of twelve (12) operating hours each week, twelve (12) months per year, and accepts for recycling at least four (4) different materials such
as paper, glass, plastic, and metal.
RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY: A facility or program licensed by the State Department of Human Services or County Commissioner of Health that
provides care in or outside of a person's own home:
Boarding Care Home: A licensed facility or unit used to provide care for aged or infirmed persons who require only personal or custodial care and
related services in accordance with these regulations. A boarding care home license is required if the persons need or receive personal or custodial
care only. Nursing services are not required. Examples of personal or custodial care: board, iron, laundry and personal services, supervision over
medications which can be safely administered, plus a program of activities and supervision required by persons who are not capable of properly
caring for themselves.
Nonresidential Program: Care, supervision, rehabilitation, training or habilitation of a person outside the person's own home and provided for fewer
than twenty four (24) hours a day, including adult daycare programs and chemical dependency or chemical abuse programs that are located in a
nursing home or hospital and receive public funds for providing chemical abuse or chemical dependency treatment services under Minnesota State
Statutes chapter 254B. Nonresidential programs include home and community based services and semi-independent living services for persons with
developmental disabilities that are provided in or outside of a person's own home.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 255/497
Residential Program: A program that provides twenty four (24) hour a day care, supervision, food, lodging, rehabilitation, training, education, and
habilitation for four (4) or more persons with developmental disabilities and chemical dependency or chemical abuse programs that are located in a
hospital or nursing home and receive public funds for providing chemical abuse or chemical dependency treatment programs under Minnesota State
Statutes chapter 254B. Residential programs include home and community based services for persons with developmental disabilities that are
provided in or outside of a person's own home.
RESTAURANT: An establishment which serves food in or on nondisposable dishes to be consumed primarily while seated at tables or booths within the
building.
RETAIL: The sale of items in small quantities directly to the consumer.
ROOFLINE: The top of the coping; or when the building has a pitched roof, at the intersection of the outside wall with the roof.
RURAL SERVICE AREA: That portion of the City, as defined by the Comprehensive Plan, which is currently and is intended to remain rural and
agricultural in character and development.
SCHOOL: A building used for the purpose of elementary or secondary education, which meets all the requirements of Compulsory Education Laws of the
State of Minnesota, and not providing residential accommodations.
SECONDARY USE: A use of land or of a building or a portion thereof which is subordinate to and does not constitute the primary use of the land or
building.
SECONDHAND DEALER: A person, partnership, firm or corporation whose regular business includes selling or receiving tangible personal property
(excluding motor vehicles) previously used, rented, owned, or leased. The term secondhand dealer shall include pawnbroker and antique shops.
SEMIPUBLIC USE: Uses owned by private or private nonprofit organizations which are open to some, but not all, of the public, such as denominational
cemeteries, private schools, clubs, lodges, recreation facilities, churches, etc.
SEPTIC SEWER SYSTEM: A septic sewer disposal system consists of: septic tank, absorption field of standard trenches or a dry well, house sewer and
outlet sewer. In the septic tank, bacterial action breaks down sewage. Standard trenches or a dry well handles final disposal of liquid from the septic tank.
The house sewer brings wastes to the tank, and the outlet sewer carries sewage liquids (effluent) from the absorption field.
SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between a structure and the property line nearest thereto. Within shoreland districts, the term shall also
mean the minimum horizontal distance between a structure or a sanitary facility and the normal high water mark. For purposes of earth shelter buildings
only, above grade portions shall be used in determining setback requirements. Distances are to be measured from the most outwardly extended portion of
the structure at ground level, except as provided hereinafter.
SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM: A septic tank and soil absorption system or other individual or cluster type sewage treatment system as described and
regulated in this Code.
SEWER SYSTEM: Pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, and force main, and all other construction devices, appliances, or appurtenances used for
conducting sewage or industrial waste or other wastes to a point of ultimate disposal.
SHOPPING CENTER: An integrated grouping of commercial stores, under single ownership or control.
SHORELAND RELATED:
Bluff: A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff, or embankment having all of the following characteristics. An area with an average slope of less than
eighteen percent (18%) over a distance for fifty feet (50') or more shall not be considered part of the bluff:
A. Part or all of the feature is located in a shoreland area.
B. The slope rises at least twenty five feet (25') above the ordinary high water level of the water body.
C. The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to a point twenty five feet (25') or more above the ordinary high water level averages thirty
percent (30%) or greater.
D. The slope must drain toward the water body.
Bluff Impact Zone: A bluff and land located within twenty feet (20') from the top of a bluff.
Boathouse: A structure designed and used solely for the storage of boats or boating equipment.
Commissioner: The Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources.
Forest Land Conversion: The clear cutting of forested lands to prepare for a new land use other than reestablishment of a subsequent forest stand.
Intensive Vegetation Clearing: The complete removal of trees or shrubs in a contiguous patch, strip, row or block.
Ordinary High Water Level: The boundary of public waters and wetlands, and shall be an elevation delineating the highest water level which has
been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape, commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes
from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. For watercourses, the ordinary high water level is the elevation of the top of the bank of the
channel. For reservoirs and flowages, the ordinary high water level is the operating elevation of the normal summer pool.
Public Waters: Any waters as defined in Minnesota Statutes section 103G.005, subdivisions 14 and 15. However, no lake, pond, or flowage of less
than ten (10) acres in size in municipalities and twenty five (25) acres in size in unincorporated areas need be regulated for the purposes of
Minnesota Rules parts 6120.2500 to 6120.3900. A body of water created by a private user where there was no previous shoreland may, at the
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 256/497
discretion of the local government, be exempted from Minnesota Rules parts 6120.2500 to 6120.3900. The official determination of the size and
physical limits of drainage areas of rivers and streams shall be made by the Commissioner.
Sensitive Resource Management: The preservation and management of areas unsuitable for development in their natural state due to constraints
such as shallow soils over groundwater or bedrock, highly erosive or expansive soils, steep slopes, susceptibility to flooding, or occurrence of flora or
fauna in need of special protection.
Shore Impact Zone: Land located between the ordinary high water level of a public water and a line parallel to it at a setback of fifty percent (50%) of
the structure setback.
Shoreland: Land located within the following distances from public water: one thousand feet (1,000') from the ordinary high water level of a lake,
pond, or flowage; and three hundred feet (300') from a river or stream, or the landward extent of a floodplain designated by ordinance on a river or
stream, whichever is greater. The limits of shorelands may be reduced whenever the waters involved are bounded by topographic divides which
extend landward from the waters for lesser distances and when approved by the Commissioner.
Shoreland Commercial Planned Unit Developments: Typically uses that provide transient, short term lodging spaces, rooms, or parcels and their
operations are essentially service oriented. For example, hotel/motel accommodations, resorts, recreational vehicle and camping parks, and other
primarily service oriented activities.
Shoreland Residential Planned Unit Development: A use where the nature of residency is nontransient and the major or primary focus of the
development is not service oriented. For example, residential apartments, manufactured home parks, timeshare condominiums, townhouses,
cooperatives, and full fee ownership residences would be considered as residential planned unit developments.
Significant Historic Site: Any archaeological site, standing structure, or other property that meets the criteria for eligibility to the National Register of
Historic Places or is listed in the State Register of Historic Sites, or is determined to be an unplatted cemetery that falls under the provisions of
Minnesota Statutes section 307.08. A historic site meets these criteria if it is presently listed on either register or if it is determined to meet the
qualifications for listing after review by the Minnesota State Archaeologist or the Director of the Minnesota Historical Society. All unplatted cemeteries
are automatically considered to be significant historic sites.
Steep Slope: Land where agricultural activity or development is either not recommended or described as poorly suited due to slope steepness and
the site's soil characteristics, as mapped and described in available County soil surveys or other technical reports, unless appropriate design and
construction techniques and farming practices are used in accordance with the provisions of these regulations. Where specific information is not
available, steep slopes are lands having average slopes over twelve percent (12%), as measured over horizontal distances of fifty feet (50') or more,
that are not bluffs.
Surface Water Oriented Commercial Use: The use of land for commercial purposes, where access to and use of a surface water feature is an
integral part of the normal conductance of business. Marinas, resorts, and restaurants with transient docking facilities are examples of such use.
Toe Of The Bluff: The lower point of a fifty foot (50') segment with an average slope exceeding eighteen percent (18%).
Top Of The Bluff: The higher point of a fifty foot (50') segment with an average slope exceeding eighteen percent (18%).
Water Oriented Accessory Structure Or Facility: A small, aboveground building or other improvement, except stairways, fences, dock, and retaining
walls, which, because of the relationship of its use to a surface water feature, reasonably needs to be located closer to public waters than the normal
structure setback. Examples of such structures and facilities include boathouses, gazebos, screen houses, fish houses, pump houses, and detached
decks.
SIGN RELATED:
Address Sign: A sign communicating only a street address.
Advertising Sign: Any permanent nongovernmental sign advertising products, services, commodities, entertainment or other activity not offered at the
location of the sign or not exclusively related to the premises on which the sign is located.
Alteration: Any change to a sign excluding routine maintenance, repair, painting or change of copy of any existing sign.
Area Identification Sign: A freestanding sign identifying the name of a single-family residential subdivision consisting of twenty (20) or more lots; a
residential planned unit development; a multiple residential complex consisting of three (3) or more structures; an office or business structure or
development containing three (3) or more independent operations; a single business consisting of three (3) or more separate structures; a
manufactured home court; or any integrated combination of the above.
Artificial Light: Illumination resulting from internal or external artificial light sources, including glare and reflected light byproducts of artificial light
sources.
Awning, Canopy Or Marquee Sign: A written or graphic message, identification or advertisement, as part of or permanently or semipermanently
affixed to an awning, canopy, marquee or other similar device. Where lighting is incorporated with the awning, canopy or marquee, the apparatus
shall not be construed as a sign exclusive of the area physically designed to form the message, identification or advertisement thereto.
Balloon Sign: A sign consisting of a bag made of lightweight material supported by helium, hot, or pressurized air.
Banners: Attention getting devices which resemble flags and are of a paper, cloth or plastic like consistency.
Billboard: An off site sign used to advertise products, goods, or services not exclusively related to the premises on which the sign is located. An
advertising sign.
Building Facade: That portion of any exterior elevation of a building extending from grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves and the entire width
of the building elevation.
Business Sign: Any sign which identifies a specific business, either retail, wholesale, or industrial, or which identifies a profession and is located upon
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 257/497
the subject property.
Campaign Sign: A temporary sign promoting the candidacy of a person running for a governmental office, or promoting an issue to be voted on at a
governmental election.
Canopy Sign: See definition of sign related: awning.
Changeable Copy Sign: A sign or portion thereof that has a reader board for the display of text information in which each alphanumeric character,
graphic or symbol is defined by objects not consisting of an illumination device and may be changed or rearranged manually or mechanically with
characters, illustrations, letters or numbers that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or surface of the sign structure.
Changeable Copy Sign, Electronic: A sign or portion thereof that displays electronic, nonpictorial text information in which each alphanumeric
character, graphic, or symbol is defined by a small number of matrix elements using different combinations of light emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber
optics, light bulbs or other illumination devices within the display area. Electronic changeable copy signs include computer programmable,
microprocessor controlled electronic displays. Electronic changeable copy signs include projected images or messages with these characteristics
onto buildings or objects. Electronic changeable copy signs do not include official signs.
Commercial Speech: Speech advertising a business, profession, commodity, service or entertainment intended for, characteristic of or related to
commerce.
Construction Sign: A sign at a construction site identifying the project or the name of the architect, engineer, contractor, financier, or other involved
parties.
Copy: The wording on a sign surface, either permanent or removable letter form.
Crop Demonstration Sign: A sign identifying agricultural products utilized upon the subject property.
Directional Sign: A sign erected with the address and/or name only of a business, development project, institution, church or other use or activity plus
directional arrows or information on location.
Directory Sign, Private: An exterior information wall sign, or a freestanding sign identifying the names of residences, businesses or professional
offices served by a common public entrance such as an apartment complex, shopping center, or office building.
Directory Sign, Public: A sign, group of signs on a sign panel or any identifiable object intended to communicate a public message or direction when
located on public property as may be approved by the Otsego City Council.
Double Sided Sign: A sign with two (2) faces back to back, or a V-type sign with an angle not exceeding twenty degrees (20°). Only one side of a
double sided sign shall be used in computing total surface area.
Dynamic Display: Any characteristics of a sign that appear to have movement or that appear to change, caused by any method other than physically
removing and replacing the sign or its components, whether the apparent movement or change is in the display, the sign structure or any other
component of the sign. This includes displays that incorporate technology or methods allowing the sign face to change the image without having to
physically or mechanically replace the sign face or its components as well as any rotating, revolving, moving, flashing, blinking or animated display
and any display that incorporates rotating panels, LED lights manipulated through digital input, digital ink or any other method or technology that
allows the sign face to present a series of images or displays.
Electronic Graphic Display Sign: A sign or portion thereof that displays electronic, static images, static graphics or static pictures, with or without text
information, defined by a small number of matrix elements using different combinations of light emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics, light bulbs or
other illumination devices within the display area where the message change sequence is accomplished immediately or by means of fade,
repixalization or dissolve modes. Electronic graphic display signs include computer programmable, microprocessor controlled electronic or digital
displays. Electronic graphic display signs include projected images or messages with these characteristics onto buildings or other objects.
Farm Identification Sign: A sign identifying the name and/or type of farming activity practices upon the subject property.
Flashing Sign: A directly or indirectly illuminated sign or portion thereof that exhibits changing light or color effect by any means, so as to provide
intermittent illumination that changes light intensity in sudden transitory bursts and creates the illusion of intermittent flashing light by streaming,
graphic bursts showing movement, or any mode of lighting which resembles zooming, twinkling or sparkling.
Freestanding Sign: A self-supported sign not affixed to another structure.
Freeway Corridor Sign District: A special signing district encompassing the following areas:
A. Land located within two thousand six hundred forty feet (2,640') of the Interstate 94 right-of-way.
B. Land located within six hundred sixty feet (660') of the right-of-way for TH 101 or land within that area between the rights-of-way of Quaday
Avenue and TH 101 and lands between the rights-of-way of Queens Avenue and TH 101, whichever is more restrictive.
Ground Or Low Profile Sign: A sign that is intended to be incorporated into some form of landscaping design scheme or planter box, is not elevated
from the ground by means of a pole or freestanding support structure, but is placed directly on the ground or on an interior planter base which is
incorporated into such a design arrangement.
Historical Sign: A sign commemorating places of local, State, or national historical significance.
Holiday Sign: Signs or displays which contain or depict a message pertaining to a religious, national, State, or local holiday.
I-94 Corridor Sign District: A special signing district encompassing land located within two thousand six hundred forty feet (2,640') of the Interstate 94
right-of-way.
Identification Sign: A sign which identifies the business, owner, manager, resident, or address of the premises where the sign is located and which
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 258/497
contains no other material.
Illuminated Sign: A sign illuminated by an artificial light source either directed upon it or illuminated from an interior source.
Informational Sign: Any on site sign giving information to employees, visitors, or delivery vehicles, but containing no advertising or identification.
Institutional Sign: A sign which identifies the name and other characteristics of a public or semipublic institution on the site where the sign is located.
Integral Sign: A sign carrying the name of a building, its date of erection, monumental citations, commemorative tablets and the like when carved into
stone, concrete or similar material or made of bronze, aluminum, or other permanent type of construction and made an integral part of the structure.
Marquee: See definition of sign related: canopy sign.
Maximum Height Of Sign: The vertical distance from the base of the sign, or the grade of the road centerline, whichever is higher, to the top of the
sign.
Menu Board: A sign containing a food price list for restaurant customers, but containing no advertising or identification.
Message Sign: A sign which allows for the graphic and/or verbal content to be changed, when desired, through electronic or manual methods.
Monument Sign: A block type sign structure not supported by poles or braces, but rather placed directly on the ground.
Motion Sign: Any sign which revolves, rotates, has moving parts, or gives illusion of motion.
Multivision Sign: Any sign composed in whole or part of a series of vertical or horizontal slats or cylinders that are capable of being rotated at
intervals so that partial rotation of the group of slats or cylinders produces a different image and, when properly functioning, allows, on a single sign
structure, the display at any given time one of two (2) or more images.
Noncommercial Speech: Dissemination of messages not classified as commercial speech that include, but are not limited to, messages concerning
political, religious, social, ideological, public service and informational topics.
Nonprofit Organization: A corporation formed under Minnesota State Statutes chapter 317 and which is formed for a purpose not involving pecuniary
gain to its shareholders or members and paying no dividends or other pecuniary enumeration, directly or indirectly, to its shareholders or members,
or a community or civic group such as the Lion's Club, League of Women Voters, etc.
Parapet: A low wall which is located on a roof of a building.
Permitted Signs: Signs allowed with or without a permit.
Political Sign: A sign used exclusively to call attention to the candidacy of any individual or party for elective office which appears on the official ballot
to be voted upon by the citizens of the City.
Portable Sign: A sign so designed as to be moveable from one location to another and which is not permanently attached to the ground, sales
display device or structure. A temporary sign.
Principal Frontage: The wall of the principal building on a lot which fronts toward the principal public streets.
Prohibited Signs: Signs not allowed in the City.
Projecting Sign: A sign, other than a wall sign, which is affixed to a building and which extends perpendicular from the building wall.
Public Entrance: Any passage or opening which affords entry and access to the general public or customer.
Public Entrance, Common: A public entrance providing access for the utilization and benefit of two (2) or more tenants or building occupants.
Public Signs: Signs of a noncommercial nature and in the public interest, erected by or on the order of a public officer in the performance of his or her
public duty.
Pylon Sign: A freestanding sign mounted on top of a single post which is greater than ten feet (10') in height.
Reader Board: A message sign with an electronic changing message.
Real Estate Development Project Sign: A temporary business sign advertising a new subdivision or development.
Real Estate Sign: A business sign placed upon a property advertising that particular property for sale, or for rent or for lease.
Roof Line: The top of the coping or, when the building has a pitched roof, the intersection of the outside wall with the roof.
Roof Sign: A sign erected, constructed or attached wholly or in part upon or over the roof of a building.
Rummage Sale Sign: Temporary signs announcing a noncommercial rummage or garage sale.
Shimmering Sign: A sign which reflects an oscillating sometimes distorted visual image.
Sign: The use of any words, numerals, figures, devices or trademarks by which anything is made known such as are used to show an individual, a
firm, a profession or business and are visible to the general public.
Sign Area: The area within the marginal lines of the surface of a sign which bear the advertisement or, in the case of messages, figures or symbols
attached directly to a building or sign structure; that area which is included in the smallest rectangle or series of geometric figures used to
circumscribe the message, figure or symbol displayed thereon.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 259/497
Sign Structure: The supports, uprights, bracing and framework for a sign including the sign area.
Street Frontage: The proximity of a parcel of land to one or more streets. An interior lot has one street frontage and a corner lot has two (2) or more
frontages.
Temporary Sign: A sign erected or displayed for a specified period of time.
Time And/Or Temperature Sign: A sign that displays the current time and/or temperature without advertising material, company name, logo or other
identifying marks.
Total Allowable Sign Area: The maximum allowable gross surface area in square feet of a sign or signs. The maximum number of signs cannot be
arranged and integrated so as to create a surface area in excess of this requirement.
Traffic Sign: A sign which is erected by a governmental unit for the purpose of directing or guiding traffic.
UL Approved: A device which has been approved by the "Underwriters' Laboratories (48)", a U.S. nonprofit organization which establishes standards
for electrical equipment.
Video Display Sign: A sign that changes its message or background in a manner or method of display characterized by motion or pictorial imagery,
which may or may not include text and depicts action or a special effect to imitate movement, the presentation of pictorials or graphics displayed in a
progression of frames that gives the illusion of motion, including, but not limited to, the illusion of moving objects, moving patterns or bands of light, or
expanding or contracting shapes, not including electronic changeable copy signs. Video display signs include projected images or messages with
these characteristics onto buildings or other objects.
Wall Graphics: A sign painted directly on an exterior wall.
Wall Sign: A sign affixed to the exterior wall of a building and which is parallel to the building wall. A wall sign does not project more than twelve
inches (12") from the surface to which it is attached, nor extend beyond the top of the parapet wall.
Window Sign: A sign affixed to or inside of a window in view of the general public. This does not include merchandise on display.
SITE PLAN: A map, drawn to scale, depicting the development of a tract of land, including, but not limited to, the location and relationship of structures,
streets, driveways, recreation areas, parking areas, utilities, landscaping, and walkways, as related to a proposed development.
SLOPE: The degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually, expressed in percent of degrees.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: Any solar collector or other solar device or any structural design of a building whose primary purpose is to collect, convert and
store solar energy for useful purposes including heating and cooling of buildings, domestic water heating, electric power generation and other energy using
processes.
STACKING AREA (MAGAZINE SPACE): That area which allows for a line of automobiles in such instances as drive-up tellers and other vehicle service
areas.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, including belowground
portions of earth sheltered buildings; except, that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost
floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level directly above a basement, or unused under floor space, is more than six feet (6') above grade,
as defined herein, for more than fifty percent (50%) of the total perimeter or is more than twelve feet (12') above grade, as defined herein, at any point,
such basement or unused under floor space shall be considered a story.
STREET: A public right-of-way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a highway, thoroughfare, arterial, parkway, collector, throughway, road, avenue,
boulevard, lane, place, drive, court or otherwise designated, which has been dedicated or deeded to the public for public use and which affords principal
means of access to abutting property.
STREET, COLLECTOR: Collector roadways connect neighborhoods within and between subregions and distribute traffic between arterials and local
streets. Parking is restricted as necessary and posted speed limits typically range between thirty (30) and forty five (45) miles per hour. Collector streets
typically should have two (2) driving lanes, two (2) parking lanes, and a bicycle/pedestrian surface if necessary. Collector streets are typically spaced 0.25
to 1.0 mile apart. Traffic control typically involves local street stops, four-way stops, and some traffic signals. Collectors typically carry one thousand
(1,000) to fifteen thousand (15,000) vehicles per day.
STREET, INTERMEDIATE ARTERIAL: Intermediate arterials function at a level between the minor arterial and major arterial categories. Intermediate
arterials are not limited access facilities but serve primarily trips between rather than within subregions.
STREET, LOCAL: Local streets provide direct land access within neighborhoods and other homogeneous land use areas and provide connections to
collector streets. Parking is usually unrestricted, the posted speed limit is thirty (30) miles per hour or less, and streets are two (2) lanes wide plus space
for parking. Traffic control is most likely to involve strategies such as stop signs, cul-de-sacs, and diverters. Local streets typically carry about one
thousand (1,000) vehicles or less per day. Residential streets typically carry about ten (10) trips per household per day.
STREET, MINOR ARTERIAL: Minor arterials connect adjacent subregions and activity centers within subregions. Land access is usually restricted and
trips are somewhat longer than on collector streets. Parking is often restricted and the posted speed limit is thirty five (35) to forty five (45) miles per hour.
Width is dependent on the volume carried. Minor arterials are typically spaced 0.5 to 2.0 miles apart. Traffic control typically includes traffic signal timing
and land access spacing. Typical traffic volumes range from five thousand (5,000) to thirty thousand (30,000) ADT.
STREET PAVEMENT: The wearing or exposed surface of a street or roadway used by vehicular traffic.
STREET, PRINCIPAL (MAJOR) ARTERIAL: Major arterials provide a high level of mobility between subregions, serving medium to long distance trips.
Principal arterials are grade separated or have high capacity controlled at grade intersections. No parking is permitted, the posted speed limit is typically
forty (40) to sixty five (65) miles per hour and traffic volumes range from ten thousand (10,000) to fifty thousand (50,000) ADT. Major arterials are typically
spaced one to three (3) miles apart (see City transportation plan).
STREET WIDTH: The shortest distance between the lines delineating the right-of-way of a street.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 260/497
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change, other than incidental repairs, which would prolong or modify the life of the supporting members of a building,
such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, or foundations.
STRUCTURE: Anything which is built, constructed or erected; an edifice or building of any kind; or any piece of work artificially built up and/or composed
of parts joined together in some definite manner, whether temporary or permanent in character. Among other things, structures include buildings,
manufactured homes, walls, fences, swimming pools, billboards and poster panels.
STRUCTURE, PUBLIC: An edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite
manner which is owned or rented and operated by a Federal, State, or local government agency.
SURVEYOR: A land surveyor registered under Minnesota State laws.
SWIMMING POOL: Any pool, tank, depression or excavation inground or aboveground, including swimming pools, spas and hot tubs but not including
stormwater facilities, which causes or has the capacity to retain water with a depth greater than thirty inches (30") and which is intended to be used by
individuals for swimming, wading or immersion purposes.
TAPROOM: An area for the on-sale consumption of malt liquor produced by the brewer for consumption on the premises of a brewery or an abutting
property in common ownership of the brewer, which may include sales of malt liquor produced and packaged at the brewery for off premises consumption
as allowed by Minnesota Statutes, as amended.
TASTING ROOM: An area for the on-sale consumption of distilled spirits or wine produced on the premises of or abutting a winery or distillery and in
common ownership to the producer, which may include sales of beverages produced and packaged at the winery or distillery for off premises consumption
as may be allowed by Minnesota Statutes, as amended.
TOWNHOUSES: Structures housing three (3) or more dwelling units contiguous to each other only by the sharing of one common wall, such structures to
be of the townhouse or rowhouse type as contrasted to multiple apartment structures.
TRANSPORTATION TERMINAL: Taxi, air, train, bus and mass transit terminal and storage areas.
TRAVEL TRAILER: A. Any vehicle or structure designed and used for human living quarters which meets all of the following qualifications:
1. Is not used as the permanent residence of the owner or occupant.
2. Is used for temporary living quarters by the owner or occupant while engaged in recreational or vacation activities.
3. Is towed or otherwise transported by its own or by other motive power, on the public streets or highways incidental to such recreational or vacation
activity.
B. The term "travel trailer" shall not include manufactured home.
C. The term "travel trailer" shall include, but not be limited to, campers, camper tents, house trailers, camping trailers, travel trailers, tent trailers and
any other self-propelled vehicle constructed to provide living accommodations. (See also definition of recreational vehicle.)
TRAVEL TRAILER PARK: A park, court, campsite, lot, parcel or tract of land designed, maintained or intended for the purpose of supplying the location or
accommodation for any travel trailers as defined herein, and upon which said trailers are parked. The term "travel trailer park" shall include all buildings
used or intended for use as part of the equipment thereof whether a charge is made for the use of the park and its facilities or not. "Travel trailer park" shall
not include automobile, mobile home or trailer sales lots on which unoccupied trailers or mobile homes are parked for purposes of inspection and sale.
TRIPLEX: Single structures which contain three (3) subdivided dwelling units all of which have individually separate entrances from the exterior of the
structure.
TRUCK STOP: A motor fuel station devoted principally to the needs of semitractor trailers and straight trucks (Class 4 or larger), including short term
parking areas for required operator rest periods, or repair (including major auto repair and tire services), dispensing of motor fuel, truck scale, and the sale
of accessories or equipment for trucks and similar commercial vehicles; a truck stop may also include overnight accommodations, lounge areas, shower
facilities, convenience or full service restaurants, a car and/or truck wash, or other ancillary uses, which also serve the travelling public in general.
URBAN SERVICE AREA: That portion of the City, as geographically defined by the Comprehensive Plan, which is or has the future potential for
development at urban densities and/or urban uses and in which urban improvements may be required.
USABLE OPEN SPACE: A required ground area or terrace area on a lot which is graded, developed, landscaped and equipped and intended and
maintained for either active or passive recreation, or both, available and accessible to and usable by all persons occupying a dwelling unit or rooming unit
on the lot and their guests. Such areas shall be grassed and landscaped or covered only for a recreational purpose. Roofs, driveways and parking areas
shall not constitute usable open space.
USE: The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is designated, arranged, or intended or for which it is occupied, utilized or maintained,
and shall include the performance of such activity as defined by the performance standards of this title.
VARIANCE: A modification of or variation from the provisions of this title consistent with Minnesota Statutes section 462.357 as applied to a specific
property and granted pursuant to the standards and procedures of this title; except, that a variance shall not be used for modification of the allowable uses
within a district and shall not allow uses that are prohibited.
VETERINARY CLINIC: Those uses concerned with the diagnosis, treatment and medical care of animals including animal or pet hospitals.
WAREHOUSING: The storage of materials or equipment within an enclosed building.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 261/497
WATER BODY: A body of water (lake, pond) or a depression of land or expanded part of a river, or an enclosed basin that holds water and is surrounded
by land.
WATERSHED: The area drained by the natural and artificial drainage system, bounded peripherally by a bridge or stretch of high land dividing drainage
areas.
WETLANDS RELATED:
Act, Wetland: When not used in reference to a specific State or Federal Act, means the Wetland Conservation Act of 1991, Laws 1991, chapter 354,
as amended by Laws 1993, chapter 175.
Activity, Wetland: Draining or filling a wetland wholly or partially.
Agricultural Land: For use in reference to exemptions, means land devoted to the production of horticultural, row, close grown, introduced pasture,
introduced hayland crops, and growing nursery stock. For use in all other places in this title, agricultural land means land devoted to the production of
horticultural, row, close grown, introduced pasture, and introduced hayland crops, and to the pasturing of livestock and dairy animals, growing
nursery stock, and animal feedlots, and shall include contiguous land and buildings under the same ownership associated with the production of the
above, for example, farmyards.
Agricultural Stabilization And Conservation Service Or ASCS: An agency of the United States Department of Agriculture.
Aquaculture: To cultivate plants and animals in water for harvest, including hydroponics and raising fish in fish farms.
Best Management Practices: State approved and published practices associated with draining, filling, or replacing wetlands that are capable of
preventing and minimizing degradation of surface water and groundwater.
Board: The Board of Water and Soil Resources under Minnesota Statutes section 103B.101.
City: The City of Otsego.
Commissioner: The Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources.
Creation: Construction of wetlands in an area that was not wetlands in the past.
Day: Working days when used in a time period of fifteen (15) days or less and calendar days when used in a time period greater than fifteen (15)
days. The day of the event shall not be used in counting any period of time.
Department: The Department of Natural Resources.
Ditch: An open channel to conduct the flow of water, as defined in Minnesota Statutes section 103E.005, subdivision 8.
Drain Or Wetland Drainage, Wetland: Any method for removing or diverting waters from wetlands. The methods shall include, but are not limited to,
excavation of an open ditch, installation of subsurface drainage tile, filling, diking, or pumping.
Drainage System: A system of ditch or tile, or both, to drain property, including laterals, improvements, and improvements of outlets.
Excavation: The displacement or removal of the sediment or other materials by any method.
Fill, Wetland: Any solid material added to or redeposited in a wetland that would alter its cross section or hydrological characteristics, obstruct flow
patterns, change the wetland boundary, or convert the wetland to a nonwetland. The term does not include posts and pilings for linear projects such
as bridges, elevated walkways, or power line structures, or structures traditionally built on pilings such as docks and boathouses. The term does
include posts that result in bringing the wetland into a nonaquatic use or significantly altering the wetland's functions and values, such as the
construction of office and industrial developments, parking structures, restaurants, stores, hotels, multi-family housing projects, and similar
structures. The term does not include slash or woody vegetation, if the slash or woody vegetation originated from vegetation growing in the wetland
and does not impair the flow or circulation of water or the reach of the wetland.
Floodplain Wetland: A wetland located in the floodplain of a watercourse, with no well defined inlets or outlets, including tile systems, ditches, or
natural watercourses. This may include the floodplain itself when it exhibits wetland characteristics.
Flow Through Wetland: A wetland with both a well defined outlet and one or more well defined inlets, including tile systems, ditches or natural
watercourses.
Hydric Soils: Soils that are saturated, flooded, or ponded long enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part.
Hydrophytic Vegetation: Macrophytic plant life growing in water, soil, or on a substrate that is at least periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of
excessive water content.
Impact, Wetland: A loss in the quantity, quality, or biological diversity of a wetland caused by draining or filling.
Impacted Wetland: A wetland that has been drained or filled, partially or wholly, and is subject to replacement.
Infrastructure: Stormwater and sanitary sewer piping, outfalls, inlets, street subbase, roads, ditches, culverts, bridges and any other work defined
specifically by a local government unit as constituting a capital improvement.
Introduced Pasture: An area devoted to the production of forage and cultivated in a rotation of row crops or small grains or interseeded with
introduced or native species at least twice during the 10-year period before January 1, 1991. The 10-year period may be enlarged to the 20-year
period before January 1, 1991, upon clear evidence of the qualifying practice in Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service or other aerial
photographs or records, or the affidavit of a plant ecologist certified by the Ecological Society of America. These areas must be harvested by
mechanical methods at least two (2) years during the period January 1, 1986, to January 1, 1991. These areas are considered to be in agricultural
crop production.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 262/497
Isolated Wetland: A wetland without well defined inlets or outlets, including tile systems, ditches, or natural watercourses.
Landowner, Wetland: A person or entity having the rights necessary to drain or fill a wetland, or to establish and maintain a replacement or banked
wetland. Typically, the landowner is a fee title owner or a holder of an easement, license, lease, or rental agreement providing the necessary rights.
The right must not be limited by a lien or other encumbrance that could override the obligations assumed with the replacement or banking of a
wetland.
Mining: Any of the following activities:
A. Any removal of the exposed layer of the earth's surface or the removal of any layer of soil under the exposed layer of the earth's surface,
whether sod, dirt, topsoil, sand, gravel, soil, stone or minerals performed with the intent of moving the same to another site as a raw material or
processed product.
B. The removal of peat and metallic minerals as provided in Minnesota Statutes sections 93.461 and 93.481.
Nondegraded Wetland: A wetland that has not been partially drained or filled by human activities.
Pasture: Land used for grazing by domestic livestock.
Peace Officer: The meaning given in Minnesota Statutes section 626.84.
Project: An action or series of actions necessary to accomplish an ultimate purpose and that will cause a physical manipulation of the environment,
directly or indirectly. Draining or filling of wetlands may be a component of a project.
Project Specific: The applicant for the replacement plan approval will construct the replacement as part of the project, rather than obtain the
replacement from a wetland bank.
Public Transportation Project: A project conducted by a public agency involving transportation facilities open to the public.
Public Value Of Wetlands: The public benefit and use of wetlands for water quality, floodwater retention, public recreation, commercial uses, and
other public uses.
Public Waters Wetlands: All types 3, 4, and 5 wetlands, as defined in United States Fish and Wildlife Service Circular No. 39 (1971 edition), that were
inventoried by the department as public waters under Minnesota Statutes section 103G.201.
Replacement Wetland: A wetland restored or created to replace public values lost at an impacted wetland.
Restoration: Reestablishment of an area that was historically wetlands but currently provides no or minimal wetland functions due to manmade
alteration such as filling or drainage.
Right-Of-Way Acreage: The meaning given it in Minnesota Statutes section 103E.285, subdivision 6.
Riverine Wetland: A wetland contained within the banks of a channel that may contain moving water or that forms a connecting link between two (2)
bodies of standing water.
Set Aside: The cropland acreage annually retired as a condition to landowner participation in United States Department of Agriculture commodity
programs.
Silviculture: The scientific management of forest trees.
Soil And Water Conservation District: A legal subdivision of State government under Minnesota Statutes chapter 103C.
Soil Conservation Service: A legal subdivision of State government under Minnesota Statutes chapter 103C.
Tributary Wetland: A wetland with a well defined outlet, including tile systems, ditches, or natural watercourses, but without a well defined inlet.
Utility: A sanitary sewer, storm sewer, potable water distribution and transmission, distribution, or furnishing, at wholesale or retail, of natural or
manufactured gas, electricity, telephone, or radio service or communications.
Watershed: The 81 major watershed units delineated by the map "State of Minnesota Watershed Boundaries - 1979" as produced by the Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources, Office of Planning and Research, Water Policy Planning Program, with funding from the Legislative Commission
on Minnesota Resources.
Watershed Management Organization: A watershed district wholly within the metropolitan area or a joint powers entity established wholly or partly
within the metropolitan area by special law or by agreement that performs some or all of the functions of a watershed district for a watershed and that
has the characteristics and the authority specified under Minnesota Statutes section 103B.211. Lake improvement or conservation districts are not
watershed management organizations.
Wetlands: A wetland, the wetland, or wetland area.
A. Lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water table is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by
shallow water. For purposes of this definition, wetlands must:
1. Have a predominance of hydric soils;
2. Be inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions; and
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 263/497
3. Under normal circumstances, support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation.
B. A distinct hydrologic feature with characteristics found in subsection A of this definition, surrounded by nonwetland and including all contiguous
wetland types, except those connected solely by riverine wetlands. "Wetland area" means a portion of "a wetland" or "the wetland".
C. Wetlands does not include public waters wetlands and public waters that are designated on the public waters inventory maps prepared under
Minnesota Statutes section 103G.201.
Wetlands In A Cultivated Field: A wetland where greater than fifty percent (50%) of its boundary abuts land that was in agricultural crop production in
six (6) of the ten (10) years before January 1, 1991.
Wetlands Located On Agricultural Land: A wetland where greater than fifty percent (50%) of its boundary abuts agricultural land.
WHOLESALING: The selling of goods, equipment and materials by bulk to another business that in turn sells to the final customer.
WILD AND SCENIC RECREATIONAL RIVER DISTRICT RELATED: The following definitions shall apply only to chapter 95 of this title which establishes
standards for development within the Wild and Scenic Recreational River District:
Bluff Line: A line along the top of a slope connecting the points at which the slope becomes less than thirteen percent (13%). This applies to those
slopes within the land use district which are beyond the setback provision from the ordinary high water level.
Commissioner: The Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources.
Open Space Recreational Uses: Recreation use particularly oriented to and utilizing the outdoor character of an area, including hiking and riding
trails, primitive campsites, campgrounds, waysides, parks and recreation areas.
Ordinary High Water Level: An elevation delineating the highest water level which has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave
evidence upon the landscape. In areas where the ordinary high water level is not evident, setbacks shall be measured from the stream bank of the
following water bodies that have permanent flow or open water: the main channel, adjoining side channels, backwaters and sloughs.
Planned Cluster Development: A pattern of subdivision development which places housing units into compact groupings while providing a commonly
owned or dedicated open space.
Selective Cutting: The removal of single scattered trees.
Setback: The minimum horizontal distance between a structure and the ordinary high water level, bluff line, road or highway, for purposes of the
WSRR District. This definition supersedes the setback definition in this section.
Single-Family Dwelling: A detached building containing one dwelling unit.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS): Any device that is designed to convert wind power to another form of energy such as electricity,
mechanical or heat (also referred to by such common names of wind charge, wind turbine and windmill).
YARD: An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as
otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the mean horizontal distance between the lot line
and main building shall be used.
YARD, DEPTH OF: The mean horizontal distance between the line of a building and the lot line.
YARD, FRONT: The front yard of a lot shall be considered to be the area extending along the full length of a front lot line between side lot lines and to the
depth of the front line of the principal building.
YARD, REAR: A space extending between the rear line of the main building and the rear line of the lot and extending the full width of the lot.
YARD, REQUIRED: That distance specified in the yard requirements pertaining to setbacks. Setbacks and required yards are used interchangeably.
YARD, SIDE: A yard between the principal building and the side line of the lot extending from the front lot line of the lot to the rear yard.
YARD WASTE COMPOST FACILITY: A site used to compost yard waste materials, including all structures or processing equipment used to control
drainage; collect and treat leachate; and storage areas for the incoming waste, the final product, and residuals resulting from the composting process.
YARD WASTE MATERIALS: Garden wastes, leaves, lawn cuttings, weeds and prunings generated by residential or commercial properties.
ZERO LOT LINE: The reduction of side yard setback requirements to zero, permitting the placement of a structure near or adjacent to the side yard lot
line. With zero lot line, no portion of the structure or accessory appurtenance shall project over the lot line.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The duly appointed officer charged with the administration and enforcement of this title.
ZONING AMENDMENT: A change authorized by the City in either the text of this title or in the mapped boundaries of the district.
ZONING DISTRICT: An area or areas of the City (as delineated on the Zoning Map) set aside for specific uses with specific regulations and provisions for
use and development as defined by this title.
ZONING DISTRICT OVERLAY: A zoning district containing regulations superimposed upon other zoning district regulations and superseding the
underlying zoning district use regulations. In the case of a conflict of said regulations, the more restrictive shall apply.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 264/497
ZONING DISTRICT UNDERLYING (BASE): All zoning districts except overlay zoning districts.
ZONING MAP: The map or maps incorporated into this title as part thereof, designating the zoning districts. (Prior Code § 20-2-2; amd. Ord. 2017-14, 11-
13-2017; 2018 Code)
Chapter 3
ADMINISTRATION - AMENDMENTS (TEXT AND MAP)
11-3-1: AMENDMENTS AUTHORIZED:
The regulations, restrictions and boundaries set forth in this title may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed or repealed. (Prior Code
§ 20-3-1)
11-3-2: PROCEDURE:
A. Requests for an amendment to this title (text or map) shall be filed with the City on an official application form and processed in accordance with this
chapter and Minnesota Statutes section 15.99.
1. An application shall be accompanied by a fee as provided in section 3-1-2 of this Code.
2. Such application shall also be accompanied by detailed written and graphic materials fully explaining the proposed change, development, or use
including the information required by section 11-9-6 of this title.
3. The request shall be considered as being officially submitted when the Zoning Administrator determines that there is compliance with all the
information requirements.
4. The City Council, the Planning Commission, and the City staff shall have the authority to request additional information from the applicant or to retain
expert testimony at the expense of the applicant, and said information is to be declared necessary to establish performance conditions in relation to
all pertinent sections of this title.
5. Failure on the part of the applicant to supply all necessary supportive information may be grounds for denial of the request.
B. The applicant shall supply proof of title of the property for which the rezoning is requested, consisting of an abstract of title or registered property
abstract currently certified, together with any unrecorded documents whereby the petitioners acquire a legal ownership or equitable ownership interest
and, as applicable, supply documented authorization from the owner(s) of the property in question to proceed with the requested rezoning.
C. Upon receipt of said application, the City Clerk shall set a public hearing to be conducted by the Planning Commission following proper hearing
notification as applicable.
1. Notice of said hearing shall consist of a legal property description and description of request, and be published in the official newspaper at least ten
(10) days prior to the hearing.
2. Written notification of said hearing shall be mailed to surrounding area property owners within three hundred fifty feet (350') of the property in
question at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
3. A copy of the notice and a list of the property owners and addresses to which the notice was sent shall be attested and made a part of the records of
the proceeding.
4. Failure of a property owner to receive said notice shall not invalidate any such proceedings as set forth within this chapter, provided a bona fide
attempt has been made to comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.
D. The Zoning Administrator shall instruct the appropriate staff persons to prepare technical reports where applicable, and provide general assistance in
preparing a recommendation on the action to the Planning Commission and City Council.
E. The applicant or a designated representative thereof shall appear before the Planning Commission and City Council in order to answer questions
concerning the proposed request. Failure by the applicant to attend meetings at which the application is to be considered by the Planning Commission
or City Council may be grounds for denial of the request.
F. The Planning Commission and City Council shall consider possible adverse effects of the proposed amendment. Their judgment shall be based upon
(but not limited to) the following factors:
1. The proposed action's consistency with the specific policies and provisions of the City Comprehensive Plan.
2. The proposed use's compatibility with present and future land uses of the area.
3. The proposed use's conformity with all performance standards contained within this title and other provisions of this Code.
4. Traffic generation of the proposed use in relation to capabilities of streets serving the property.
5. The proposed use can be accommodated by existing public services and facilities and will not overburden the City's service capacity.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 265/497
G. The Planning Commission shall make a finding of fact and recommend such actions or conditions relating to the request as they deem necessary to
carry out the intent and purpose of this title.
H. The City Council shall not act upon an amendment until they have received a report and recommendation from the Planning Commission or until sixty
(60) days after the first regular Planning Commission meeting at which the request was considered.
I. Upon completion of the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, the request shall be scheduled for consideration on the agenda of the
City Council. Such reports and recommendations shall be entered in and made part of the permanent written record of the City Council meeting.
J. Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission and the City staff, the City Council shall have the option to set and hold a
public hearing if deemed necessary.
K. If, upon receiving said reports and recommendations of the Planning Commission, the City Council finds that specific inconsistencies exist in the review
process and thus the final recommendation of the City Council will differ from that of the Planning Commission, the City Council may, before taking final
action, refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for further consideration.
L. Approval of a proposed amendment shall require a majority vote of the City Council. Approval of a proposed Zoning Map amendment which changes all
or part of the existing classification of a zoning district from agriculture or residential to business, industrial, or planned unit development that allows for
commercial or industrial uses shall require a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the City Council.
M. The Zoning Administrator shall provide the applicant and property owner with written notice of the City Council's findings of fact and decision regarding
the application.
N. The amendment shall not become effective until such time as the City Council approves an ordinance reflecting said amendment and after said
ordinance is published in the official newspaper. The City Clerk, at the applicant's expense, shall record the ordinance with the appropriate Wright
County Office. No building permits for the property in question will be granted until recording of the action has been completed.
O. Whenever an application for an amendment has been considered and denied by the City Council, a similar application and proposal for an amendment
affecting the same property or ordinance change shall not be considered again by the Planning Commission or City Council for at least one year from
the date of its denial except as follows:
1. Applications are withdrawn prior to the City Council taking action on the matter.
2. If the City Council determines that the circumstances surrounding a previous application have changed significantly.
3. If the City Council decides to reconsider such matter by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the entire City Council. (Prior Code § 20-3-2)
11-3-3: INITIATION OF AMENDMENT:
The City Council or Planning Commission may, upon their own motion, initiate a request to amend the text or the district boundaries of this title. The
procedural requirements of subsections 11-3-2A and B of this chapter shall not apply to such proposed amendments except to the extent required by State
Statute. Any person owning real estate or having documented interest therein within the City may initiate a request to amend the district and map
boundaries or text of this title so as to affect the said real estate. (Prior Code § 20-3-3)
11-3-4: CERTIFICATION OF TAXES AND FEES PAID:
Prior to approving an application for an amendment, the applicant shall provide certification to the City that there are no delinquent Property Taxes, special
assessments, interest, or City utility fees due upon the parcel of land to which the application relates. (Prior Code § 20-3-4)
Chapter 4
ADMINISTRATION - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
11-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of a conditional use permit is to provide the City with a reasonable degree of discretion in determining the suitability of certain designated
uses upon the general welfare, public health and safety. In making this determination, whether or not the conditional use is to be allowed, the City may
consider the nature of the adjoining land or buildings, the effect upon traffic into and from the premises, or on any adjoining roads, and all other or further
factors as the City shall deem a prerequisite of consideration in determining the effect of the use on the general welfare, public health and safety. (Prior
Code § 20-4-1)
11-4-2: PROCEDURE:
A. Request for a conditional use permit shall be filed with the City on an official application form and processed in accordance with this chapter and
Minnesota Statutes section 15.99.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 266/497
1. An application shall be accompanied by a fee as provided in section 3-1-2 of this Code.
2. Such application shall also be accompanied by detailed written and graphic materials fully explaining the proposed change, development, or use
including the information required by section 11-9-6 of this title.
3. The request shall be considered as being officially submitted when the Zoning Administrator determines that there is compliance with all the
information requirements.
4. The City Council, the Planning Commission, and the City staff shall have the authority to request additional information from the applicant or to retain
expert testimony at the expense of the applicant, and said information is to be declared necessary to establish performance conditions in relation to
all pertinent sections of this title.
5. Failure on the part of the applicant to supply all necessary supportive information may be grounds for denial of the request.
B. The applicant shall supply proof of title and the legal description of the property for which the conditional use permit is requested, consisting of an
abstract of title or registered property abstract currently certified, together with any unrecorded documents whereby the petitioners acquire a legal
ownership or equitable ownership interest and, as applicable, supply documented authorization from the owner(s) of the property in question to
proceed with the requested conditional use permit.
C. Upon receipt of said application, the City Clerk shall set a public hearing to be conducted by the Planning Commission following proper hearing
notification as applicable.
1. Notice of said hearing shall consist of a legal property description and description of request, and be published in the official newspaper at least ten
(10) days prior to the hearing.
2. Written notification of said hearing shall be mailed to surrounding area property owners within three hundred fifty feet (350') of the property in
question at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
3. A copy of the notice and a list of the property owners and addresses to which the notice was sent shall be attested and made a part of the records of
the proceeding.
4. Failure of a property owner to receive said notice shall not invalidate any such proceedings as set forth in this chapter, provided a bona fide attempt
has been made to comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.
D. The Zoning Administrator shall instruct the appropriate staff persons to prepare technical reports where applicable, and provide general assistance in
preparing a recommendation on the action to the Planning Commission and City Council.
E. The applicant or a designated representative thereof shall appear before the Planning Commission and City Council in order to answer questions
concerning the proposed request. Failure by the applicant to attend meetings at which the application is to be considered by the Planning Commission
or City Council may be grounds for denial of the request.
F. The Planning Commission and City Council shall consider possible adverse effects of the proposed conditional use. Their judgment shall be based upon
(but not limited to) the following factors:
1. The proposed action's consistency with the specific policies and provisions of the City Comprehensive Plan.
2. The proposed use's compatibility with present and future land uses of the area.
3. The proposed use's conformity with all performance standards contained within this title and other provisions of this Code.
4. Traffic generation of the proposed use in relation to capabilities of streets serving the property.
5. The proposed use can be accommodated by existing public services and facilities and will not overburden the City's service capacity.
G. The Planning Commission shall make a finding of fact and recommend such actions or conditions relating to the request as they deem necessary to
carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter.
H. The City Council shall not consider or act upon a conditional use permit until they have received a report and recommendation from the Planning
Commission or until sixty (60) days after the first regular Planning Commission meeting at which the request was considered.
I. Upon completion of the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, the request shall be scheduled for consideration on the agenda of the
City Council. Such reports and recommendations shall be entered in and made part of the permanent written record of the City Council meeting.
J. Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission and City staff, the City Council shall have the option to set and hold a public
hearing if deemed necessary and shall make a recorded finding of fact and may impose any condition it considers necessary to protect the public
health, safety and welfare.
K. If, upon receiving said reports and recommendations of the Planning Commission and City staff, the City Council finds that specific inconsistencies exist
in the review process and thus the final recommendation of the City Council will differ from that of the Planning Commission, the City Council may,
before taking final action, refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for further consideration.
L. Approval of a request shall require passage by a majority vote of the City Council.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 267/497
M. The Zoning Administrator shall provide the applicant and property owner with written notice of the City Council's findings of fact and decision regarding
the application.
N. If a request for a conditional use permit receives approval of the City Council, the City Clerk, at the applicant's expense, shall record such with the
appropriate Wright County Office. No building permits for the property in question will be granted until recording of the action has been completed.
O. Whenever an application for a conditional use permit has been considered and denied by the City Council, a similar application for the conditional use
permit affecting substantially the same property shall not be considered again by the Planning Commission or City Council for at least one year from
the date of its denial, except as follows:
1. If the applicant or property owner can clearly demonstrate that the circumstances surrounding the previous conditional use permit application have
changed significantly.
2. If the City Council determines that the circumstances surrounding a previous application have changed significantly.
3. If the City Council decides to reconsider such matter by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the entire City Council. (Prior Code § 20-4-2)
11-4-3: AGREEMENT:
The approval of a conditional use permit and the stipulations, limitations and conditions therein shall be applied to the property in question. All written and
graphic materials officially submitted to the City shall be treated as a formal agreement between the applicant and the City. Once approved, no changes,
modifications or alterations shall be made to any plan detail, standard, or specifications without prior submission of a plan modification request to the
Zoning Administrator for review and approval. (Prior Code § 20-4-3)
11-4-4: AMENDED PERMIT:
The owner of a property with a conditional use permit may propose an amendment to modify the conditional use at any time. No changes in the approved
plans, intensity or scope of the conditional use shall, however, be undertaken without prior approval of those changes by the City. Requests for permit
modifications shall be processed according to section 11-4-2 of this chapter and shall be subject to all requirements and standards of this title; except, that
those permit modifications meeting the following criteria, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, may be approved administratively in accordance with
chapter 8 of this title:
A. Only applications for preexisting uses or uses explicitly classified as allowed uses, including accessory uses, by the approved conditional use permit
governing the use of the property are eligible for administrative approval.
B. The permit modification shall not result in an increase in hours of operation, traffic, employees, or number of dwelling units, expand any principal
building or otherwise increase the intensity of the use of the site.
C. The permit modification shall comply with all requirements of the applicable zoning district and all other performance standards of this title or this Code.
D. All applications for permit modification shall be complete and in full accordance with the requirements of section 11-9-6 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-4-
4)
11-4-5: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT APPROVAL:
A. Unless otherwise specified by the City Council at the time it is authorized, a conditional use permit shall be null and void and expire if the applicant fails
to utilize such conditional use permit and fulfill each and every condition attached thereto within one year from the date of its authorization unless a
petition for an extension of time in which to complete or utilize the permit has been granted by the Zoning Administrator; provided, that:
1. The extension is requested in writing and filed with the City at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the initial conditional use permit request.
2. The request for extension states facts demonstrating that a good faith attempt has been made to complete or utilize the use or activity permitted in
the conditional use permit.
3. A maximum of one administrative extension shall be granted.
4. The extension shall not exceed ninety (90) days from the initial conditional use permit expiration date.
5. There shall be no charge for the filing of a petition for an administrative extension.
B. Upon receiving a recommendation from the Planning Commission and City staff, the City Council may grant an extension of the conditional use permit
of greater than ninety (90) days; provided, that:
1. The conditions described in subsections A1, A2 and A3 of this section are satisfied.
2. The extension shall not exceed one year from the initial conditional use permit expiration date. (Prior Code § 20-4-5)
3. The filing of a petition for extension is subject to fee requirements established in section 3-1-2 of this Code. (Prior Code § 20-4-5; amd. 2018 Code)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 268/497
11-4-6: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
A. The Planning Commission may recommend, and the City Council may direct, the revocation of any conditional use permit for cause upon determination
that the authorized conditional use is not in conformance with the conditions of the permit or is in continued violation of this title, City codes, or other
applicable regulations.
B. The City Council or Planning Commission shall initiate an application and the Zoning Administrator shall notify the responsible person that he has an
opportunity to show cause why the permit should not be revoked.
C. The application shall be processed and considered pursuant to section 11-4-2 of this chapter. (Prior Code § 20-4-6)
11-4-7: PERFORMANCE SECURITY:
A. Except in the case of non-income producing residential property (excluding relocated structures), upon approval of a conditional use permit the City
shall be provided, where deemed necessary by the Council, with a performance security as approved by the City Attorney prior to the issuing of
building permits or initiation of work on the proposed improvements or development. Said security shall be non-cancelable and shall guarantee
conformance and compliance with the conditions of the conditional use permit and the ordinances of the City.
B. The security shall be in the amount equal to the Zoning Administrator's estimated costs of labor and materials for the proposed improvements or
development. Said project may be handled in stages upon the discretion of the Zoning Administrator.
C. The City shall hold the security until completion of the proposed improvements or development and a certificate of occupancy indicating compliance
with the conditional use permit and ordinances of the City has been issued by the City building official.
D. Failure to comply with the conditions of the conditional use permit or the ordinances of the City shall result in forfeiture of the security in whole or in part
depending upon the degree of noncompliance and at the discretion of the City Council.
E. Whenever a performance guarantee is imposed by the City, the applicant shall be required to enter into a performance agreement with the City. This
agreement is to provide authorization to the City to utilize the posted security and complete stipulated work should the applicant fail to meet the terms
and conditions of the permit. Said agreement shall hold harmless the City for completion of the work and address other matters as may be determined
by the City Attorney. (Prior Code § 20-4-7)
11-4-8: CERTIFICATION OF TAXES AND FEES PAID:
Prior to approving an application for a conditional use permit, the applicant shall provide certification to the City that there are no delinquent Property
Taxes, special assessments, interest, or City utility fees due upon the parcel of land to which the application relates. (Prior Code § 20-4-8)
11-4-9: REQUEST FOR PERMIT:
The City Council or the Planning Commission may, upon their own motion, initiate a request for a conditional use permit in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter. Any person owning real estate or having documented interest therein may initiate a request for a conditional use permit
applicable to said real estate in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. (Prior Code § 20-4-9)
Chapter 5
ADMINISTRATION - INTERIM USE PERMITS
11-5-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose and intent of allowing interim uses is:
A. To allow a use for a brief period of time until a permanent location is obtained or while the permanent location is under construction.
B. To allow a use that is presently judged acceptable by the City Council, but that with anticipated development or redevelopment, will not be acceptable in
the future or will be replaced in the future by a permitted or conditional use allowed within the respective district.
C. To allow a use which is reflective of anticipated long range change to an area and which is in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan; provided, that
said use maintains harmony and compatibility with surrounding uses and is in keeping with the architectural character and design standards of existing
uses and development. (Prior Code § 20-5-1)
11-5-2: PROCEDURE:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 269/497
A. Request for an interim use permit shall be filed with the City on an official application form and processed in accordance with this chapter and
Minnesota Statutes section 15.99.
1. An application shall be accompanied by a fee as provided by section 3-1-2 of this Code.
2. Such application shall also be accompanied by detailed written and graphic materials fully explaining the proposed change, development, or use
including the information required by section 11-9-6 of this title.
3. The request shall be considered as being officially submitted when the Zoning Administrator determines that there is compliance with all the
information requirements.
4. The City Council, the Planning Commission, and the City staff shall have the authority to request additional information from the applicant or to retain
expert testimony at the expense of the applicant, and said information is to be declared necessary to establish performance conditions in relation to
all pertinent sections of this title.
5. Failure on the part of the applicant to supply all necessary supportive information may be grounds for denial of the request.
B. The applicant shall supply proof of title and the legal description of the property for which the interim use permit is requested, consisting of an abstract
of title or registered property abstract currently certified, together with any unrecorded documents whereby the petitioners acquire a legal ownership or
equitable ownership interest and, as applicable, supply documented authorization from the owner(s) of the property in question to proceed with the
requested interim use permit.
C. Upon receipt of said application, the City Clerk shall set a public hearing to be conducted by the Planning Commission following proper hearing
notification as applicable.
1. Notice of said hearing shall consist of a legal property description and description of request, and be published in the official newspaper at least ten
(10) days prior to the hearing.
2. Written notification of said hearing shall be mailed to surrounding area property owners within three hundred fifty feet (350') of the property in
question at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
3. A copy of the notice and a list of the property owners and addresses to which the notice was sent shall be attested and made a part of the records of
the proceeding.
4. Failure of a property owner to receive said notice shall not invalidate any such proceedings as set forth within this chapter, provided a bona fide
attempt has been made to comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.
D. The Zoning Administrator shall instruct the appropriate staff persons to prepare technical reports where applicable, and provide general assistance in
preparing a recommendation on the action to the Planning Commission and City Council.
E. The applicant or a designated representative thereof shall appear before the Planning Commission and City Council in order to answer questions
concerning the proposed request. Failure by the applicant to attend meetings at which the application is to be considered by the Planning Commission
or City Council may be grounds for denial of the request.
F. The Planning Commission and City Council shall consider possible adverse effects of the proposed interim use. Their judgment shall be based upon
(but not limited to) the following factors:
1. The proposed action's consistency with the specific policies and provisions of the City Comprehensive Plan.
2. The proposed use's compatibility with present and future land uses of the area.
3. The proposed use's conformity with all performance standards contained within this title and other provisions of this Code.
4. Traffic generation of the proposed use in relation to capabilities of streets serving the property.
5. The proposed use can be accommodated by existing public services and facilities and will not overburden the City's service capacity.
G. The Planning Commission shall make a finding of fact and recommend such actions or conditions relating to the request as they deem necessary to
carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter.
H. The City Council shall not consider or act upon an interim use permit until they have received a report and recommendation from the Planning
Commission or until sixty (60) days after the first regular Planning Commission meeting at which the request was considered.
I. Upon completion of the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, the request shall be scheduled for consideration on the agenda of the
City Council. Such reports and recommendations shall be entered in and made part of the permanent written record of the City Council meeting.
J. Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission and City staff, the City Council shall have the option to set and hold a public
hearing if deemed necessary and shall make a recorded finding of fact and may impose any condition it considers necessary to protect the public
health, safety and welfare.
K. If, upon receiving said reports and recommendations of the Planning Commission and City staff, the City Council finds that specific inconsistencies exist
in the review process and thus the final recommendation of the City Council will differ from that of the Planning Commission, the City Council may,
before taking final action, refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for further consideration.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 270/497
L. Approval of a request shall require passage by a majority vote of the City Council.
M. The Zoning Administrator shall provide the applicant and property owner with written notice of the City Council's findings of fact and decision regarding
the application.
N. If a request for an interim use permit receives approval of the City Council, the City Clerk, at the applicant's expense, shall record such with the
appropriate Wright County Office. No building permits for the property in question will be granted until recording of the action has been completed.
O. Whenever an application for an interim use permit has been considered and denied by the City Council, a similar application for the interim use permit
affecting substantially the same property shall not be considered again by the Planning Commission or City Council for at least one year from the date
of its denial, except as follows:
1. If the applicant or property owner can clearly demonstrate that the circumstances surrounding the previous interim use permit application have
changed significantly.
2. If the City Council determines that the circumstances surrounding a previous application have changed significantly.
3. If the City Council decides to reconsider such matter by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the entire City Council. (Prior Code § 20-5-2)
11-5-3: AGREEMENT:
The approval of an interim use permit and the stipulations, limitations and conditions therein shall be applied to the property in question. All written and
graphic materials officially submitted to the City shall be treated as a formal agreement between the applicant and the City. Once approved, no changes,
modifications or alterations shall be made to any plan detail, standard, or specifications without prior submission of a plan modification request to the
Zoning Administrator for review and approval. (Prior Code § 20-5-3)
11-5-4: TERMINATION OF PERMIT:
An interim use shall terminate on the happening of any of the following events, whichever first occurs:
A. The date or event stated in the interim use permit.
B. Upon violation of conditions under which the interim use permit was issued.
C. Upon change in the City's zoning regulations that renders the use nonconforming.
D. The redevelopment of the use and property upon which it is located to a permitted or conditional use as allowed within the respective zoning district.
(Prior Code § 20-5-4)
11-5-5: AMENDED PERMIT:
The owner of a property with an interim use permit may propose an amendment to modify the interim use at any time. No changes in the approved plans,
intensity or scope of the interim use shall, however, be undertaken without prior approval of those changes by the City. Requests for permit modifications
shall be processed according to section 11-5-2 of this chapter and shall be subject to all requirements and standards of this title; except, that those permit
modifications meeting the following criteria, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, may be approved administratively in accordance with chapter 8 of
this title:
A. Only applications for preexisting uses or uses explicitly classified as allowed uses, including accessory uses, by the approved interim use permit
governing the use of the property are eligible for administrative approval.
B. The permit modification shall not result in an increase in hours of operation, traffic, employees, or number of dwelling units, expand any principal
building or otherwise increase the intensity of the use of the site.
C. The permit modification shall comply with all requirements of the applicable zoning district and all other performance standards of this title or this Code.
D. All applications for permit modification shall be complete and in full accordance with the requirements of section 11-9-6 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-5-
5)
11-5-6: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT APPROVAL:
A. Unless otherwise specified by the City Council at the time it is authorized, an interim use permit shall be null and void and expire if the applicant fails to
utilize such interim use permit and fulfill each and every condition attached thereto within one year from the date of its authorization unless a petition for
an extension of time in which to complete or utilize the permit has been granted by the Zoning Administrator; provided, that:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 271/497
1. The extension is requested in writing and filed with the City at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the initial interim use permit request.
2. The request for extension states facts demonstrating that a good faith attempt has been made to complete or utilize the use or activity permitted in
the interim use permit.
3. A maximum of one administrative extension shall be granted.
4. The extension shall not exceed ninety (90) days from the initial interim use permit expiration date.
5. There shall be no charge for the filing of a petition for an administrative extension.
B. Upon receiving a recommendation from the Planning Commission and City staff, the City Council may grant an extension of the interim use permit of
greater than ninety (90) days; provided, that:
1. The conditions described in subsections A1, A2 and A3 of this section are satisfied.
2. The extension shall not exceed one year from the initial interim use permit expiration date. (Prior Code § 20-5-6)
3. The filing of a petition for extension is subject to fee requirements established by section 3-1-2 of this Code. (Prior Code § 20-5-6; amd. 2018 Code)
11-5-7: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
A. The Planning Commission may recommend, and the City Council may direct, the revocation of any interim use permit for cause upon determination that
the authorized interim use is not in conformance with the conditions of the permit or is in continued violation of this title, City codes, or other applicable
regulations.
B. The City Council or Planning Commission shall initiate an application and the Zoning Administrator shall notify the responsible person that he has an
opportunity to show cause why the permit should not be revoked.
C. The application shall be processed and considered pursuant to section 11-5-2 of this chapter. (Prior Code § 20-5-7)
11-5-8: PERFORMANCE SECURITY:
A. Except in the case of non-income producing residential property (excluding relocated structures), upon approval of an interim use permit, the City shall
be provided, where deemed necessary by the Council, with a performance security as approved by the City Attorney prior to the issuing of building
permits or initiation of work on the proposed improvements or development. Said security shall be non-cancelable and shall guarantee conformance
and compliance with the conditions of the interim use permit and the ordinances of the City.
B. The security shall be in the amount equal to the Zoning Administrator's estimated costs of labor and materials for the proposed improvements or
development. Said project may be handled in stages upon the discretion of the Zoning Administrator.
C. The City shall hold the security until completion of the proposed improvements or development and a certificate of occupancy indicating compliance
with the interim use permit and ordinances of the City has been issued by the City building official.
D. Failure to comply with the conditions of the interim use permit or the ordinances of the City shall result in forfeiture of the security in whole or in part
depending upon the degree of noncompliance and at the discretion of the City Council.
E. Whenever a performance guarantee is imposed by the City, the applicant shall be required to enter into a performance agreement with the City. This
agreement is to provide authorization to the City to utilize the posted security and complete stipulated work should the applicant fail to meet the terms
and conditions of the permit. Said agreement shall hold harmless the City for completion of the work and address other matters as may be determined
by the City Attorney. (Prior Code § 20-5-8)
11-5-9: CERTIFICATION OF TAXES AND FEES PAID:
Prior to approving an application for an interim use permit, the applicant shall provide certification to the City that there are no delinquent Property Taxes,
special assessments, interest, or City utility fees due upon the parcel of land to which the application relates. (Prior Code § 20-5-9)
11-5-10: REQUEST FOR PERMIT:
A. The City Council or the Planning Commission may, upon their own motion, initiate a request for an interim use permit in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter.
B. Any person owning real estate or having documented interest therein may initiate a request for an interim use permit for said real estate in conformance
with the provisions of this chapter. (Prior Code § 20-5-10)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 272/497
Chapter 6
ADMINISTRATION - VARIANCES
11-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for deviations from the literal provisions of this title in instances where their strict enforcement would cause
practical difficulties because of physical circumstances unique to the individual property under consideration, and to grant such variances only when it is
demonstrated that such actions will be in keeping with the spirit and intent of this title and the Comprehensive Plan. (Prior Code § 20-6-1)
11-6-2: BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS:
The City Council shall serve as the Board of Adjustment And Appeals. (Prior Code § 20-6-2)
11-6-3: REVIEW CRITERIA:
A variance request (major or minor) shall not be approved unless a finding is made by the City Council that failure to grant the variance will result in
practical difficulties.
A. "Practical difficulties" means that the property owner proposes to use the property in a reasonable manner not permitted by this title and include, but are
not limited to, inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems.
B. The applicant for variance shall also demonstrate that the request satisfies the following criteria:
1. That the variance would be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
2. That the variance would be in harmony with the general purposes and intent of this title.
3. That the plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to the property not created by the current or any previous landowner.
4. That the purpose of the variance is not exclusively an economic consideration.
5. That the granting of the variance will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood in which the parcel of land is located.
6. That the requested variance is the minimum action required to eliminate the practical difficulty.
C. Variances may not be approved for any use that is not allowed under this title for property in the zoning district where the land is located.
D. The Planning Commission, in the case of a major variance, and based upon a report and recommendation by the City staff, shall have the power to
advise and recommend such conditions related to the variance regarding the location, structure, or use as it may deem advisable in the interest of the
intent and purpose of this chapter.
E. The City Council shall, in granting any variance under the provisions of this chapter, designate any conditions in connection therewith as will, in its
opinion, secure substantially the objectives of the regulations or provisions to which the variance is granted, as to light, air, and the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. (Prior Code § 20-6-3)
11-6-4: PROCEDURES:
A. Minor Variances:
1. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide for an expeditious method of processing variance requests.
2. Qualifications: Requests qualifying as minor variances must meet one of the following criteria: (Prior Code § 20-6-4)
a. Cases where practical difficulties to existing buildings or platted property are created as a result of public action or change in City Code standards
other than those variances affecting floodplain, shoreland, wetland, and/or wild and scenic river regulations. (Prior Code § 20-6-4; amd. 2018
Code)
b. Structure or setback deviations which are characteristic of and common to neighboring uses and which do not exceed five feet (5') or more than a
ten percent (10%) departure from a standard established by this title.
B. Major Variances Classification: All variances which are not classified as "minor" shall be deemed "major" variances.
C. Processing: A request for a minor or major variance shall be filed with the City on an official application form and processed in accordance with this
chapter and Minnesota Statutes section 15.99.
1. An application shall be accompanied by a fee as provided in section 3-1-2 of this Code.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 273/497
a. Such application shall also be accompanied by detailed written and graphic materials fully explaining the proposed change, development, or use
including the information required by section 11-9-6 of this title.
b. The request shall be considered as being officially submitted when the Zoning Administrator determines that there is compliance with all the
information requirements.
c. The City Council, the Planning Commission, and the City staff shall have the authority to request additional information from the applicant or to
retain expert testimony at the expense of the applicant, and said information is to be declared necessary to establish performance conditions in
relation to all pertinent sections of this title.
d. Failure on the part of the applicant to supply all necessary supportive information may be grounds for denial of the request. (Prior Code § 20-6-4)
2. The applicant shall supply proof of title and the legal description of the property for which the variance is requested, consisting of an abstract of title
or registered property abstract currently certified, together with any unrecorded documents whereby the petitioners acquire a legal ownership or
equitable ownership interest and, as applicable, supply documented authorization from the owner(s) of the property in question to proceed with the
requested variance. (Prior Code § 20-6-4; amd. 2018 Code)
3. Upon receipt of said application for a major variance, the City Clerk shall set a public hearing to be conducted by the Planning Commission following
proper hearing notification as applicable.
a. Notice of said hearing shall consist of a legal property description and description of request, and be published in the official newspaper at least
ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
b. Written notification of said hearing shall be mailed to surrounding area property owners within three hundred fifty feet (350') of the property in
question at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
c. A copy of the notice and a list of the property owners and addresses to which the notice was sent shall be attested and made a part of the records
of the proceeding.
d. Failure of a property owner to receive said notice shall not invalidate any such proceedings as set forth in this chapter, provided a bona fide
attempt has been made to comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.
4. The Zoning Administrator shall instruct the appropriate staff persons to prepare technical reports where applicable, and provide general assistance in
preparing a recommendation on the action to the Planning Commission and City Council.
5. The applicant or a designated representative thereof shall appear before the Planning Commission and City Council in order to answer questions
concerning the proposed request. Failure by the applicant to attend meetings at which the application is to be considered by the Planning
Commission or City Council may be grounds for denial of the request.
6. The Planning Commission shall make a finding of fact and recommend such actions or conditions relating to the request as they deem necessary to
carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter.
7. The City Council shall not consider or act upon a variance until they have received a report and recommendation from the Planning Commission or
until sixty (60) days after the first regular Planning Commission meeting at which the request was considered.
8. Upon completion of the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, the request shall be scheduled for consideration on the agenda of
the City Council. Such reports and recommendations shall be entered in and made part of the permanent written record of the City Council meeting.
9. Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission and City staff, the City Council shall have the option to set and hold a
public hearing if deemed necessary and shall make a recorded finding of fact and may impose any condition it considers necessary to protect the
public health, safety and welfare.
10. If, upon receiving said reports and recommendations of the Planning Commission and City staff, the City Council finds that specific inconsistencies
exist in the review process and thus the final recommendation of the City Council will differ from that of the Planning Commission, the City Council
may, before taking final action, refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for further consideration.
11. Approval of a request shall require passage by a four-fifths (4/5) majority vote of the City Council.
12. The Zoning Administrator shall provide the applicant and property owner with written notice of the City Council's findings of fact and decision
regarding the application.
13. If a request for variance receives approval of the City Council, the City Clerk, at the applicant's expense, shall record such with the appropriate
Wright County Office. No building permits for the property in question will be granted until recording of the action has been completed.
14. All decisions by the City Council involving a variance request shall be final; except, that an aggrieved person or persons shall have the right to
appeal within thirty (30) days of the decision to the Wright County District Court.
15. Whenever an application for variance has been considered and denied by the City Council, a similar application for the variance affecting
substantially the same property shall not be considered again by the Planning Commission or City Council for at least one year from the date of its
denial, except as follows:
a. If the applicant or property owner can clearly demonstrate that the circumstances surrounding the previous variance application have changed
significantly.
b. If the City Council determines that the circumstances surrounding a previous application has changed significantly.
c. If the City Council decides to reconsider such matter by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the entire City Council. (Prior Code § 20-6-4)
11-6-5: AGREEMENT:
The approval of a variance and the stipulations, limitations and conditions therein shall be applied to the property in question. All written and graphic
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 274/497
materials officially submitted to the City shall be treated as a formal agreement between the applicant and the City. Once approved, no changes,
modifications or alterations shall be made to any plan detail, standard, or specifications without prior submission of a plan modification request to the
Zoning Administrator for review and approval. (Prior Code § 20-6-5)
11-6-6: EXPIRATION OF VARIANCE APPROVAL:
Unless otherwise specified by the City, if, within one year after granting a variance, the use as allowed by the variance shall not have been initiated or
utilized, then such a variance shall become null and void unless a petition for an extension of time in which to complete or utilize the variance has been
granted by the Zoning Administrator; provided, that:
A. The extension is requested in writing and filed with the City at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the initial variance request.
B. The request for extension states facts demonstrating that a good faith attempt has been made to complete or utilize the variance that has been granted.
C. A maximum of one extension shall be granted.
D. The extension shall not exceed sixty (60) days from the initial variance expiration date.
E. There shall be no charge for the filing of a petition for the extension. (Prior Code § 20-6-6)
11-6-7: PERFORMANCE SECURITY:
A. Upon approval of a variance, the City shall be provided, where deemed necessary by the City Council, with a performance security as approved by the
City Attorney prior to the issuing of building permits or initiation of work on the proposed improvements or development. Said security shall guarantee
conformance and compliance with the conditions of the variance and City ordinance provisions.
B. The security shall be in the amount equal to the Zoning Administrator's estimated costs of labor and materials for the proposed improvements or
development.
C. The City shall hold the security until completion of the proposed improvements or development and a certificate of occupancy indicating compliance
with the variance and this Code has been issued by the building official. (Prior Code § 20-6-7)
D. Failure to comply with the conditions of the variance and this Code shall result in forfeiture of the security in whole or in part depending upon the degree
of noncompliance and at the discretion of the City Council. (Prior Code § 20-6-7; amd. 2018 Code)
E. Whenever a performance guarantee is imposed by the City, the applicant shall be required to enter into a performance agreement with the City. This
agreement is to provide authorization to the City to utilize the posted security and complete stipulated work should the applicant fail to meet the terms
and conditions of the variance. Said agreement shall hold harmless the City for completion of the work and address other matters as may be
determined by the City Attorney. (Prior Code § 20-6-7)
11-6-8: CERTIFICATION OF TAXES AND FEES PAID:
Prior to approving an application for a variance, the applicant shall provide certification to the City that there are no delinquent Property Taxes, special
assessments, interest, or City utility fees due upon the parcel of land to which the application relates. (Prior Code § 20-6-8)
11-6-9: REQUEST FOR VARIANCE:
The City Council or the Planning Commission may, upon their own motion, initiate a request for a variance in conformance with the provisions of this
chapter. Any person owning real estate or having documented interest therein may initiate a request for a variance applicable to said real estate in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter. (Prior Code § 20-6-9)
Chapter 7
ADMINISTRATION - APPEALS
11-7-1: BOARD DESIGNATED:
The City Council shall serve as the Board of Adjustment and Appeals. (Prior Code § 20-7-1)
11-7-2: APPLICABILITY OF APPEAL:
An appeal shall only be applicable to an interpretation of legislative intent of provisions of this title. City staff opinions and evaluations as they pertain to the
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 275/497
impact or result of a request are not subject to the appeal procedure. (Prior Code § 20-7-2)
11-7-3: PROCEDURES:
A. An appeal from the ruling of an administrative officer of the City shall be made by the property owner or his agent within thirty (30) days after the making
of the order being appealed.
B. The property owner or his agent shall file with the City a notice of appeal stating the specific grounds upon which the appeal is made.
C. Any appeal filed shall be comprehensive and include all matters subject to question. Subsequent appeals filed by the same individual or group which
are intended to cause unjustifiable delay in the decision making process shall not be accepted by the City. (Prior Code § 20-7-3)
D. The filing of an appeal shall be accompanied by a fee as provided by section 3-1-2 of this Code. (Prior Code § 20-7-3; amd. 2018 Code)
E. The Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall make a finding of fact and its decision by resolution within sixty (60) days from the date at which the City
Council first considered the appeal. (Prior Code § 20-7-3)
11-7-4: STAY OF PROCEEDINGS:
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action being appealed unless it is certified to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, after the notice of
appeal is filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not
be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by a court of record on application, on notice to the City. (Prior Code § 20-7-4)
11-7-5: APPEALS FROM BOARD DECISIONS:
Any person or persons or any board, taxpayer, department, or bureau of the City aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall
have the right to seek review within thirty (30) days of the decision with a court of record of such decision in the manner provided by the laws of the State
of Minnesota, and particularly Minnesota Statutes chapter 462, as such statute may be from time to time amended, supplemented or replaced. (Prior Code
§ 20-7-5)
Chapter 8
ADMINISTRATION - ADMINISTRATIVE PERMITS
11-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations and procedures for the processing and consideration of activities allowed by administrative permit,
with the goal of protecting the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City. (Prior Code § 20-8-1)
11-8-2: PROCEDURE:
A. Request for an administrative permit shall be filed with the City on an official application form and processed in accordance with this chapter and
Minnesota Statutes section 15.99.
1. An application shall be accompanied by a fee as provided in section 3-1-2 of this Code.
2. Such application shall also be accompanied by detailed written and graphic materials fully explaining the proposed change, development, or use
including the information required by section 11-9-6 of this title.
3. The request shall be considered as being officially submitted when the Zoning Administrator determines that there is compliance with all the
information requirements.
4. The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to request additional information from the applicant or to retain expert testimony at the expense of
the applicant. Said information is to be declared necessary to establish performance conditions in relation to all pertinent sections of this title.
5. Failure on the part of the applicant to supply all necessary supportive information may be grounds for denial of the request.
B. The applicant shall supply proof of title and the legal description of the property for which the administrative permit is requested, consisting of an
abstract of title or registered property abstract currently certified, together with any unrecorded documents whereby the petitioners acquire a legal
ownership or equitable ownership interest and, as applicable, supply documented authorization from the owner(s) of the property in question to
proceed with the requested administrative permit.
C. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and related materials and shall determine, in consultation with other City staff as may be
appropriate, that the proposal is in compliance with all applicable evaluation criteria, codes, ordinances, and performance standards.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 276/497
D. The Zoning Administrator shall consider possible adverse effects of the proposed events or activity. Judgment shall be based upon (but not limited to)
the following factors:
1. The proposed action's consistency with the specific policies and provisions of the City Comprehensive Plan.
2. The proposed use's compatibility with present and future land uses of the area.
3. The proposed use's conformity with all performance standards contained within this title and other provisions of this Code.
4. Traffic generation of the proposed use in relation to capabilities of streets serving the property.
5. The proposed use can be accommodated by existing public services and facilities and will not overburden the City's service capacity.
E. The Zoning Administrator shall make a determination on approval or denial of the administrative permit.
F. A written permit shall be issued to the applicant when a determination of compliance has been made. Specific conditions to assure compliance with
applicable evaluation criteria, codes, ordinances, and the standards of this title shall be attached to the permit.
G. The Zoning Administrator shall provide the applicant and property owner with written notice of a determination of noncompliance with applicable codes,
ordinances, and standards in this chapter and that the application for the permit shall be considered denied.
H. Unresolved disputes as to administrative application of the requirements of this section shall be subject to appeal as defined by chapter 7 of this title.
(Prior Code § 20-8-2)
11-8-3: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
All uses, events or activities allowed by administrative permit shall conform to the applicable standards outlined in the zoning district in which such use,
event or activity is proposed. (Prior Code § 20-8-3)
11-8-4: AGREEMENT:
The administrative permit and the stipulations, limitations and conditions therein shall be applied to the property in question. All written and graphic
materials officially submitted to the City shall be treated as a formal agreement between the applicant and the City. Once approved, no changes,
modifications or alterations shall be made to any plan detail, standard, or specifications without prior submission of a plan modification request to the
Zoning Administrator for review and approval. (Prior Code § 20-8-4)
11-8-5: NONPERMIT APPROVALS:
In cases where the Zoning Administrator is given approval authority without a requirement for an administrative permit, determinations shall be based upon
the criteria outlined in subsection 11-8-2D of this chapter. (Prior Code § 20-8-5)
11-8-6: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT APPROVAL:
Unless otherwise specified by the Zoning Administrator at the time it is authorized, an administrative permit shall be null and void and expire if the
applicant fails to utilize such administrative permit and fulfill each and every condition attached thereto within one year from the date of its authorization
unless a petition for an extension of time in which to complete or utilize the permit has been granted by the Zoning Administrator; provided, that:
A. The extension is requested in writing and filed with the City at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the initial administrative permit request.
B. The request for extension states facts demonstrating that a good faith attempt has been made to complete or utilize the use or activity permitted in the
administrative permit.
C. A maximum of one administrative extension shall be granted.
D. The extension shall not exceed ninety (90) days from the initial administrative permit expiration date.
E. There shall be no charge for the filing of a petition for an administrative extension. (Prior Code § 20-8-6)
11-8-7: CERTIFICATION OF TAXES AND FEES PAID:
Prior to approving an application for an administrative permit, the applicant shall provide certification to the City that there are no delinquent Property
Taxes, special assessments, interest, or City utility fees due upon the parcel of land to which the application relates. (Prior Code § 20-8-7; amd. 2018
Code)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 277/497
11-8-8: REQUEST FOR PERMIT:
A. The City Council or the Planning Commission may, upon their own motion, initiate a request for an administrative permit in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter.
B. Any person owning real estate or having documented interest therein may initiate a request for an administrative permit applicable to said real estate in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter. (Prior Code § 20-8-8)
Chapter 9
ADMINISTRATION - SITE AND BUILDING PLAN REVIEW
11-9-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a formal plan review procedure and provide regulations pertaining to the enforcement of site design and
construction standards as agreed to by the contractor through officially submitted plan documents. (Prior Code § 20-9-1)
11-9-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
All building and site plans for townhouse, multiple-family, commercial, or industrial construction shall be subject to review by the Planning Commission and
approval by the City Council; except, that those plan modifications meeting the following criteria, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, may be
approved administratively in accordance with chapter 8 of this title:
A. Only applications for preexisting uses or uses explicitly classified as allowed uses, including accessory uses, by previously approved site and building
plans governing the use of the property are eligible for administrative approval.
B. The site and building plan modification shall not result in an increase in hours of operation, traffic, employees, or number of dwelling units, expand any
principal building or otherwise increase the intensity of the use of the site.
C. The permit modification shall comply with all requirements of the applicable zoning district and all other performance standards of this title or this Code.
D. All applications for site and building plan modification shall be complete and in full accordance with the requirements of section 11-9-6 of this chapter.
(Prior Code § 20-9-2)
11-9-3: PROCEDURE:
A. Request for site and building plan approval shall be filed with the City on an official application form and processed in accordance with this chapter and
Minnesota Statutes section 15.99.
1. An application shall be accompanied by a fee as provided in section 3-1-2 of this Code.
2. Such application shall also be accompanied by detailed written and graphic materials fully explaining the proposed change, development, or use
including the information required by section 11-9-6 of this chapter.
3. The request shall be considered as being officially submitted when the Zoning Administrator determines that there is compliance with all the
information requirements.
4. The City Council, the Planning Commission, and the City staff shall have the authority to request additional information from the applicant or to retain
expert testimony at the expense of the applicant. Said information is to be declared necessary to establish performance conditions in relation to all
pertinent sections of this title.
5. Failure on the part of the applicant to supply all necessary supportive information may be grounds for denial of the request.
B. The applicant shall supply proof of title and the legal description of the property for which the site and building plan approval is requested, consisting of
an abstract of title or registered property abstract currently certified, together with any unrecorded documents whereby the petitioners acquire a legal
ownership or equitable ownership interest and, as applicable, supply documented authorization from the owner(s) of the property in question to
proceed with the requested site and building plans.
C. The Zoning Administrator shall instruct the appropriate staff persons to prepare technical reports where applicable, and provide general assistance in
preparing a recommendation on the action to the Planning Commission and City Council.
D. The applicant or a designated representative thereof shall appear before the Planning Commission and City Council in order to answer questions
concerning the proposed request.
E. The Planning Commission and City Council shall review the proposed site plan based upon compliance with the Comprehensive Plan, provisions of this
title, and other applicable chapters of this Code.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 278/497
F. The Planning Commission shall make a finding of fact and recommend such actions or conditions relating to the request as they deem necessary to
carry out the intent and purpose of this title.
G. The City Council shall not consider or act upon an application until they have received a report and recommendation from the Planning Commission or
until sixty (60) days after the first regular Planning Commission meeting at which the request was considered.
H. Upon completion of the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, the request shall be scheduled for consideration on the agenda of the
City Council. Such reports and recommendations shall be entered in and made part of the permanent written record of the City Council meeting.
I. If, upon receiving said reports and recommendations of the Planning Commission and City staff, the City Council finds that specific inconsistencies exist
in the review process and thus the final recommendation of the City Council will differ from that of the Planning Commission, the City Council may,
before taking final action, refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for further consideration.
J. Approval of a request shall require passage by a majority vote of the City Council.
K. The Zoning Administrator shall provide the applicant and property owner with written notice of the City Council's findings of fact and decision regarding
the application.
L. If a request for site and building plan approval receives approval of the City Council, the City, at the applicant's expense, shall record such with the
appropriate Wright County Office. No building permits for the property in question will be granted until recording of the action has been completed.
(Prior Code § 20-9-3)
11-9-4: AGREEMENT:
The site and building plan approval and the stipulations, limitations and conditions therein shall be applied to the property in question. All written and
graphic materials officially submitted to the City shall be treated as a formal agreement between the applicant and the City. Once approved, no changes,
modifications or alterations shall be made to any plan detail, standard, or specifications without prior submission of a plan modification request to the
Zoning Administrator for review and approval. (Prior Code § 20-9-4)
11-9-5: EXPIRATION OF PLAN APPROVAL:
Unless otherwise specified by the City Council at the time it is authorized, approval of site and building plans shall be null and void and expire if the
applicant fails to utilize such approvals and fulfill each and every condition attached thereto within one year from the date of its authorization unless a
petition for an extension of time in which to complete or utilize the site and building plan has been granted by the Zoning Administrator; provided, that:
(Prior Code § 20-9-5; amd. 2018 Code)
A. The extension is requested in writing and filed with the City at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the initial site and building plan approval
request.
B. The request for extension states facts demonstrating that a good faith attempt has been made to complete or utilize the use or activity permitted in the
site and building plans.
C. A maximum of one administrative extension shall be granted. (Prior Code § 20-9-5)
D. The extension shall not exceed ninety (90) days from the initial administrative plan expiration date. (Prior Code § 20-9-5; amd. 2018 Code)
E. There shall be no charge for the filing of a petition for an administrative extension. (Prior Code § 20-9-5)
11-9-6: INFORMATION REQUIRED:
The information required for all site plan applications shall consist of the following items, and shall be submitted unless waived by the Zoning
Administrator:
A. Site boundaries, buildings, structures and other improvements on the site shall be identified with a current certificate of survey, prepared and signed by
a Minnesota licensed land surveyor, depicting the following:
1. Scale of plan (engineering scale only), at one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') or less.
2. North point indication.
3. Existing boundaries with lot dimension and area.
4. Existing site improvements.
5. All encroachments.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 279/497
6. Easements of record.
7. Legal description of the property.
8. Ponds, lakes, springs, rivers or other waterways bordering on or running through the subject property.
B. A site plan utilizing a copy of the current certificate of survey as a base for the site in question, depicting the following:
1. Name and address of developer/owner.
2. Name and address of architect/designer.
3. Date of plan preparation.
4. Dates and description of all revisions.
5. Name of project or development.
6. All proposed improvements, including:
a. Required and proposed setbacks.
b. Location, setbacks and dimensions of all proposed buildings and structures.
c. Location of all adjacent buildings located within one hundred feet (100') of the exterior boundaries of the property in question.
d. Location, number, dimensions, and setbacks of proposed parking spaces and drive aisles.
e. Location, number, and dimensions of proposed loading spaces.
f. Location, width, and setbacks of all curb cuts and driveways.
g. Vehicular circulation.
h. Sidewalks and trails.
i. Location and type of all proposed lighting, including details of all proposed fixtures and photometric illumination.
j. Location of recreation and service areas.
k. Location of rooftop equipment and proposed screening.
l. Provisions for storage and disposal of waste, garbage, and recyclables, including details for screening exterior trash/recycling enclosures.
m. Location, sizing, and type of water and sewer system mains and proposed service connections.
C. Grading, drainage and erosion control plan, utilizing a copy of the current certificate of survey as a base for the site in question, prepared and signed by
a Minnesota licensed engineer, depicting the following:
1. Existing contours at two foot (2') intervals (may be prepared by a Minnesota licensed surveyor).
2. Proposed grade elevations at two foot (2') maximum intervals.
3. Drainage plan, including the configuration of drainage areas and calculations.
4. Storm sewer, catch basins, invert elevations, type of castings, and type of materials.
5. Spot elevations (may be prepared by a Minnesota licensed surveyor).
6. Proposed driveway grades.
7. Surface water ponding and treatment areas.
8. Erosion control measures.
D. Landscaping plan, utilizing a copy of the current certificate of survey as a base for the site in question, depicting the following:
1. Planting schedule (table) containing:
a. Symbols.
b. Quantities.
c. Common names.
d. Botanical names.
e. Sizes of plant material.
f. Root specification (bare root, balled and burlapped, potted, etc.).
g. Special planting instructions.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 280/497
2. Location, type and size of all existing significant trees to be removed or preserved.
3. Planting detail (show all species to scale at normal mature crown diameter or spread for local hardiness zone).
4. Typical sections with details of fences, tie walls, planter boxes, tot lots, picnic areas, berms and the like.
5. Typical sections with details of landscape islands, planter beds, and foundation plantings with identification of materials used.
6. Note indicating how disturbed soil areas will be restored through the use of sodding, seeding, or other techniques.
7. Delineation of both sodded and seeded areas with respective areas in square feet.
8. Coverage plan for underground irrigation system, if any.
9. Where landscape or manmade materials are used to provide screening from adjacent and neighboring properties, a cross through section shall be
provided showing the perspective of the site from the neighboring property at the property line elevation.
10. Other existing or proposed conditions which could be expected to affect landscaping.
E. Other plans and information as required by the Zoning Administrator including, but not limited to:
1. Architectural elevations of all principal and accessory buildings (type, color, and materials used in all external surfaces).
2. "Typical" floor plan and "typical" room plan drawn to scale with a summary of square footage for each use or activity.
3. Fire protection plan.
4. Extent of and any proposed modifications to land within the environmental protection districts, as established by chapter 50 of this title.
5. Type, location and size (area and height) of all signs to be erected upon the property in question.
6. Vicinity map showing the subject property in reference to nearby highways or major street intersections.
7. Sound source control plan.
8. Wetland delineation report. (Prior Code § 20-9-6)
11-9-7: PERFORMANCE SECURITY:
A. Except in the case of non-income producing residential property (excluding relocated structures), upon approval of site and building plans, the City shall
be provided, where deemed necessary by the Council, with a performance security as approved by the City Attorney prior to the issuing of building
permits or initiation of work on the proposed improvements or development. Said security shall be non-cancelable and shall guarantee conformance
and compliance with the conditions of the site and building plan and the ordinances of the City. (Prior Code § 20-9-7; amd. 2018 Code)
B. The security shall be in the amount equal to the Zoning Administrator's estimated costs of labor and materials for the proposed improvements or
development. Said project may be handled in stages upon the discretion of the Zoning Administrator. (Prior Code § 20-9-7)
C. The City shall hold the security until completion of the proposed improvements or development and a certificate of occupancy indicating compliance
with the site and building plan and ordinances of the City has been issued by the City building official. (Prior Code § 20-9-7; amd. 2018 Code)
D. Failure to comply with the conditions of the site and building plan approval or the ordinances of the City shall result in forfeiture of the security in whole
or in part depending upon the degree of noncompliance and at the discretion of the City Council.
E. Whenever a performance guarantee is imposed by the City, the applicant shall be required to enter into a performance agreement with the City. This
agreement is to provide authorization to the City to utilize the posted security and complete stipulated work should the applicant fail to meet the terms
and conditions of the permit. Said agreement shall hold harmless the City for completion of the work and address other matters as may be determined
by the City Attorney. (Prior Code § 20-9-7)
11-9-8: CERTIFICATION OF TAXES AND FEES PAID:
Prior to approving an application for a site and building plan review, the applicant shall provide certification to the City that there are no delinquent Property
Taxes, special assessments, interest, or City utility fees due upon the parcel of land to which the site plan and building review application relates. (Prior
Code § 20-9-8)
Chapter 10
ADMINISTRATION - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
11-10-1: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL; VIOLATIONS:
A. Administration And Enforcement Official: This title shall be administered and enforced by the Zoning Administrator who is appointed by the City Council.
The Zoning Administrator may institute, in the name of the City, any appropriate actions or proceedings against a violator as provided by statute,
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 281/497
ordinance, or code.
B. Violations: If the provisions of this title are being violated, the City shall notify, in writing, the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature
of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. The City shall order the discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures;
removal of illegal buildings or structures or of additions, alterations or structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall
take any other action authorized by this chapter to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. (Prior Code § 20-10-1)
11-10-2: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this title shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than the maximum penalty for a misdemeanor
prescribed under State law. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. (Prior Code § 20-10-2)
Chapter 11
RESERVED
Chapter 12
RESERVED
Chapter 13
RESERVED
Chapter 14
RESERVED
Chapter 15
NONCONFORMITIES
11-15-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the regulation of legal nonconforming lots, buildings, structures, and uses and to specify those requirements,
circumstances and conditions under which legal nonconforming lots, buildings, structures, and uses will be operated and maintained. This title establishes
separate districts, each of which is an appropriate area for the location of uses which are permitted in that district. It is necessary and consistent with the
establishment of these districts that nonconforming lots, buildings, structures, and uses not be permitted to continue without restriction. (Prior Code § 20-
15-1)
11-15-2: NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD:
A. Vacant Lots:
1. For the purposes of orderly development, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on nonconforming lots of
record at the effective date hereof, provided:
a. The lot fronts on an improved public right-of-way.
b. The use of the lot is consistent with its current zoning designation.
c. Frontage, depth and area requirements are at least seventy five percent (75%) of the minimum requirements of the district where the use is
permitted.
d. Unsewered lots have a lot area and soil conditions judged by the City Engineer to satisfactorily provide for private on site sewage treatment.
2. If the owner has an interest in more than one lot of record contiguous to other lots of record, all such lots must be combined to meet the
requirements of this chapter or the applicable zoning district standards. If sufficient contiguous property is held in one ownership to comply with the
standard of the applicable zoning district, then those more restrictive provisions will apply. In no circumstances will there be approval of any proposal
for multiple lot developments based upon lots of record, and not conforming with the provisions of the existing zoning district.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 282/497
3. Subsection A1 of this section is not intended to permit a reduction in setbacks or required yards.
4. In the event that the measurements of such lot areas and widths do not comply with subsection A1 of this section, then approval for the construction
of a single-family dwelling may be requested as a conditional use permit, subject as regulated by chapter 4 of this title.
B. Developed Lots: An existing conforming single-family use on a lot of substandard size may be expanded or enlarged if such expansion or enlargement
meets all other provisions of this title. (Prior Code § 20-15-2)
11-15-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Except as provided in this section, any nonconforming structure or use lawfully existing upon the effective date hereof shall not be expanded, enlarged,
intensified or reconstructed, but may be continued at the size and in the manner of operation existing upon such date except as hereinafter specified or
subsequently amended. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
EXPANSION, ENLARGEMENT, OR INTENSIFICATION: Any increase in a dimension, size, area, volume, or height; any increase in the area of use;
any placement of a structure or part thereof where none existed before; any addition of a site feature such as a deck, patio, fence, driveway, parking
area, or swimming pool; any improvement that would allow the land to be more intensely developed; any move of operations to a new location on the
property; or any increase in intensity of use based on a review of the original nature, function or purpose of the nonconforming use, the hours of
operation, traffic, parking, noise, exterior storage, signs, exterior lighting, types of operations, types of goods or services offered, odors, area of
operation, number of employees, and other factors deemed relevant by the City.
IMPROVEMENT: Making the nonconforming use better, more efficient, or more aesthetically pleasing, including any change that does not replicate
what preexisted, but does not include an expansion, enlargement, or intensification.
REPLACEMENT, RECONSTRUCTION OR RESTORATION: Construction that exactly matches preexisting conditions.
B. Any legal nonconformity, including the lawful use or occupation of land or premises existing at the time of the adoption of an additional control under this
chapter, may be continued, including through repair, replacement, restoration, maintenance, or improvement, but not including expansion, except as
specifically provided in this chapter, unless:
1. The nonconformity or occupancy is discontinued for a period of more than one year; or
2. Any nonconforming use is destroyed by fire or other peril to the extent of greater than fifty percent (50%) of its market value as determined by the
City, and no building permit has been applied for within one hundred eighty (180) days of when the property is damaged. In this case, the City may
impose reasonable conditions upon a building permit in order to mitigate any newly created impact on adjacent property.
3. Any subsequent use or occupancy of the land or premises shall be a conforming use or occupancy.
C. Any proposed structure which will, under this title, become nonconforming but for which a building permit has been lawfully granted prior to the effective
date hereof, may be completed in accordance with the approved plans; provided construction is started within sixty (60) days of the effective date
hereof, is not abandoned for a period of more than one hundred twenty (120) days, and continues to completion within two (2) years. Such structures
and use shall thereafter be a legally nonconforming structure or use.
D. Except as herein provided, normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing or related to a lawful nonconforming structure or use is
permitted, including necessary nonstructural repairs and incidental alterations which do not physically extend or intensify the nonconforming use or
structure.
E. Except as herein provided, alterations may be made to a building containing lawful nonconforming residential units when they will improve the livability
thereof, provided they will not increase the number of dwelling units, or size or volume of the building. A dwelling may not, however, be demolished and
a new dwelling constructed unless the new dwelling is in full compliance with this title.
F. A legal nonconforming, single-family dwelling unit may be expanded to improve livability as a conditional use, as regulated by chapter 4 of this title;
provided, that the nonconformity is not increased.
G. When any lawful nonconforming use of any structure or land in any district has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be changed to
any nonconforming use.
H. A lawful nonconforming use of a structure or parcel of land may be changed to lessen the nonconformity of use. Once a nonconforming structure or
parcel of land has been changed, it shall not thereafter be so altered to increase the nonconformity. (Prior Code § 20-15-3)
Chapter 16
GENERAL PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
11-16-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish general development performance standards. These standards are intended and designed to assure
compatibility of uses; to prevent blight, deterioration, and decay; and to enhance the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the City. (Prior
Code § 20-16-1)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 283/497
11-16-2: DWELLING UNIT RESTRICTION:
A. No garage, tent, accessory building, travel trailer or motor home shall at any time be used as living quarters, temporarily or permanently, except as
allowed by subsection E of this section. (Prior Code § 20-16-2)
B. Basements and cellars may not be used as temporary living quarters or rooms pending the completion of construction and issuance of a certificate of
occupancy of the principal residential dwelling. Energy conserving designs in housing are not prohibited by this subsection; provided, that a conditional
use permit is approved by the City Council and the structure complies with standards imposed by the State and the Minnesota State Building Code.
(Prior Code § 20-16-2; amd. 2018 Code)
C. As regulated by this title, tents, play houses, travel trailers or motor homes or similar structures may be used only for play or recreational purposes,
except as allowed by subsection E of this section.
D. No accessory building or structure other than a fence or temporary construction office may be constructed prior to the time of construction of the
principal building or structure.
E. Temporary establishment of dwelling units is allowed by administrative permit on residential lots during reconstruction of the principal structure damaged
by fire or natural disaster; provided, that:
1. The temporary dwelling unit is not established prior to building permit approval for the reconstruction of the principal structure.
2. Occupancy of the temporary dwelling unit is limited to the residents of the prior or future principal structure.
3. The applicant must demonstrate intent to proceed with reconstruction of the principal structure, including construction contracts, proof of financial or
other evidence of intended project completion.
4. The temporary dwelling unit meets all setback requirements within the zoning district for which the property is located.
5. The temporary dwelling unit shall not exceed one story or fifteen feet (15') in height, whichever is the least.
6. The temporary dwelling housing unit is connected to a private water and sewer system approved by the City and State Department of Health.
7. Security is provided to ensure removal of the temporary dwelling unit upon completion of the reconstruction project. The security shall be in the
amount equal to Zoning Administrator's estimated costs for removal of the temporary dwelling unit.
8. The applicant submits a permit application and a site plan (to scale) showing the location of lot lines, the proposed location of the temporary dwelling
unit, the principal structure and other prominent site features.
9. All temporary dwelling units shall be subject to inspection by the Zoning Administrator and/or building official.
10. a. The temporary dwelling unit permit shall expire ninety (90) days from the date of permit issuance or within three (3) weeks after the date of
certificate of occupancy permit being issued for the principal residential dwelling, whichever first occurs, unless a petition for an extension of time has
been granted by the Zoning Administrator; and provided, that:
(1) The extension is requested in writing and is filed with the City at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the initial permit.
(2) The request for extension states facts demonstrating that a good faith attempt has been made to complete or utilize the permit that has been
granted.
(3) A maximum of one extension shall be granted.
(4) The extension shall not exceed sixty (60) days from the initial permit expiration date.
b. There shall be no charge for the filing of a petition for the extension described in subsection E10a of this section.
F. The City opts out of the requirements of Minnesota Statutes section 462.3593, which defines and regulates temporary family healthcare dwellings,
pursuant to authority granted by Minnesota Statutes section 462.3593, subdivision 9. (Prior Code § 20-16-2)
11-16-3: PLATTED AND UNPLATTED PROPERTY:
A. Any person desiring to improve property shall submit to the Zoning Administrator a Certificate of Survey of said premises and information on the
location and dimensions of existing and proposed buildings, location of easements crossing the property, encroachments, and any other information
which may be necessary to ensure conformance with the provisions of this Code.
B. All buildings shall be so placed so that they will not obstruct future streets which may be constructed by the City in conformity with existing streets and
according to the Comprehensive Plan and to the system and standards employed by the City. Furthermore, all buildings shall be placed so that they
will not obstruct future utility routes or the potential resubdivision of the property.
C. Except in the case of planned unit developments or planned unit development conditional use permits as provided in chapter 36 of this title, not more
than one principal building shall be located on a lot; provided, that:
1. Lot Requirements: The lot shall conform to the applicable minimum lot area, lot width, and setback requirements of the zoning district in which it is
located.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 284/497
2. Setbacks: Setbacks between multiple principal buildings within the same base lot shall be a minimum of ten feet (10').
3. Common Areas: All common areas including, but not limited to, open space, wetlands, greenways, stormwater basins, driveways, parking areas,
sidewalks, etc., shall be maintained in one of the following ways:
a. All of the property including buildings and common areas shall be owned by a single entity.
b. Condominium ownership pursuant to Minnesota Statutes section 515A.1-106.
c. The property shall be divided into a base lot and unit lots to allow for individual ownership of the principal buildings or individual tenant spaces
within the principal building, with each owner of a unit lot having an equal and undivided interest in the common area, subject to the following
requirements:
(1) The tenant space related to each unit lot shall have an exclusive exterior entrance.
(2) A management association shall be established for all commercial developments with multiple principal buildings subdivided in a base lot/unit
lot configuration that is to be responsible for all exterior building maintenance, approval of any exterior architectural modifications, landscaping,
snow clearing and regular maintenance of driveways and parking areas.
4. Utilities:
a. Underground Or Exterior Service: All utilities including telephone, electricity, gas, and telecable shall be installed underground. Exterior utility
meters and fixtures shall be located in interior side or rear yards when possible and shall be screened from view of adjacent properties and the
public right-of-way.
b. Public Utility Service: Separate public utility services shall be provided to each unit unless exempted by the City Engineer.
(1) Water connection: A shutoff valve for each individual unit shall be provided.
(2) Sewer connection: Where more than one unit is served by a sanitary sewer service, all maintenance and cleaning shall be the responsibility of
the maintenance association or owners.
D. On a through lot or a corner lot, both lot lines abutting a public right-of-way shall be defined as front yards for applying the regulations of this title.
E. When a development is proposed which is to be located on two (2) or more lots, and such lots are required to meet the minimum district area, frontage
and density requirements and/or are required to accommodate the use, the lots shall be combined in accordance with the subdivision ordinance, prior
to the issuing of a building permit.
F. In the case of properties that abut street easements, applicable setbacks shall be measured from the easement line and shall be related to roadway
classification as identified in the Comprehensive Plan.
G. Outlots are deemed unbuildable unless replatted as a lot and block in accordance with the subdivision ordinance, and no building permit shall be issued
for such properties, except in the case of public park facilities and essential services. (Prior Code § 20-16-3)
11-16-4: TRAFFIC VISIBILITY:
A. Visibility Requirements: Visibility from any street or driveway shall be unobstructed above a height of two feet (2') and eight feet (8') measured from
where both street or driveway centerlines intersect within the triangle described as beginning at the intersection of the projected curb line (or edge of
shoulders for rural sections) of two (2) intersecting streets or drives, then forty five feet (45') along one curb line, then diagonally to a point forty five feet
(45') from the point of beginning along the other curb line.
B. Exceptions:
1. Plantings as allowed by chapter 19 of this title and section 5-2-3 of this Code.
2. Fences as allowed by chapter 19 of this title.
3. Building setbacks as allowed within a PUD Planned Unit Development District, by PUD-CUP or as otherwise provided by this title. (Prior Code § 20-
16-4)
11-16-5: DRAINAGE PLANS AND SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL:
A. Soil Erosion And Sediment Control Required: No land shall be developed and no use shall be permitted that results in water runoff causing flooding,
erosion, or deposit of minerals on adjacent properties. Such runoff shall be properly channeled into a storm drain, watercourse, ponding area, or other
public facilities in compliance with title 8, chapter 4 of this Code, subject to the review and approval of the City Engineer.
B. Permit Required To Disturb Land: No person shall initiate any land disturbing activity without first obtaining a permit from the City as may be required by
title 9, chapters 6 and 7 of this Code, subject to review and approval of the City Engineer.
C. Drainage Plans: In the case of all residential subdivisions, multiple-family, business and industrial developments, the drainage plans with appropriate
spot site elevations shall be submitted to the City Engineer for review, and the final drainage plan shall be subject to written approval. In the case of
such uses, no modifications in grade and drainage flow through fill, erection of retaining walls or other such actions shall be permitted until such plans
have been reviewed and received written approval from the City Engineer.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 285/497
D. Standards: The following standards shall apply to all development and activity that necessitates the grading, stripping, cutting, filling, or exposure of
soils:
1. General Standards:
a. The development shall conform to the natural limitations presented by topography and soil so as to create the least potential for soil erosion.
b. Erosion and siltation control measures shall be coordinated with the different stages of development. Appropriate control measures shall be
installed prior to development when necessary to control erosion.
c. Land shall be developed in increments of workable size such that adequate erosion and siltation controls can be provided as construction
progresses. The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any one period of time.
d. The drainage system shall be constructed and operational as quickly as possible during construction.
e. Whenever possible, natural vegetation shall be retained and protected.
f. Where the topsoil is removed, sufficient arable soil shall be set aside for respreading over the developed area. The soil shall be restored to a depth
of four inches (4") and shall be of a quality at least equal to the soil quality prior to development.
g. When soil is exposed, the exposure shall be for the shortest feasible period of time. No exposure shall be planned to exceed sixty (60) days. Said
time period shall be extended only if the Zoning Administrator is satisfied that adequate measures have been established and will remain in place.
h. The natural drainage system shall be used as far as is feasible for the storage and flow of runoff. Stormwater drainage shall be discharged to
marshlands, swamps, retention basins or other treatment facilities. Diversion of stormwater to marshlands or swamps shall be considered for
existing or planned surface drainage. Marshlands and swamps used for stormwater shall provide for natural or artificial water level control.
Temporary storage areas or retention basins scattered throughout developed areas shall be encouraged to reduce peak flows, erosion damage,
and construction costs.
2. Exposed Slopes: The following control measures shall be taken to control erosion during any activity where soils are exposed:
a. Grading and erosion control plans for exposed slopes shall comply with section 9-6-5 of this Code and are subject to review and approval of the
City Engineer.
b. At the foot of each exposed slope, a channel and berm should be constructed to control runoff. The channelized water should be diverted to a
sedimentation basin (debris basin, silt basin or silt trap) before being allowed to enter the natural drainage system.
c. Along the top of each exposed slope, a berm should be constructed to prevent runoff from flowing over the edge of the slope. Where runoff
collecting behind said berm cannot be diverted elsewhere and must be directed down the slope, appropriate measures shall be taken to prevent
erosion. Such measures should consist of either an asphalt paved flow apron and drop chute laid down the slope or a flexible slope drain. At the
base of the slope drain or flow apron, a gravel energy dissipator should be installed to prevent erosion at the discharge end.
d. Exposed slopes shall be protected by whatever means will effectively prevent erosion considering the degree of slope, soils material, and
expected length of exposure. Slope protection shall consist of mulch, sheets of plastic, burlap or jute netting, sod blankets, fast growing grasses or
temporary seedings of annual grasses. Mulch consists of hay, straw, wood chips, corn stalks, bark or other protective material to be anchored by
means as approved by the City Engineer.
e. Alternate control measures, other than those specifically stated above or provided in title 9, chapter 6 of this Code, may be used in place of the
above measures if it can be demonstrated that they will as effectively protect exposed slopes, subject to review and approval of the City Engineer.
3. Design Standards:
a. Waterways:
(1) The use of the natural aboveground drainage system to dispose of runoff is strongly encouraged. Storm sewers are only to be used where it
can be demonstrated that the use of the aboveground natural drainage system will not adequately dispose of runoff. Aboveground runoff
disposal waterways may be constructed to augment the natural drainage system. To the extent possible, the natural and constructed waterways
shall be coordinated with an open space trail system.
(2) The widths of a constructed waterway shall be sufficiently large to adequately channel runoff from a 10-year storm. Adequacy shall be
determined by the expected runoff when full development of the drainage area is reached.
(3) No fences or structures shall be constructed across the waterway that will reduce or restrict the flow of water.
(4) The banks of the waterway shall be protected with a permanent turf vegetation.
(5) The banks of the waterway shall not exceed five feet (5') horizontal to one foot (1') vertical in gradient.
(6) The gradient of the waterway bed shall not exceed a grade that will result in a velocity that will cause erosion of the banks of the waterway.
(7) The bed of the waterway shall be protected with turf, sod, or concrete. If turf or sod will not function properly, rip rap may be used. Rip rap shall
consist of quarried limestone, fieldstone (if random rip rap is used) or construction materials, provided said construction materials are limited to
asphalt cement and concrete. The rip rap shall be no smaller than two inches (2") square nor no larger than two feet (2') square. Construction
materials shall be used only in those areas where the waterway is not used as part of a recreation trail system.
(8) If the flow velocity in the waterway is such that erosion of the turf sidewall will occur and said velocity cannot be decreased via velocity control
structures, then other materials may replace turf on the sidewalls. Either gravel or rip rap may be allowed to prevent erosion at these points.
b. Water Velocity:
(1) The flow velocity of runoff in waterways shall be controlled to a velocity that will minimize erosion of the waterway.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 286/497
(2) Flow velocity shall be controlled through the installation of diversions, berms, slope drains, and other similarly effective velocity control
structures.
c. Sediment Control:
(1) To prevent sedimentation of waterways, pervious and impervious sediment traps and other sediment control structures shall be incorporated
throughout the contributing watershed.
(2) Temporary pervious sediment traps could consist of a construction of bales of hay with a low spillway embankment section of sand and gravel
that permits a slow movement of water while filtering sediment. Such structures may serve as temporary sediment control features during the
construction stage of a development.
(3) Permanent impervious sediment control structures consist of sediment basins (debris basins, desilting basins, or silt traps) and shall be utilized
to remove sediment from runoff prior to its disposal in any permanent body of water.
d. Maintenance Of Erosion Control System:
(1) The erosion and velocity control structures shall be maintained in a condition that will ensure continuous functioning according to the provisions
of this title.
(2) Sediment basins shall be maintained as the need occurs to ensure continuous desilting action.
(3) The areas utilized for runoff waterways and sediment basins shall not be allowed to exist in an unsightly condition. The banks of the sediment
basins and waterways shall be landscaped.
(4) Prior to the approval of any development, the developer shall make provision for continued maintenance of the erosion and sediment control
system.
E. Building Elevations:
1. The top of the foundation and the garage floor of all structures shall be eighteen inches (18") above the grade of the crown of the street upon which
the property fronts.
2. The lowest floor, including basement floor, of all structures constructed on lots preliminarily platted or established after January 24, 2016, shall be at
a level at least three feet (3') above the highest known groundwater table elevation. If requested by the building official, the groundwater table
elevation shall be determined by a licensed soils engineer using soil borings, piezometers, or the observation of mottled soils.
3. Exceptions to this standard may be approved by administrative permit upon consultation with the City Engineer for special circumstances such as
increased setback, site topography, septic system operation and the like; provided, that proper site and area drainage is maintained and the
elevation of the structure is in keeping with the character of the area.
F. Wetlands: In addition to the requirements of chapter 93 of this title, the following shall be the minimum protection for natural wetlands:
1. Runoff must not be discharged directly into wetlands without appropriate quality and quantity runoff control, depending on the individual wetland's
vegetation sensitivity, subject to approval of the City Engineer. (Prior Code § 20-16-5)
2. Wetlands must not be drained or filled, wholly or partially, unless replaced by either restoring or creating wetland areas of at least equal public value.
Compensation, including the replacement ratio and quality of replacement, should be consistent with the requirements outlined in the rules adopted
by the Board of Water and Soil Resources to implement the Wetland Conservation Act of 1991, as amended. (Prior Code § 20-16-5; amd. 2018
Code)
3. Work in and around wetlands must be guided by the following principles in descending order of priority:
a. Avoid both the direct and indirect impact of the activity that may destroy or diminish the wetland.
b. Minimize the impact by limiting the degree or magnitude of the wetland related activity and its implementation.
c. Rectify the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected wetland environment with one of at least equal public value.
d. Reduce or eliminate the adverse impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the activity.
e. Compensate for the impact by replacing or providing approved substitute wetland resources or environments.
4. a. A protective buffer of natural vegetation at least twenty feet (20') wide from the delineated edge at the time of development shall surround all
wetlands within parcels preliminarily platted, developed, or redeveloped after October 14, 2002. The City Engineer may require a larger buffer than
the minimum based upon site specific design issues. The design criteria should follow common principles and the example of nearby natural areas.
The site should be examined for existing buffer zones and mimic the slope structure and vegetation as much as possible.
b. A principal building setback of forty feet (40') from the delineated edge of all wetlands or twenty feet (20') from the edge of a buffer easement,
whichever is greater, shall be provided within parcels preliminarily platted, developed, or redeveloped after October 14, 2002.
c. Grading, construction, or vegetation alteration/disturbance within this buffer is prohibited. Buffer design and protection during construction shall
accomplish any or all of the following:
(1) Slow water runoff.
(2) Enhance water infiltration.
(3) Trap sediment, fertilizers, pathogens, heavy metals, blowing snow and soil, and act as corridors for wildlife.
(4) Drain tiles shall be identified and rendered inoperable.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 287/497
d. The wetland and buffer shall be platted as an outlot if established as part of a subdivision application. All other applications shall require dedication
of a perpetual conservation easement.
5. Ponding areas established for stormwater drainage purposes are exempt from the provisions of this section.
G. Security:
1. The developer shall provide the City financial security in the form of a cash escrow or letter of credit for required grading, landscape, and driveway
improvements required by this title as a condition of subdivision approval and/or issuance of a building permit; letters of credit must be from a State
or Federally chartered bank or savings and loan association, insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation that has an office in the State of
Minnesota, or a subsidiary of such bank or savings association with an office in the State of Minnesota.
2. An as built certificate of survey shall be submitted to verify that the final as built grades and elevations of the lot and building setbacks are consistent
with the approved grading plan for the development and amendments as approved by the City Engineer, that all required property monuments are in
place, and verify that all required landscaping and driveway improvements are completed.
3. If the developer fails to perform required grading, landscape, or driveway improvements, or submit an as built certificate of survey as required by this
title within one year from the date of occupancy, the security is forfeited to the City and may be used by the City to cure any default. The property
owner shall further agree to be responsible for all costs incurred by the City that exceed the amount of the security forfeited. (Prior Code § 20-16-5)
11-16-6: EXTERIOR LIGHTING:
A. Purpose: It is the purpose of this section to encourage the use of lighting systems that will reduce light pollution while increasing nighttime safety, utility,
security and productivity.
B. Exemptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following:
1. Temporary outdoor lighting used during customary holiday seasons.
2. Temporary outdoor lighting used for civic celebrations and promotions.
3. Lighting installed by a government jurisdiction or agency within public rights-of-way, required by a government agency for the safe operation of
airplanes, or security lighting required on government buildings or structures.
4. Emergency lighting by police, fire, and rescue authorities.
5. Architectural/historical light fixtures that feature globes that are not shielded. In no case shall the light affect adjacent property in excess of the
maximum intensity defined in subsection C1 of this section.
6. All outdoor lighting fixtures existing and legally installed prior to October 14, 2002, are exempt from regulations of this chapter but shall comply with
the previous standards for glare as follows:
a. Any lighting used to illuminate an off street parking area, sign or other structure shall be arranged as to deflect light away from any adjoining
residential zone or from the public streets. Direct or sky reflected glare, where from floodlights or from high temperature processes such as
combustion or welding shall not be directed into any adjoining property. The source of lights shall be hooded or controlled in some manner so as
not to light adjacent property. Bare incandescent light bulbs shall not be permitted in view of adjacent property or public right-of-way. Any light or
combination of lights which cast light on a public street shall not exceed one foot-candle (meter reading) as measured from the centerline of said
street. Any light or combination of lights which cast light on residential property shall not exceed four-tenths (0.4) foot-candle (meter reading) as
measured from said property.
b. Whenever a light fixture that was existing on October 14, 2002, is replaced by a new outdoor light fixture, there shall be compliance with the
provisions of this section.
C. Performance Standards:
1. Intensity: No light source or combination thereof which cast light on a public street shall exceed one foot-candle meter reading as measured at the
property line nor shall any light source or combination thereof which cast light on adjacent property exceed four-tenths (0.4) foot-candle as measured
at the property line.
2. Agriculture Or Residential District Standards: In all agriculture or residential districts, any lighting used to illuminate an off street parking area,
structure, or area shall be arranged as to deflect light away from any adjoining residential property or from any public right-of-way in accordance with
the following provisions:
a. The light source shall be hooded or controlled so as not to light adjacent property in excess of the maximum intensity defined in subsection C1 of
this section.
b. Bare light bulbs shall not be permitted in view of adjacent property or public right-of-way, unless part of a permanent fixture.
3. Institutional, Business, And Industrial Districts: Any lighting used to illuminate an off street parking area, structure, or area shall be arranged so as to
deflect light away from any adjoining property or from any public right-of-way in accordance with the following provisions:
a. Shielding: The light fixture shall contain a cutoff which directs the light at an angle of ninety degrees (90°). Exposure of the light source shall not be
permitted in view of adjacent property or public right-of-way.
b. Lighting Of Entire Facades Or Architectural Features: Lighting of entire facades or architectural features of a building shall be approved by the City
Council. Building facades or architectural features may not be internally illuminated and shall only utilize illuminating devices mounted on top and
facing downward onto the structure. In no case shall the light affect adjacent property in excess of the maximum intensity defined in subsection C1
of this section.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 288/497
c. Intensity: Light sources shall not be permitted so as to light adjacent property in excess of the maximum intensity defined in subsection C1 of this
section.
d. Searchlights: The use of searchlights for any business shall be limited to not more than two (2) events per calendar year. During any one event,
the use of searchlights shall be limited to five (5) days consecutively and shall not be used between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and
sunrise.
4. Height:
a. The maximum height above the ground grade permitted for poles, fixtures, and light sources mounted on a pole shall be:
(1) Agricultural, residential, business and institutional districts: Twenty five feet (25').
(2) Industrial districts: Thirty five feet (35').
b. A light source mounted on a building shall not exceed the height of the building.
c. Exceptions to the height limits for light sources may be approved by conditional use permit; provided, that there is compliance with all other
requirements of this section.
5. Location:
a. All outdoor light fixtures shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from a street right-of-way and five feet (5') from an interior side or rear lot
line.
b. No light sources shall be located on the roof unless said light enhances the architectural features of the building and is approved by the City
Council.
6. Glare: Direct or reflected glare from high temperature processes such as combustion or welding shall not be visible from any adjoining property.
7. Outdoor Recreation: Outdoor recreational uses such as, but not limited to, baseball fields, football fields, tennis courts and snow skiing areas have
special requirements for nighttime lighting. Due to these unique circumstances, a conditional use permit shall be required for outdoor lighting
systems for such uses that do not comply with the regulations of this section; provided, that:
a. No public or private outdoor recreation facility shall be illuminated after eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M., unless approved by the City Council.
b. Off street parking areas for outdoor recreation uses that are illuminated shall meet the requirements for institutional, commercial, and industrial
applications as found in subsection C3 of this section.
8. Outdoor Signs: Outdoor signs constructed of translucent materials and wholly illuminated from within do not require shielding. Signs not exclusively
illuminated internally may only utilize illuminating devices mounted on top and facing downward of the display structure. All shall comply with all other
provisions of this section.
D. Prohibitions: The following outdoor lights are prohibited: Flashing lights. (Prior Code § 20-16-6)
11-16-7: SMOKE:
The emission of smoke by any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the State of Minnesota Pollution Control Agency and Minnesota
Regulation APC 7017, as amended. (Prior Code § 20-16-7)
11-16-8: DUST AND OTHER PARTICULATE MATTER:
The emission of dust, fly ash or other particulate matter by any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the State of Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency and Minnesota Regulation APC 7011, as amended. (Prior Code § 20-16-8)
11-16-9: ODORS:
The emission of odor by any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the State of Minnesota Pollution Agency and Minnesota Regulation APC
7011, as amended. (Prior Code § 20-16-9)
11-16-10: NOISE:
Noises emanating from any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the State of Minnesota Pollution Control Agency and Minnesota Regulations
NPC 7010, as amended, and section 5-1-8 of this Code. (Prior Code § 20-16-10)
11-16-11: UTILITY SYSTEMS:
Any development of land requiring provision of utilities for potable water and sanitary sewer disposal shall comply with the provisions of title 8, chapter 1 of
this Code. (Prior Code § 20-16-11)
11-16-12: WASTE MATERIAL:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 289/497
A. All waste generated on any premises shall be disposed in a manner consistent with all Minnesota Pollution Control Agency rules and this Code.
B. The accumulation, storage, processing, and disposal of waste on any premises, which is not generated on that premises, is prohibited, except as
specifically provided in title 5, chapter 3 of this Code. (Prior Code § 20-16-12)
11-16-13: BULK STORAGE (LIQUID):
All uses associated with the bulk storage of all gasoline, liquid fertilizer, chemical, flammable and similar liquids shall comply with requirements of the
Minnesota State Fire Marshal's and Minnesota Department of Agriculture Offices and have documents from those offices stating the use is in compliance.
(Prior Code § 20-16-13)
11-16-14: RADIATION EMISSION:
All activities that emit radioactivity shall comply with the minimum requirements of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. (Prior Code § 20-16-14)
11-16-15: ELECTRICAL EMISSION:
All activities which create electrical emissions shall comply with the minimum requirements of the Federal Communications Commission. (Prior Code § 20-
16-15)
11-16-16: PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
The erection and/or placement of any structure or any use occurring within the City's public right-of-way shall be in compliance with applicable provisions
of title 8, chapter 6 of this Code. (Prior Code § 20-16-16)
Chapter 17
GENERAL YARD, LOT AREA AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
11-17-1: SUMMARY:
This chapter identifies yard, lot area, building size, building type and height requirements in each zoning district. (Prior Code § 20-17-1)
11-17-2: USABLE OPEN SPACE:
Except for elderly (senior citizen) housing, each multiple-family dwelling site shall contain at least seven hundred fifty (750) square feet of "usable open
space" as defined in section 11-2-2 of this title for each dwelling unit contained therein. (Prior Code § 20-17-2)
11-17-3: HEIGHT:
A. Allowable Increases: Except in the Wild and Scenic Recreational River District, building, antenna and antenna support structure heights in excess of
those standards contained in the district provisions and any other sections of this title may be allowed through a conditional use permit; provided, that:
1. Demonstrated need is established for the increase in height, and said increase will not violate the intent and character of the zoning district in which
the structure is located.
2. The site is capable of accommodating the increased structure size.
3. The potential increased intensity and size of use does not cause an increase in traffic volumes beyond the capacity of the surrounding streets.
4. Public utilities and services are adequate.
5. For each additional story over the district limitation or for each additional ten feet (10') above the maximum allowed per district, front and side yard
setback requirements shall be increased by ten percent (10%).
6. The construction does not limit solar access to abutting and/or neighboring properties.
7. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and satisfactorily met.
B. Exceptions: Except in the Wild and Scenic Recreational River District, the building height limits established for the respective zoning districts shall not
apply to the following:
1. Belfries.
2. Chimneys or flues.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 290/497
3. Church spires.
4. Cooling towers.
5. Cupolas and domes which do not contain usable floor space.
6. Elevator penthouses.
7. Flagpoles.
8. Monuments and statues, public and semipublic only.
9. Parapet walls extending not more than three feet (3') above the limiting height of the building.
10. Poles, towers and other structures for essential services.
11. Necessary mechanical and electrical appurtenances.
12. Farming buildings.
13. Wind energy conversion system towers as regulated by chapter 34 of this title.
14. Antennas and antenna support structures as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
C. Restrictions On Projections: No excluded roof equipment or structure element extending beyond the limited height of a building may occupy more than
twenty five percent (25%) of the area of such roof nor exceed ten feet (10') unless otherwise noted. (Prior Code § 20-17-3)
11-17-4: BUILDING TYPE AND CONSTRUCTION:
Buildings in all zoning districts shall maintain a high standard for exterior architecture to ensure a high quality of development and land use compatibility
that contribute positively to community image in regard to material quality, visual aesthetics, permanence and stability and to prevent use of materials that
are unsightly, deteriorate rapidly, or cause urban blight.
A. General Provisions:
1. General Design Concept: Building and/or project designs shall utilize materials, colors, or details to meet the intent of these architectural standards.
2. Design Elements: Projects may be required to utilize building ornamentation features, including, but not limited to: columns, arches, parapets,
cornices, friezes, canopies, moldings, dentils, corbels, quoins, rustication, vaults, domes, and cupolas.
3. Corporate Identity: The intent and purpose of these architectural standards supersede corporate identity designs. When a corporate identity design
does not meet the intent and purpose of the architectural standards, the corporate identity design shall be limited to the area immediately adjacent to
the main entry but shall otherwise be consistent with the intent of this section.
B. Exterior Building Finishes:
1. Grade Categories: For the purpose of this subsection, materials shall be divided into grade A, grade B, grade C, grade D, and grade E categories as
follows:
a. Grade A:
(1) Brick or custom masonry units (CMU) having a brick like appearance.
(2) Glass.
(3) Natural or artificial stone.
b. Grade B:
(1) Exterior insulation and finish system (EIFS).
(2) Fiber-cement exterior siding (limited to vertical seam or board/batten style for commercial, industrial uses).
(3) Integral color architecturally precast concrete panels having an exposed aggregate, light sandblast, acid etch, form liner, tooled, natural stone
veneer, brick face and/or cast stone type finish.
(4) Integral color specialty concrete block such as textured, burnished block or rock faced block.
(5) Masonry stucco.
c. Grade C:
(1) Glass block.
(2) Opaque panels.
(3) Ornamental metal.
(4) Wood; provided, that the surfaces are finished for exterior use or the wood is of proven durability for exterior use, such as cedar, redwood or
cypress.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 291/497
d. Grade D:
(1) Integral color smooth as cast concrete block.
(2) Integral color smooth scored concrete block.
(3) Integral color smooth as cast concrete panels.
(4) Integral color architecturally precast concrete panels having a smooth as cast finish.
e. Grade E:
(1) Aluminum siding.
(2) Steel siding.
(3) Vinyl siding.
2. Color:
a. For the purpose of this chapter, exterior finish materials requiring integral color shall not include natural gray.
b. Brick, stone and/or integral color concrete exteriors shall not be painted during the life of the exterior materials.
3. Foundations:
a. Building foundations not exceeding one foot (1') and other such portions of a building's facade below the elevation of the first floor need not
comply with the requirements for the primary facade treatment or materials.
b. Structures in excess of one hundred fifty (150) square feet shall be constructed with continuous structural load bearing perimeter foundations
except industrial uses within the I-3 Zoning District and pole buildings as expressly defined and permitted in accordance with this title.
4. Exposed Roof Materials:
a. Exposed roof materials shall be similar to, or an architectural equivalent of, a three hundred (300) pound or better asphalt or fiberglass shingle,
wooden shingle, standing seam metal roof or better.
b. The back of parapets that are visible shall be finished with materials and colors compatible with the front of the parapet.
5. Accessory Structures:
a. Except in A-1 and A-2 Districts, all accessory buildings in excess of one hundred twenty (120) square feet that are accessory to residential
dwelling units shall be constructed with a design and exterior building materials consistent with the general character of the principal structure on
the lot.
b. Accessory buildings for nonresidential uses, including those allowed in the residential districts, shall be of a similar character, design, and facade
as the principal structure.
6. Other Building Types And Construction:
a. Except as allowed for buildings used for agricultural purposes as defined by this title, no galvanized or unfinished steel or unfinished aluminum
buildings (walls or roofs), except those specifically intended to have a corrosive designed finish such as COR-TEN steel shall be permitted in any
zoning district.
b. Except for buildings used for agricultural purposes as defined by this title, pole buildings shall not be allowed as a principal building or structure.
7. Calculation:
a. The material shall comprise at least five percent (5%) of the exterior wall to be considered in the calculations of exterior materials required by this
chapter.
b. Garage doors, window trim, flashing accent items and the like shall not constitute required materials that make up the exterior finish of a building
for the purposes of this section.
C. Residential Uses:
1. Exterior Finish: The primary exterior building finish for residential uses shall consist of grade A, B, C, D and/or E materials.
2. Detached Townhomes, Two-Family And Townhouses:
a. The exterior of detached townhome and two-family dwelling units shall include a variation in building materials which are to be distributed
throughout the building elevations and coordinated into the architectural design of the structure to create an architecturally balanced appearance.
b. A minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of the area of the front elevation of a structure, including the sides of an attached garage forward of the
dwelling unit, shall have an exterior finish of brick, stucco and/or natural or artificial stone.
c. Except for brick, stucco, natural or artificial stone, or cement or wood fiber board, no single elevation shall have more than twenty five percent
(25%) of one type of exterior finish.
d. For developments with more than three (3) principal buildings, the developer shall specify a minimum of four (4) color packages for siding, trim,
and shutters with no color package used for more than thirty percent (30%) of the exterior finish for the total number of dwelling units.
3. Multiple-Family Buildings:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 292/497
a. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the combined area of all elevations of a principal building shall have an exterior finish of brick or brick CMU,
stucco and/or natural or artificial stone.
b. Except for brick or brick CMU, stucco, natural or artificial stone, rock face block, or cement or wood fiber board, no single elevation shall have
more than twenty five percent (25%) of one type of exterior finish.
D. Commercial, Office And Institutional Uses: The exterior of commercial, office and institutional buildings shall include a variation in building materials and
forms to be distributed throughout the facade and coordinated into the design of the structure to create an architecturally balanced appearance and
shall comply with the following requirements: (Prior Code § 20-17-4)
1. Business Districts (Except B-4 District):
a. The exterior building finish shall be composed of at least sixty five percent (65%) grade A materials; not more than thirty five percent (35%) grade
B materials and not more than ten percent (10%) grade C materials. (Prior Code § 20-17-4; amd. 2018 Code)
b. All sides of the principal and accessory structures are to have essentially the same or coordinated harmonious exterior finish treatment. (Prior
Code § 20-17-4)
2. B-4 District Uses And All Institutional Uses Regardless Of Zoning District:
a. For any facade facing a public right-of-way, the exterior building finish shall be composed of at least sixty five percent (65%) grade A materials
and/or integral color architecturally precast concrete panels with a form liner, tooled, natural stone veneer, brick face and/or cast stone type finish,
not more than thirty five percent (35%) other grade B materials and not more than ten percent (10%) grade C materials. (Prior Code § 20-17-4;
amd. 2018 Code)
b. For all other facades, the exterior building finish shall be composed of a minimum of ninety percent (90%) grade A and grade B materials and not
more than ten percent (10%) grade C materials.
E. Industrial Uses:
1. Within I-1 And I-2 Districts:
a. The primary exterior building finish for buildings shall consist of grade A, B, and C materials for those facades facing a public right-of-way and a
minimum of seventy five percent (75%) grade A, B, and C materials together with a maximum of twenty five percent (25%) grade D materials on all
other facades.
b. Not more than one exterior wall designed for removal to allow future building expansion shown on a site plan as meeting all applicable lot
requirements may be allowed to use grade D materials notwithstanding other applicable provisions of this section provided that, the wall does not
face a public street.
2. Within I-3 District: The primary exterior building finish for buildings shall consist of grade A, B, C, and D materials and/or steel or aluminum curtain
wall panels.
F. Exceptions: Exceptions to the provisions of this section are allowed subject to the following:
1. The use is an essential service as defined in section 11-2-2 of this title; or
2. Remodeling or maintenance that does not increase the gross floor area of a building or structure existing as of February 11, 2013, shall be regulated
by chapter 15 of this title and may utilize the same or any higher grade materials.
3. Upon approval of a conditional use permit based on a finding by the City Council that the applicant has demonstrated that the following criteria are
met:
a. The proposed building maintains the quality in design and materials intended by this title.
b. The proposed building design and materials are compatible and in harmony with other structures within the district.
c. The justification for deviation from the requirements of this section shall not be based on economic considerations. (Prior Code § 20-17-4)
11-17-5: YARDS:
No lot, yard or other open space shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to make such lot, yard or open space less than the minimum required by this
title. No required open space provided about any building or structure shall be included as part of any open space required for another structure.
A. The following shall not be considered as encroachments on yard setback requirements:
1. Accessory structures as governed by this title are permitted in rear yards.
2. Awnings, balconies, chimneys, flues, leaders, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, sills, cornices, buttresses, eaves, gutters and the like may
project not more than two and one-half feet (21/2') over or half the distance of the required side yard, whichever is less.
3. Walks or steps for negotiating ground slopes, retaining walls, uncovered porches, decks, stoops, hedges and natural growth, paved terraces, paved
areas or similar features, provided they do not extend above the height of the ground floor level of the principal structure or not more than a distance
of three feet (3') into any required yard except a rear yard.
4. Structures used ornamentally, for gardening, or for private recreation purposes, and structures for essential services, all accessory to and
customarily incidental to the principal use, are permitted in yards and courts, and solar energy systems not included in the floor area of the building
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 293/497
are permitted in side yards; provided, that a side yard strip three feet (3') in width adjoining the side line of the lot shall be unobstructed by any
structure or feature, except a fence or retaining wall.
5. In rear yards, recreational and laundry drying equipment, arbors, and trellises, detached outdoor living rooms, and air conditioning or heating
equipment, provided they are at a distance of five feet (5') from the rear lot line.
6. Open work fire balconies and fire escapes may extend not more than three feet (3') into a required yard.
7. Add-on entryways to residential dwellings constructed prior to January 1, 1992, may encroach into the required front yard setback not more than five
feet (5') and shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet in total size.
B. Where adjacent structures have front yard setbacks different from those required, the minimum front yard setback shall be no less than the average
setback of the two (2) adjacent principal structures. If only one adjacent lot is occupied by a structure, the minimum front yard shall be the average of
the adjacent principal structure and the district minimum setback, but in no case shall a setback greater than the minimum established for the
respective zoning district be required. (Prior Code § 20-17-5)
11-17-6: MINIMUM FLOOR AREA PER DWELLING UNIT:
A. Single-Family Dwelling Units: Except as otherwise specified in the zoning district provisions or allowed as a conditional use permit, single-family homes
as classified below shall have the following minimum floor areas per unit.
1. Two (2) bedroom: Nine hundred forty (940) square feet aboveground.
2. Three (3) bedroom: One thousand forty (1,040) square feet aboveground.
B. Multiple Dwelling Units: Except for elderly housing or as allowed by conditional use permit, living units classified as multiple dwelling shall have the
following minimum floor areas per unit:
1. Efficiency units: Five hundred (500) square feet.
2. One bedroom units: Seven hundred (700) square feet.
3. More than one bedroom units: An additional eighty (80) square feet for each additional bedroom.
C. Elderly (Senior Citizen) Housing: Living units classified as elderly (senior citizen) housing units, except as allowed by conditional use permit, shall have
the following minimum floor areas per unit:
1. Efficiency units: Four hundred forty (440) square feet.
2. One bedroom: Five hundred twenty (520) square feet.
D. Two-Family Dwellings, Quadraminiums, Townhouses And Manor Homes: Except as otherwise specified in the zoning district provisions or allowed as a
conditional use permit, two-family dwellings, quadraminiums, townhouses and manor homes, as classified below, shall have the minimum floor area
per one bedroom unit:
1. Two-family dwellings: Six hundred fifty (650) square feet first floor above grade, plus one hundred (100) additional square feet for each additional
bedroom.
2. Quadraminiums, townhouses and manor homes: Six hundred (600) square feet first floor above grade, plus one hundred (100) additional square feet
for each additional bedroom. (Prior Code § 20-17-6)
11-17-7: EFFICIENCY APARTMENTS:
Except for elderly (senior citizen) housing, the number of efficiency apartments in a multiple dwelling shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the total
number of apartments. In the case of elderly (senior citizen) housing, efficiency apartments shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total number of
apartments. (Prior Code § 20-17-7)
11-17-8: MINIMUM FLOOR AREA FOR COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURES:
Commercial and industrial buildings (principal structure) which are to be less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area may only be allowed
upon approval of a conditional use permit as provided in chapter 4 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-17-8)
11-17-9: MINIMUM LOT AREA PER UNIT:
The lot area per unit requirement for single-family, two-family, townhouses, apartments and planned unit developments shall be calculated on the basis of
the total area on the lot or in the project and as controlled by an individual and joint ownership.
A. Single- and two-family uses shall be as specified in the respective zoning districts subject to the following:
1. A-1, A-2, R-1 and R-2 District lots and lots of record and preliminary platted lots having legal standing on May 26, 2009: Except as may be otherwise
required by this title, the lot area shall be measured as the area of a horizontal plane within the lot lines.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 294/497
2. Lots of record in the R-C, R-3, R-4A, R-4, R-5, R-6 and R-7 Districts established after May 26, 2009: Except as may be otherwise allowed by this
title, the lot area shall be measured as the area of a horizontal plane within the lot lines excluding stormwater basins, drainageways, wetlands,
required wetland buffers, water bodies, public rights-of-way, regional drainage and utility easements, and slopes steeper than three to one (3:1).
B. Townhouse and similar independent unit entry: Structure platted in as base/unit lots, five thousand (5,000) square feet.
C. Multiple-family: Two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.
D. Elderly housing: One thousand (1,000) square feet. (Prior Code § 20-17-9)
11-17-10: TWO-FAMILY, TOWNHOUSE, QUADRAMINIUM, MANOR HOME AND MULTIPLE-FAMILY USES:
A. Single Townhouse Dwelling Units: No single townhouse structure shall contain more than eight (8) dwelling units.
B. Townhouse Minimum Unit Lot Frontage: Minimum unit lot frontage for townhouses shall not be less than twenty feet (20').
C. Subdivision Of Two-Family Double Bungalows, Townhouse Or Quadraminium Lots: The subdivision of base lots containing two-family dwellings,
townhouses, or quadraminiums to permit individual private ownership of a single dwelling within such a structure is acceptable upon the approval by
the City Council. Approval of a subdivision request is contingent on the following requirements:
1. Two-family, townhouses, and quadraminiums intended for owner occupancy shall be subdivided on an individual unit lot basis according to the
provisions of chapter 36, "Planned Unit Developments", of this title. (Prior Code § 20-17-10)
2. Prior to subdivision, such units shall fully comply with applicable provisions of the Minnesota State Building Code. (Prior Code § 20-17-10; amd.
2018 Code)
3. Prior to a two-family double bungalow dwelling, townhouse, or quadraminium subdivision, the base lot must meet all the requirements of the zoning
district.
4. There shall be no more than one principal structure on a base lot in all residential districts. The principal structure on a unit lot created in a twofamily,
townhouse or quadraminium subdivision will be the portion of the attached dwelling existing or constructed on the platted unit lot.
5. Permitted accessory uses as defined by the zoning districts are acceptable, provided they meet all the zoning requirements.
6. A property maintenance agreement must be arranged by the applicant and submitted to the City Attorney for review and subject to the Attorney's
approval. The agreement shall ensure the maintenance and upkeep of the structure and lots to meet minimum City standards. The agreement is to
be filed with the Wright County Recorder's Office as a deed restriction against the title of each unit lot.
7. Separate public utility service shall be provided to each subdivided unit and shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Engineer.
8. The subdivision is to be platted and recorded in conformance to requirements of the subdivision ordinance of the City.
D. Subdivision Of Multiple-Family, Two-Family Duplex Dwellings, Manor Homes And Other Such Units:
1. The subdivision is to be platted and recorded in conformance with the requirements of the subdivision ordinance of the City as applicable.
2. The subdivision shall comply with applicable cooperative or condominium laws of the State of Minnesota. (Prior Code § 20-17-10)
11-17-11: SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS:
A. All single-family detached homes except in the R-MH District; in legally approved mobile home subdivisions; and in manufactured home parks as may
be allowed in the R-5, R-6 and R-7 Districts, shall: (Prior Code § 20-17-11)
1. Be constructed upon a continuous perimeter foundation that meets the requirements of the Minnesota State Building Code. (Prior Code § 20-17-11;
amd. 2018 Code)
2. Not be less than thirty feet (30') in length and not less than twenty four feet (24') in width over that entire minimum length. Width measurements shall
not take account of overhang and other projections beyond the principal walls. Dwellings shall also meet the minimum floor area requirements as set
out in this title.
3. Have a minimum roof overhang of one foot (1').
4. Have an earth covered, composition, shingled or tiled roof.
5. Receive a building permit. The application for a building permit, in addition to other information required, shall indicate the height, size, design and
the appearance of all elevations of the proposed building and a description of the construction materials proposed to be used. The exterior
architectural design of a proposed dwelling may not be so at variance with, nor so similar to, the exterior architectural design of any structure or
structures already constructed or in the course of construction in the immediate neighborhood, nor so at variance with the character of the
surrounding neighborhood as to cause a significant depreciation in the property values of the neighborhood or adversely affect the public health,
safety or general welfare. (Prior Code § 20-17-11)
6. Meet the requirements of the Minnesota State Building Code or the applicable Manufactured Housing Code. (Prior Code § 20-17-11; amd. 2018
Code)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 295/497
B. All single-family dwellings within the R-MH Zoning District shall be governed by chapter 69 of this title.
C. All single-family homes within an approved mobile home subdivision and manufactured home parks as provided in the R-5, R-6 and R-7 Zoning
Districts shall comply with the Guidelines for Manufactured Housing Installation, International Conference of Building Officials, 1983, as amended.
(Prior Code § 20-17-11)
11-17-12: STORM SHELTERS:
A. For any dwelling or dwelling unit that is constructed slab on grade within a preliminary plat approved after September 26, 2016, provisions shall provide
for storm protection internally to the dwelling or dwelling unit.
B. Storm shelters internal to the dwelling or dwelling unit, other than within an attached garage, shall be provided in a bathroom or laundry room, or other
occupied space with sufficient area for standing so as to ensure accessibility and that the storm shelter is not obstructed by storage.
C. Storm shelters internal to the attached garage shall be allowed provided that the area of the garage is increased to maintain the following dimensions
for vehicle parking:
1. A minimum depth of twenty feet (20') from the storm shelter to the exterior wall with the garage door when the storm shelter is located at the front of
the vehicle stalls.
2. A minimum width of twenty feet (20') from the storm shelter to the opposite side wall when the storm shelter is located to the side of the vehicle
stalls.
3. The door to the storm shelter shall be located so as to be accessible in accordance with the minimum dimensions established by subsections C1
and C2 of this section.
D. Compliance with this requirement shall be based upon Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) P-320 guidelines and standards; except, that
the shelter door shall be solid core construction (not limited to metal) and only one deadbolt lock shall be required. (Ord. 2019-05, 2-11-2019)
Chapter 18
ACCESSORY USES AND BUILDINGS
11-18-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide performance standards for the erection, siting and use of accessory buildings, structures and uses that may be
allowed within the various zoning districts to ensure compatibility with the principal use and with surrounding properties, as well as to protect the general
health, safety and welfare of the community. (Prior Code § 20-18-1)
11-18-2: ACCESSORY USES AND BUILDINGS GENERALLY:
A. Time Of Construction: No detached accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the time of construction of the principal
building to which it is accessory.
B. Exceptions:
1. Accessory buildings used for agricultural purposes as defined by this title are exempt from the area limits, height limits and building type and
construction standards of this chapter and are regulated by chapter 25 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-18-2)
2. Accessory buildings, uses, and equipment within the R-MH District shall be as regulated by chapter 69 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-18-2; amd. 2018
Code)
3. For the purposes of this chapter, decks, gazebos, play equipment and similar unenclosed structures with a footprint less than two hundred (200)
square feet and height of less than sixteen feet (16') are exempt from the accessory building number and area limits.
C. Detached Single-Family And Two-Family Uses:
1. No accessory use, building, structure or equipment shall be allowed within a required front yard and, with the exception of an attached garage, no
accessory building may be placed within a front yard within the R-C, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4A, R-4, R-5, R-6 and R-7 Districts.
2. No accessory building, structure, and/or detached garage for a single-family dwelling shall occupy more than ten percent (10%) of the area of the
required rear yard in the A-1, A-2, R-C, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Zoning Districts or not more than twenty five percent (25%) of the area of the required rear
yard in the R-4A, R-4, R-5, R-6, and R-7 Zoning Districts.
3. Setbacks and encroachments:
a. Attached accessory structures shall conform to principal building setbacks required for the zoning district in which the structure is located.
b. Detached accessory structures may encroach into required side or rear yard setbacks when located in the rear yard of the lot, but shall not
encroach into the required setback for a yard abutting a public street of a corner lot:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 296/497
(1) Detached accessory structures not exceeding two hundred (200) square feet in gross floor area shall be set back at least five feet (5') from side
or rear lot lines abutting other lots or ten feet (10') from a rear lot line abutting a public right-of-way in the case of a through lot.
(2) Detached accessory structures with a gross floor area larger than two hundred (200) square feet shall be set back at least ten feet (10') from
side or rear lot lines abutting other lots or twenty feet (20') from a rear lot line abutting a public right-of-way in the case of a through lot.
c. No accessory structure shall be located within a required buffer yard, drainage and utility easement or public right-of-way.
4. Attached accessory garages:
a. The minimum floor area of an attached garage shall be four hundred eighty (480) square feet.
b. The maximum floor area of an attached garage shall be one thousand eighty (1,080) square feet, except as provided by subsection C4c of this
section.
c. Within the A-1, R-C, R-1, and R-2 Districts, the floor area of an attached garage may exceed one thousand eighty (1,080) square feet; provided,
that the maximum floor area does not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet or sixty five percent (65%) of the building footprint of
the principal dwelling (not including the area of the attached garage), whichever is less.
5. Detached accessory buildings and structures within the A-1 and A-2 Districts:
a. The total floor area allowed for all detached accessory structures shall be as follows:
Lot Area
(Acres)
Maximum Total Floor Area Of All Detached Accessory Structures
(Square Feet)
1.00 or smaller 1,080
1.01 to 2.00 1,500
2.01 to 3.00 2,000
3.01 to 4.00 2,500
4.01 to 5.00 3,000
5.01 to 6.00 3,500
6.01 to 7.00 4,000
7.01 to 8.00 4,500
8.01 to 9.00 5,000
9.01 to 10.00 5,500
10.01 and larger 6,000
b. For parcels located within the sewer service district or long range urban service area or those parcels with an area of five (5) acres or less:
(1) In no case shall the floor area of an individual detached accessory building exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet for parcels
with an area of five (5) acres or less.
(2) The total floor area of all accessory structures shall not exceed two hundred percent (200%) of the gross floor area of the principal structure, or
shall not exceed the maximum combined accessory area allowed based upon lot size, as outlined in this chapter, whichever is the least.
c. There is to be no more than two (2) detached private garages or accessory structures for each single-family dwelling.
6. Detached accessory buildings and structures within the R-C, R-1, R-2, and R-3 Districts:
a. The total floor area allowed for all detached accessory buildings shall be as follows:
Lot Area
(Acres)
Maximum Total Floor Area Of All Detached Accessory Structures
(Square Feet)
0.00 to 1.00 1,080
1.01 to 2.00 1,500
2.01 or larger 2,000
b. In no case shall the floor area of an individual detached accessory building exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet.
c. The total floor area of all accessory structures shall not exceed two hundred percent (200%) of the gross floor area of the principal structure, or
shall not exceed the maximum combined accessory area allowed based upon lot size as outlined in this chapter, whichever is the least.
d. There is to be no more than two (2) detached private garages or accessory structures for each detached single- or two-family dwelling.
7. Within R-4A and R-4 Districts:
a. The combined gross floor area of attached and detached accessory buildings shall be as follows:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 297/497
Lot Area
(Square Feet)
Maximum Total
Floor Area Of All
Attached And
Detached
Accessory
Structures
(Square Feet)
Maximum Gross Floor Area Of A Detached Accessory Structure When An Attached Garage
Exists On The Same Lot
(Square Feet)
0.00 to less than
18,000
1,280 200
18,001 or larger 1,440 360
b. In no case shall the floor area of an individual detached accessory building exceed one thousand eighty (1,080) square feet.
c. There shall be no more than one detached accessory structure with a gross floor area larger than two hundred (200) square feet per lot.
8. Within the R-5, R-6, and R-7 Districts:
a. No accessory detached building shall occupy more than two hundred (200) square feet when accompanied by an attached garage on the same
lot, nor shall the combined total floor area of accessory detached structures and/or an attached garage exceed one thousand one hundred fifty
(1,150) square feet.
b. There shall be no more than one detached accessory structure with a gross floor area larger than two hundred (200) square feet per lot.
D. Accessory Building Setbacks: Except as was otherwise noted, accessory buildings and uses for all principal uses other than single-family detached
dwellings shall conform to the setback requirements specified for the respective zoning district in which they are located.
E. Accessory Building Gross Floor Area: Except in the case of single-family detached dwellings, accessory buildings shall not exceed thirty percent (30%)
of the gross floor area of the principal buildings. In those cases where this standard is exceeded, a planned unit development conditional use permit
shall be required.
F. Accessory Building Height: Except as expressly allowed by conditional use permit, accessory buildings shall comply with the following height limitations:
(Prior Code § 20-18-2)
1. Maximum Height Generally:
Zoning District Maximum Height
A-1 District limit but not higher than the principal building
A-2 District limit but not higher than the principal building
R-C 16 feet
R-1 16 feet
R-2 16 feet
R-3 16 feet
R-4A 16 feet
R-4 16 feet
R-5 16 feet
R-6 16 feet
R-7 16 feet
INS District limit but not higher than the principal building
B-1 16 feet
B-2 District limit but not higher than the principal building
B-3 District limit but not higher than the principal building
B-4 District limit but not higher than the principal building
I-1 District limit but not higher than the principal building
I-2 District limit but not higher than the principal building
I-3 District limit but not higher than the principal building
(Prior Code § 20-18-2; amd. 2018 Code)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 298/497
2. Accessory Buildings: Accessory buildings other than garages shall be limited to ten feet (10') in height on all two-family or townhouse or multiplefamily
lots, except by conditional use permit.
G. Building Type And Standards:
1. Except for public uses owned by the City or as may be expressly allowed by this title or by conditional use permit subject to subsection H of this
section, the same or suitable quality exterior finish building materials used for the principal building and allowed by section 11-17-4 of this title shall
be used in all accessory buildings over one hundred fifty (150) square feet.
2. The design of all accessory buildings shall be compatible with that of the principal building on the lot. "Compatible" means that the exterior
appearance of the accessory building is similar to the principal building from an aesthetic, building material and architectural standpoint so as not to
cause a difference to a degree to cause an incongruity or a nuisance. The City shall also give consideration to the function of the accessory building
when evaluating its compatibility with the design of the principal building for the purposes of this chapter.
3. Pole buildings, as defined in section 11-2-2 of this title, are allowed as a permitted accessory structure within the A-1 and A-2 Districts; provided,
that:
a. The lot or parcel lies within the rural service area or urban service expansion area, as defined by the Comprehensive Plan.
b. The lot or parcel on which the building is to be constructed has an area of five (5) acres or greater.
H. Conditional Use Permits: Application for a conditional use permit under this chapter shall be regulated by chapter 4 of this title and may be granted;
provided, that:
1. There is a demonstrated need and potential for continued use of the structure and the purpose stated.
2. In the case of residential uses, no commercial or home occupation activities, except as expressly permitted by and in accordance with this title, are
conducted on the property. This restriction shall include the storage of materials and equipment which are unrelated to the on site residential use and
activity.
3. The building has an evident re-use or function related to the principal use.
4. Accessory buildings shall be maintained in a manner that is compatible with the adjacent uses and does not present a hazard to public health, safety
and general welfare. (Prior Code § 20-18-2)
11-18-3: OUTDOOR STORAGE:
A. Residential Uses: Except as provided in this title, all outside storage of materials and equipment for residential uses shall be stored within a building or
fully screened so as not to be visible from adjoining properties and the public right-of-way, except for the following:
1. Clotheslines pole and wire. (Prior Code § 20-18-3)
2. Not more than two (2) currently licensed recreational vehicles, trailers and equipment (not including racing cars) subject to the following provisions:
(Prior Code § 20-18-3; amd. 2018 Code)
a. In the front yard, provided the recreational vehicles and equipment are located on an established driveway, entirely on the equipment or vehicle
owner's property and not upon any public right-of-way.
b. In the side yard only when abutting an attached or detached garage; provided, that:
(1) The recreational vehicles and equipment are not closer than five feet (5') from the side lot line.
(2) The area on which the recreational vehicles and equipment are stored shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete or paving brick.
(3) The recreational vehicles and equipment shall not be within the setback required from a public right-of-way for the side yard of a corner lot,
except for a side yard when abutting a major collector or arterial street and then may not encroach into a required buffer yard.
c. In the rear yard not closer than ten feet (10') from the rear lot line and/or five feet (5') from the side lot lines and then may not encroach into a
required buffer yard.
3. Off street parking of currently registered and operable passenger vehicles as in accordance with chapter 21 of this title.
4. Construction and landscaping material currently being used on the premises.
5. Lawn furniture or furniture used and constructed explicitly for outdoor use.
6. Rear or side yard exterior storage of firewood for the purpose of consumption only by the person or persons on whose property it is stored.
B. Semitractor Trailers And Land/Sea Containers:
1. Certification:
a. All semitractor trailers with a Minnesota license plate shall be certified by the State and shall display a current inspection certification decal issued
by the State of Minnesota Department of Public Safety.
b. All semitractor trailers with out of State license plates shall produce upon request proof that the vehicle complies with Federal motor vehicle
inspection requirements for vehicles in interstate commerce as provided under 49 CFR section 396.17.
2. Location:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 299/497
a. Land/sea containers shall not be stored and semitractor trailers shall not be parked in the required front yard setback area or in a required side
yard setback area abutting a Residential District or right-of-way of a collector or arterial street as defined by the Comprehensive Plan.
b. Outdoor storage of land/sea containers and parking of semitractor trailers shall not be allowed on required parking spaces.
3. Surface:
a. All semitractor trailers shall be parked on a concrete or bituminous surface.
b. Land/sea containers used for outdoor storage shall be placed upon a concrete, bituminous, crushed rock, or crushed concrete surface. (Ord.
2019-04, 2-11-2019)
C. Other Uses: Outdoor storage for nonresidential uses shall be subject to the requirements established within the respective zoning districts in which the
use is located. (Prior Code § 20-18-3; amd. Ord. 2019-04, 2-11-2019)
11-18-4: WASTE AND RECYCLING CONTAINERS:
A. Enclosed Storage: Except as provided by this section, all waste and recycling containers shall be stored within the principal structure or within an
accessory building or enclosure.
B. Single-Family Residential Uses: Exterior storage of waste and recycling containers not stored within the principal structure shall be located in side or
rear yards and shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from all property lines.
C. Other Uses: All refuse, recyclable materials, and necessary handling equipment including, but not limited to, waste and recycling containers not stored
within the principal structure, or within an accessory building, shall be totally screened from view from all neighboring uses and the public right-of-way
within an enclosure subject to the following conditions:
1. Exterior wall or fence treatment shall be similar and/or complement the principal building.
2. The enclosed trash and/or recycling receptacle area shall be located in the rear or side yard and shall observe all applicable setback requirements
and shall not encroach upon any drainage and utility easements.
3. The trash and/or recycling enclosure must be in an accessible location for pick up hauling vehicles.
4. The trash and/or recycling receptacles must be fully screened from view of adjacent properties and the public right-of-way by a solid fence or wall of
at least six feet (6') in height.
5. All waste and recycling containers and enclosures shall be kept in a good state of repair with tightfitting lids to prevent spilling and spread of debris.
(Prior Code § 20-18-4)
6. The design and construction of all waste and recycling enclosures shall be subject to review and approval of the Zoning Administrator. (Prior Code
§ 20-18-4; amd. 2018 Code)
11-18-5: SWIMMING POOLS:
A. Setback Requirements: All aboveground or belowground swimming pools shall be subject to the setback requirements for accessory structures
established by section 11-18-2 of this chapter.
B. Administrative Permit: An administrative permit shall be required for all swimming pools that cause or have the capacity to retain water with a depth
greater than thirty inches (30"), as defined by section 11-2-2 of this title, that do not require a building permit. Each application for an administrative
permit to construct or erect a swimming pool shall be accompanied by plans of sufficient detail to show:
1. The proposed location and its relationship to the other buildings and structures on the lot.
2. The size of the pool.
3. Fencing and other fixtures existing on the lot including utility locations and trees.
4. The location, size and types of equipment to be used in connection with the pool, including, but not limited to, filter unit, pump, fencing and the pool
itself.
5. A plan for drainage of the pool explaining drainage method and location.
6. That the requirements contained in subsection C of this section will be satisfied.
C. Safeguards: All swimming pools, as defined in section 11-2-2 of this title shall be provided with safeguards to prevent children from gaining uncontrolled
access. This may be accomplished with fencing or other enclosure of sufficient density as to be impenetrable.
1. Fences: If fences are employed, they shall be at least four feet (4') in height. The opening between the bottom of the fence and the ground or other
surfaces shall not be more than four inches (4"). Fences shall be of a noncorrosive material and shall be constructed so as to be not easily
climbable. All fencing openings or points of entry into the pool enclosure shall be equipped with gates or doors. All gates or doors to swimming pools
shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices placed at a sufficient height so as to be inaccessible to small children. All fence posts
shall be decay or corrosion resistant and shall be set in concrete bases or other suitable protection.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 300/497
2. Accessory Decks: Aboveground pools with an accessory deck constructed within three feet (3') of the pool shall install a thirty six inch (36") guardrail
around the deck. All openings shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching gates.
3. Pool Covers: All aboveground swimming pools shall be covered when not in use by a cover constructed of a material which prevents uncontrolled
access. Pool covers, whether they can be locked or not, do not alone meet public safety requirements if the cover is of the type that can collect and
hold natural water.
4. Ladders: For all aboveground swimming pools utilizing a ladder for pool access, ladders shall be removed from the pool area when not in use to
prevent uncontrolled access. (Prior Code § 20-18-5)
11-18-6: SALES IN RESIDENTIAL AND AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS:
A. Passenger Vehicles, Trailers, Recreational Equipment And Similar Items:
1. The merchandise sold in residential areas shall be the personal property of the occupant.
2. Sales of such personal merchandise shall be limited to no more than two (2) merchandise items per calendar year, unless approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
3. Merchandise items for sale shall not be placed in any portion of the public right-of-way or required front yard abutting a public right-of-way except
upon a designated, improved driveway that complies with the requirements of chapter 21 of this title.
4. For sale signs on or in such merchandise shall be limited to four (4) square feet.
B. Garage Or Rummage Sales:
1. Merchandise offered for sale shall be the personal property of the occupant.
2. Sales shall be limited to a maximum of four (4) consecutive days and occurring no more than two (2) times within one calendar year per property,
unless approved by the Zoning Administrator.
3. Merchandise items for sale shall not be placed in any portion of the public right-of-way, public boulevard, or required front yard except a designated,
improved driveway that complies with the requirements of chapter 21 of this title.
4. Signs shall be governed by chapter 37 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-18-6)
Chapter 19
LANDSCAPING, SCREENING AND FENCES
11-19-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards for the installation of fencing, screening, and landscaping and as may be required by other sections of
this title to protect the general health, safety, and welfare of the City. (Prior Code § 20-19-1)
11-19-2: LANDSCAPING:
A. Generally: Landscaping of all properties shall be installed and maintained in accordance with section 5-2-3 of this Code.
B. New Residential Subdivision, Semipublic, And All Income Producing Property Uses:
1. Single-family dwelling units shall provide a minimum of two (2) deciduous shade trees per lot.
2. All other uses shall be subject to mandatory landscape plan and specifications with a landscape plan required to be developed and installed with an
emphasis upon the following areas:
a. The boundary or perimeter of the proposed site at points adjoining other property.
b. The immediate perimeter of the structure.
c. The perimeter of parking and loading areas.
3. All landscaping incorporated in said plan shall conform to the following standards and criteria:
a. Approved Plants Required: Plantings suitable for complying with this chapter shall be as approved by the Zoning Administrator.
b. Minimum Size: All plants must at least equal the following minimum size in conformance with American Nursery Association standards measured
from the top of the ball or container to the top of the tree/shrub or bottom of the evergreen leader:
Potted/Bare Root
Or Balled And Burlapped
Evergreen trees (evergreen or deciduous) 3 feet to 4 feet high
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 301/497
Low shrubs:
Deciduous 24 inches to 30 inches
Evergreen 24 inches to 30 inches
Spreading evergreen 18 inches to 24 inches
Ornamental trees 11/2 inch diameter
Shade trees 2 inch diameter
Tall shrubs and hedge material (evergreen or deciduous) 3 feet to 4 feet high
c. Spacing:
(1) Plant material centers shall not be located closer than three feet (3') from the fence line or property line and shall not be planted to conflict with
public plantings based on the judgment of the Zoning Administrator.
(2) Where plant materials are planted in two (2) or more rows, plantings shall be staggered in rows unless otherwise approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
(3) Where massing of plants or screening is intended, large deciduous shrubs shall not be planted more than four feet (4') on center, and/or
evergreen shrubs shall not be planted more than three feet (3') on center.
d. Design:
(1) The landscape plan must show some form of designed site amenities (i.e., composition of plant materials, and/or creative grading, decorative
lighting, exterior sculpture, etc., which are largely intended for aesthetic purposes).
(2) All areas within the property lines (or beyond, if side grading extends beyond) shall be treated. All exterior areas not paved or designated as
drives, parking or storage, must be planted into ornamental vegetation (lawns, ground covers or shrubs) unless otherwise approved by the
Zoning Administrator.
(3) Turf slopes in excess of two to one (2:1) are prohibited unless approved by the Zoning Administrator.
(4) All ground areas under the building roof overhang must be treated with a decorative mulch and/or foundation planting.
(5) All buildings must have an exterior water spigot to ensure that landscape maintenance can be accomplished.
e. Landscape Guarantee: All new plants shall be guaranteed for one year from the time planting has been completed. All plants shall be alive and in
satisfactory growth at the end of the guarantee period or be replaced by the property owner.
f. Tree Preservation: Prior to the issuance of building permits for all new and/or expanded multiple-family residential, commercial, industrial and
institutional uses, a tree preservation plan shall be submitted. The plan and its implementation shall be in accordance with the City's adopted tree
preservation guidelines and requirements as outlined in the subdivision ordinance, as may be amended, and shall be subject to review and
approval of the City Engineer and Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may exempt an applicant from the submission of a tree
preservation plan upon demonstration that a tree preservation plan is not considered relevant to the site in question. (Prior Code § 20-19-2)
11-19-3: REQUIRED SCREENING:
A. Nonresidential Uses: Where any nonresidential use except agriculture and farming (i.e., structure, parking or storage) abuts property zoned for
residential use, that nonresidential use shall provide screening along the boundary of the residential property. Screening shall also be provided where a
nonresidential use is across the street from a residential zone, but not on that side of a nonresidential use considered to be the front (as defined by this
title). All fencing and screening specifically required by this chapter shall be subject to section 11-16-4 of this title regarding traffic visibility and shall
consist of either a green belt planting strip, fence or combination thereof, as follows:
1. A green belt planting strip shall consist of evergreen trees and/or deciduous trees and plants and shall be of sufficient width and density to provide
an effective visual screen. This planting strip shall be designed to provide complete visual screening to a minimum height of eight feet (8'). Earth
mounding or berms may be used but shall not be used to achieve more than three feet (3') of the required screen. The planting plan and type of
plantings shall require the approval of the City Council.
2. The City may also require that a fence may be installed, but not in lieu of the greenbelt. A required screening fence shall be constructed of masonry,
brick, vinyl or maintenance free composite materials. A required screening fence shall provide a solid screening effect to a minimum of six feet (6') in
height but shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height unless allowed by issuance of an interim use permit.
B. Residential Buffer Yards:
1. Overlay Easements Required: Double frontage lots or corner lots abutting a collector or arterial street, as defined by the Comprehensive Plan,
preliminary platted after October 14, 2002, shall have an additional ten feet (10') of depth or width to be overlaid with a drainage and utility easement
in order to allow space for screening along the lot line abutting such street rights-of-way.
2. Plan Required: For all applicable subdivisions, a landscape plan shall be submitted. The plan shall identify all proposed buffer screening including
plantings, berms, and fences. The development contract shall include a security for the cost of materials and installation of the approved plan.
3. Design Standards:
a. Buffer Yard Plantings: All designated buffer yards must be seeded or sodded except in areas of steep slopes where natural vegetation is
acceptable as approved by the City Engineer. All plantings within designated buffer yards shall adhere to the following:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 302/497
(1) Plant material centers shall not be located closer than three feet (3') from the fence line or property line, and shall not conflict with public
plantings, sidewalks, trails, etc.
(2) Landscape screen plant material shall be planted in two (2) or more rows. Plantings shall be staggered in rows unless otherwise approved by
the Zoning Administrator.
(3) Deciduous shrubs shall not be planted more than four feet (4') on center, and/or evergreen shrubs shall not be planted more than three feet (3')
on center.
(4) Deciduous trees intended for screening shall be planted not more than forty feet (40') apart. Evergreen trees intended for screening shall be
planted not more than fifteen feet (15') apart.
b. Earth Berms:
(1) Except in areas of steep slopes or where other topographic features will not permit, as determined by the City Engineer, an earth berm at least
four feet (4') in height shall be installed in all designated buffer yards.
(2) Earth berms shall not exceed a three to one (3:1) slope unless approved by the City Engineer.
(3) Earth berms shall contain no less than four inches (4") of topsoil.
4. Installation: All buffer plantings, berms, and fences shall be installed or planted prior to release of the security required as part of the development
contract.
5. Maintenance:
a. Maintenance of the buffer strip planting shall be the responsibility of the individual property owners or, if applicable, the homeowners' association.
b. Replacement of landscape materials or plantings in a buffer yard area shall be consistent with the original screen design.
c. All repair or plant replacement shall be done within forty five (45) days of written notification from the City. (Prior Code § 20-19-3)
11-19-4: FENCES:
Fences shall be permitted in all yards subject to the following:
A. Administrative Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person hereafter to construct or cause to be constructed or erected within the City, any fence
within a front yard, within a residential buffer yard, or a property line fence without first making an application for and securing an administrative permit,
which shall be treated as a formal agreement as to the construction and location of the proposed fence between the City and applicant in accordance
with section 11-8-4 of this title.
B. Certificate Of Survey: An application for fence permit shall be accompanied by a current certificate of survey providing exact lot dimensions, the location
of existing building and structures on the lot, and the location of the proposed fence.
C. Location: All boundary line fences shall be located entirely within the private property of the person, firm or corporation constructing or causing the
construction of such fence. The owners of the property on which a fence exists or is proposed to be constructed is responsible for verifying their
property lines by:
1. Locating their property irons; or
2. If the property lines cannot be located:
a. The Zoning Administrator may require the owner of property upon which a fence now exists, or may require any property owner proposing to
construct a fence, to establish the boundary lines of the property by a survey thereof to be made by a registered land surveyor; or
b. The owner of property upon which a fence now exists, or the property owner on which the fence is to be constructed and the owner(s) of the
adjoining properties, enter into an agreement regarding the location of the fence to be recorded with the titles of the respective properties, subject
to approval of an administrative permit.
D. Construction And Maintenance:
1. Every fence shall be constructed in a professional and substantial manner and of substantial material reasonably suitable for the purpose for which
the fence is proposed to be used. The materials and design shall also be compatible with other structures in the area in which the fence is located
and shall not cause blight or a negative impact.
2. Every fence shall be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair and shall not be allowed to become and remain in a condition of disrepair or
danger, or constitute a nuisance, public or private. Any such fence which is or has become dangerous to the public safety, health or welfare is a
public nuisance, and the City shall commence proper proceedings for the abatement thereof.
3. All posts or similar supporting instruments used in the construction of fences shall be faced inward toward the property being fenced.
4. Except as specified in this subsection, barbed wire fences and electric fences shall only be allowed in the A-1 and A-2 Districts when related to the
keeping of farm animals. On farms in other districts, such fencing shall be allowed when related to farming, but not including electric fences as
boundary line fences when abutting platted property.
5. All fences shall be provided with a gate which affords reasonable and convenient access for public safety.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 303/497
E. Grading And Drainage:
1. All fences shall not obstruct natural drainage.
2. Any modifications to the grade or drainage of a property in conjunction with the construction of a fence shall be subject to section 11-16-5 of this title.
F. Drainage And Utility Easements:
1. The fence and its design is subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
2. The fence or a portion thereof may be removed at any time for the purpose of utilizing the easement, and such action shall be at the property
owner's expense.
3. The property owner shall execute an acknowledgement of the easement encroachment that is to be recorded by the City at Wright County with the
title of the property.
G. Residential District Fences:
1. Alongside Property Lines: Except in the case of a side yard on a corner lot which abuts a street, fences alongside property lines shall not be more
than six feet (6') in height for the distance commencing from a point on such side property line located along the rear lot line and proceeding thence
along such side property line to a point thereon which would be intersected by the front wall line of the existing principal structure on the lot.
2. Rear Property Lines: Fences along or paralleling any rear property line which is also the rear property line of an abutting lot shall not exceed six feet
(6') in height.
3. Rear Property Line/Abutting Side Line: Except in the case of a side yard on a corner lot which abuts a street, fences along a rear property line which
line constitutes the side lot line of an abutting lot shall not exceed six feet (6') in height.
4. Screening Provisions: The required screening provisions for residential districts shall supersede, where applicable, the provisions of this subsection.
5. Required Front Yards And Side Yards Of Corner Lots:
a. Fences extending across required front yards or a required side yard that abuts a street on a corner lot shall not exceed forty eight inches (48") in
height and shall be at least seventy five percent (75%) open space for the passage of air and light, except as provided in subsection G5b of this
section.
b. A fence with a height greater than forty eight inches (48") and/or less than seventy five percent (75%) open space may be constructed within the
required rear yards and side yard of a corner lot abutting a collector or arterial street; provided, that:
(1) The fence does not exceed six feet (6') in height.
(2) The fence is set back ten feet (10') from the lot line abutting a collector or arterial street right-of-way.
(3) For interior lots, a gate or other opening is to be provided in the fence to allow for maintenance of the street side boulevard.
(4) The fence along a side lot line abutting a collector or arterial street right-of-way shall not extend into a required front yard and be no closer to
the front lot line than a point intersecting the front line of the principal building.
(5) On lots where no buffer yard has been established pursuant to subsection 11-19-3B of this chapter, the yard on the street side of the fence
shall be grass and landscaped with plant materials that will grow to the height of the fence, subject to the following standards:
(A) Plant material centers shall not be located closer than three feet (3') from the fence line or property line, and shall not conflict with public
plantings, sidewalks, trails, etc.
(B) Deciduous shrubs shall not be planted more than four feet (4') on center, and/or evergreen shrubs shall not be planted more than three feet
(3') on center.
(C) Deciduous trees shall be planted not more than forty feet (40') apart. Evergreen trees shall be planted not more than fifteen feet (15') apart.
c. All fences located within any required yard abutting a public right-of-way shall maintain the traffic visibility requirements of section 11-16-4 of this
title.
H. Commercial And Industrial District Fences:
1. Fences On Corner Lot: Fences extending across a required front yard or a required side yard which abuts a street on a corner lot shall be at least
seventy five percent (75%) open for the passage of air and light and shall maintain the traffic visibility requirements of section 11-16-4 of this title.
2. Height: Fences may be erected up to eight feet (8') in height. Fences in excess of eight feet (8') shall require an interim use permit.
3. Construction:
a. Fences shall be constructed of nonwood maintenance free materials such as vinyl, stone, brick, split face block, textured or architectural concrete
panels, synthetic or composite products, or similar materials as approved by the Zoning Administrator.
b. Except for fences accessory to essential services, chainlink fences within commercial districts shall be coated with integral color vinyl and shall not
include vinyl, plastic or metal slats within the fence.
c. The location of gates across driveways accessing the site shall be set back a sufficient distance so as not to cause congestion in the public street.
d. Fences which are primarily erected as a security measure may have arms projecting into the applicant's property on which barbed wire can be
fastened commencing at a point at least seven feet (7') above the ground.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 304/497
4. Screening Provisions: The screening provisions for commercial and industrial districts shall supersede, where applicable, the provisions of this
subsection.
I. Special Purpose Fences: Fences for special purposes and fences differing in construction, height or length may be permitted by the City by issuance of
an interim use permit upon a finding by the City Council that the fence is necessary to protect, buffer or improve the premises for which such fence is
intended. (Prior Code § 20-19-4)
Chapter 20
MODEL HOMES
11-20-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the erection of model homes in new subdivisions without adversely affecting the character of surrounding
residential neighborhoods or creating a general nuisance. As model homes represent a unique temporary commercial use, special consideration must be
given to the peculiar problems associated with them and special standards must be applied to ensure reasonable compatibility with their surrounding
environment. (Prior Code § 20-20-1)
11-20-2: PROCEDURE:
The erection of a model home(s) shall require approval of an administrative permit as regulated by chapter 8 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-20-2)
11-20-3: SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Temporary parking facilities equal to four (4) spaces per model home dwelling unit shall be provided. The overall location, design, drainage, and
surfacing of the temporary parking facility shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer and the Zoning Administrator.
B. Traffic generated by the model home shall be directed away from residential neighborhoods to the greatest extent possible.
C. No model home shall incorporate outside lighting which creates a nuisance due to glare or intensity, as provided in chapter 16 of this title.
D. All model home signage shall comply with the sign regulations as contained in the provisions of this title relating to signs. (Prior Code § 20-20-3)
Chapter 21
OFF STREET PARKING
11-21-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public right-of-way and to promote the safety and general welfare of the public by
establishing minimum requirements for off street parking of motor vehicles in accordance with the utilization of various parcels of land or structures. (Ord.
2019-04, 2-11-2019)
11-21-2: APPLICATION:
The regulations and requirements set forth herein shall apply to all off street parking facilities in all of the zoning districts of the City. (Ord. 2019-04, 2-11-
2019)
11-21-3: SITE PLAN DRAWING REQUIRED:
All applications for a building or an occupancy permit in all zoning districts shall be accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale and dimension indicating the
location of off street parking stalls and loading stalls in compliance with the requirements set forth in this chapter and chapter 22 of this title. All site plans
for single-family homes must provide for the location of a two (2) stall garage in compliance with this title, whether or not construction is intended. (Ord.
2019-04, 2-11-2019)
11-21-4: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Floor Area: The term "floor area", for the purpose of calculating the number of off street parking stalls required, shall be determined on the basis of the
exterior floor area dimensions of the buildings, structures or use times the number of floors, minus ten percent (10%), except as may hereinafter be
provided or modified.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 305/497
B. Reduction Of Existing Off Street Parking Stall Or Lot Area: Off street parking stalls and loading stalls or lot area existing upon the effective date hereof
shall not be reduced in number or size, unless said number or size exceeds the requirements set forth herein for a similar new use.
C. Change Of Use Or Occupancy Of Land: No change of use or occupancy of land already dedicated to parking stalls, driveways, or loading stalls shall be
made, nor shall any sale of land, division or subdivision of land be made which reduces area necessary for parking, parking stalls, or parking
requirements below the minimum prescribed by this chapter.
D. Change Of Use Or Occupancy Of Buildings: Any change of use or occupancy of any building or buildings, including additions thereto, requiring more
parking area shall not be permitted until there is furnished such additional parking stalls as required by this chapter.
E. Residential Use Parking:
1. Off street parking facilities accessory to a residential use shall be utilized solely for the parking of licensed and operable passenger automobiles,
vans, and trucks rated as Class 3 (14,000 pounds' gross vehicle weight) or smaller; off street parking of vehicles Class 4 (14,001 pound gross
vehicle weight) or larger is prohibited.
2. Off-street parking and storage of recreational vehicles and equipment shall be as allowed in accordance with subsection 11-18-3A2 of this title.
F. Calculating Stalls:
1. When determining the number of off street parking stalls results in a fraction, each fraction shall constitute another stall.
2. In stadiums, sports arenas, churches and other places of public assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews or other similar
seating facilities, each eighteen inches (18") of linear seating shall be counted as one seat for the purpose of determining requirements.
3. Except as provided under joint parking and shopping centers, should a structure contain two (2) or more types of use, the sum of each shall be
calculated separately and shall be used for determining the total off street parking stalls required.
G. Disability Accessible Parking: Disability accessible parking stalls and pedestrian access shall be provided as applicable pursuant to the Americans With
Disabilities Act, as may be amended.
H. Maintenance: It shall be the joint responsibility of the lessee and owner of the principal use, uses or buildings to maintain in a neat and adequate
manner, the parking stall, drive aisles, striping, landscaping, and required screening.
I. Prohibited Use: Required accessory off street parking stalls in any district shall not be utilized for open storage, sale or rental of goods, repair work,
storage of inoperable vehicles, and/or storage of snow. (Ord. 2019-04, 2-11-2019)
11-21-5: LOCATION:
All accessory off street parking facilities as required by this chapter shall be located and restricted as follows:
A. Accessory Off Street Parking: Required accessory off street parking shall be on the same lot under the same ownership as the principal use being
served, except under the provisions of sections 11-21-10 and 11-21-11 of this chapter.
B. Setbacks:
1. Except for single family, two-family and townhouse dwellings, there shall be no off street parking within fifteen feet (15') of any public right-of-way.
2. Off-street parking areas shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from interior side and rear lot lines.
C. Corner Lots: Required accessory off street parking shall not be provided in required front yards or in required side yards in the case of corner lots, in
Agricultural and Residential Zoning Districts.
D. Single And Two Family Dwellings:
1. Required off street parking areas for single family and two-family uses shall be in the rear yard, side yards other than a required side yard, garage, or
carport, and upon a defined driveway.
2. Parking stall in excess of that specifically required by this chapter may be located in an area not to exceed twelve feet (12') in width abutting the
driveway or garage on one side only away from the principal building in the front yard. (Ord. 2019-04, 2-11-2019)
11-21-6: STREET ACCESS:
A. Street Access Required: All off street parking facilities shall be designed and constructed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a public street.
Each lot shall have access directly onto an abutting, improved and City accepted public street, except as may be allowed as a conditional use pursuant
to chapter 4 of this title.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 306/497
B. Street Access Spacing:
NP = Not permitted
1. Local street:
a. Residential 40' 40' 50' 50' 50' 10'
b. Individual multiple family, commercial, industrial, or institutional
50' 50' 90' 90' 90' 50'
c. Multiple commercial 90' 90' 125' 125' 125' 100'
2. Minor collector:
a. Residential 40' 40' 50' 50' 50' 10'
b. Individual multiple family, commercial, industrial, or institutional
50' 50' 90' 90' 90' 50'
c. Multiple commercial 90' 90' 125' 125' 125' 100'
3. Major collector:
a. Residential NP NP NP NP NP NP
b. Individual multiple family, commercial, industrial, or institutional
90' 90' 220' 220' 220' 200'2
c. Multiple commercial 125' 125' 220' 220' 220' 200'2
4. Minor arterial:
a. Residential NP NP NP NP NP NP
b. Individual multiple family, commercial, industrial, or institutional
NP NP NP 660' 660' 230'2
c. Multiple commercial NP NP NP 660' 660' 230'2
5. Principal arterial NP NP NP NP NP NP
Notes:
1. The setback measurement shall be measured from the edge of the street right-of-way to the nearest edge of the curb cut. Site access shall not
be permitted within right turn lanes or taper areas of a street.
2. Driveways onto arterials and major collectors shall be prohibited where alternative street access is available. For existing lots of record, where
alternative access is not available, direct access onto arterial and major collectors may be permitted, provided a site plan is submitted for review
and approval of the City Engineer or the City Traffic Consultant.
C. Street Access Width:
1. Single-family, two-family, and townhouse dwelling units: The maximum width of an access within the right-of-way onto any public street shall not
exceed thirty feet (30'), as defined by the Engineering Manual.
2. Other uses: The maximum width of an access within the right-of-way onto any public street shall not exceed twenty four feet (24'), as defined by the
Engineering Manual, except as may be approved by the City Engineer in the case of traffic circulation needs.
D. Number Of Street Accesses:
1. All property shall be entitled to one access from a public street.
2. Multiple family, commercial, industrial, and institutional uses shall be allowed one access from each one hundred twenty five feet (125') of street
frontage, subject to approval of the City Engineer.
3. Townhouse and two-family uses shall be allowed one access per dwelling unit.
4. Single-family residential uses shall be limited to one access per property, except as follows:
a. Lots within the A-1 or A-2 District shall be allowed two (2) accesses per property by administrative permit; provided, that:
(1) The lot shall have an area of five (5) acres or greater.
(2) The lot shall have a minimum frontage of two hundred fifty feet (250') to a public street with a rural section design (no curb).
(3) The location of all access points shall be subject to approval of the City Engineer.
Street
With Proposed
Driveway
Nearest Intersecting Street1 Minimum
Spacing
Between
Adjacent
Driveways
Local
Street
Minor
Collector
Collector
Minor
Arterial
Principal
Arterial
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 307/497
b. Lots within the R-C, R-1, R-2, and R-3 Districts shall be allowed two (2) accesses per property by administrative permit; provided, that:
(1) There is a demonstrated need for more than one lot access due to physical site constraints (soils, steep slopes, significant vegetation, ponds or
wetlands) or the location of existing principal buildings.
(2) The lot shall have a minimum of one hundred fifty feet (150') of frontage to a public street.
(3) The location of all access points shall be subject to approval of the City Engineer.
c. Lots within all other districts or those not meeting the requirements for an administrative permit outlined in subsections D4a and D4b of this section
shall be allowed not more than two (2) accesses per property by conditional use permit; provided, that:
(1) There is a demonstrated need for more than one lot access due to physical site constraints (soils, steep slopes, significant vegetation, ponds or
wetlands) or the location of existing principal buildings.
(2) The location of all access points shall be subject to compliance with subsection B of this section and approval of the City Engineer and the
County Engineer when applicable.
(3) The design of the lot access shall conform to the specifications established by the Engineering Manual.
d. A lot having access from two (2) public streets (in the case of a corner lot or double frontage lot) may incur additional costs related to street
improvement projects benefiting the property.
E. Side Yard Setback: Except with special approval from the Zoning Administrator, curb cut openings shall be a minimum of five feet (5') from the side yard
property line in all districts. (Ord. 2019-04, 2-11-2019)
11-21-7: STALL AND AISLE DESIGN:
A. Parking Stall Size: Except for parking stalls for persons with physical disabilities, each parking stall shall not be less than nine feet (9') wide and
eighteen feet (18') in length exclusive of access aisles, and each stall shall be served adequately by access aisles.
B. Lot Design: Except in the case of single-family, two-family, and townhouse dwellings, parking areas and their aisles shall be developed in compliance
with the standards on the parking lot dimension table below.
PARKING LOT DIMENSIONS TABLE
0° 8'6" 23'0" 8'6" 12'0"
9'0" 23'0" 9'0" 12'0"
9'6" 23'0" 9'6" 12'0"
10'0" 23'0" 10'0" 12'0"
20° 8'6" 24'11" 14'6" 11'0"
9'0" 26'4" 15'0" 11'0"
9'6" 27'10" 15'6" 11'0"
10'0" 29'3" 15'11" 11'0"
30° 8'6" 17'0" 16'11" 11'0"
9'0" 18'0" 17'4" 11'0"
9'6" 19'0" 17'10" 11'0"
10'0" 20'0" 18'3" 11'0"
40° 8'6" 13'3" 18'9" 12'0"
9'0" 14'0" 19'2" 12'0"
9'6" 14'10" 19'6" 12'0"
10'0" 15'8" 19'11" 12'0"
45° 8'6" 12'0" 19'5" 13'6"
9'0" 12'9" 19'10" 13'0"
9'6" 13'5" 20'2" 13'0"
10'0" 14'2" 20'6" 13'0"
50° 8'6" 11'2" 20'0" 12'6"
9'0" 11'9" 20'5" 12'0"
Angle Of Parking Stall Width Curb Length Per Car Stall Depth Aisle Width
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 308/497
9'6" 12'5" 20'9" 12'0"
10'0" 13'2" 21'0" 12'0"
60° 8'6" 9'10" 20'9" 18'6"
9'0" 10'5" 21'0" 18'0"
9'6" 11'0" 21'3" 18'0"
10'0" 11'6" 21'6" 18'0"
70° 8'6" 9'0" 20'10" 19'6"
9'0" 9'8" 21'0" 19'0"
9'6" 10'2" 21'3" 18'6"
10'0" 10'8" 21'3" 18'0"
80° 8'6" 8'8" 20'3" 24'0"
9'0" 9'2" 20'4" 24'0"
9'6" 9'8" 20'5" 24'0"
10'0" 10'3" 20'6" 24'0"
90° 8'6" 8'6" 20'0" 24'0"
9'0" 9'0" 20'0" 22'0"
9'6" 9'6" 20'0" 22'0"
10'0" 10'0" 20'0" 22'0"
Note: This table pertains to a wall to wall situation. In calculating dimensions, 2 feet may be subtracted from each stall depth for each overhang and
overlap. No subtraction for overlap is allowed for angles greater than 60 degrees.
C. Surfacing:
1. Farmsteads, farming operations, detached single-family residential uses in unplatted areas not accessed from a paved public street, and City of
Otsego essential service or park uses within the INS District shall have driveways and parking areas surfaced with materials suitable to control dust
and drainage.
2. All other uses shall have driveways and parking stalls surfaced with asphalt, concrete, cobblestone, or paving brick.
3. For industrial uses that experience frequent heavy equipment utilization, which could be expected to destroy or damage required surfacing materials,
an exemption to the surfacing requirements may be allowed by an interim use permit pursuant to chapter 5 of this title, provided, that:
a. General public and employee access driveways and parking areas shall not be included in the exemption.
b. At such time as the presence of heavy equipment is reduced or eliminated, the surfacing of exempted areas shall be completed in compliance with
this title.
c. All other performance standards related to parking and driveways shall be met.
D. Curbing: Except for agricultural uses; single-family, two-family and townhouses dwellings; and City of Otsego essential service or park uses within the
INS Zoning District, all open, off street parking shall have a continuous six inch (6") high back concrete perimeter curb barrier around the entire parking
lot.
E. Grading:
1. The grade elevation of any parking area or driveways shall not exceed:
a. Single family, two family and townhouses: Ten percent (10%).
b. All other uses: Four percent (4%).
2. Plans for surfacing and drainage of driveways and stalls for parking areas of five (5) or more vehicles shall be submitted to the City Engineer for
review, and the final drainage plan shall be subject to written approval.
F. Striping: Except for single-family, two-family and townhouses dwellings, all parking stalls shall be marked with white or yellow painted lines not less than
four inches (4") wide.
G. Pedestrian Provision: All off street parking areas shall be designed with due regard to pedestrian circulation. Off street parking areas shall be designed
such that vehicle and pedestrian circulation is accommodated in a safe, complementary and orderly fashion. When curb separated sidewalks are
provided at the head of parking stalls, the minimum width shall be five feet (5').
Angle Of Parking Stall Width Curb Length Per Car Stall Depth Aisle Width
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 309/497
H. Snow Storage: Adequate area for snow storage shall be provided on the site so as not to reduce the required minimum number of parking stalls. In
those cases where excessive snow cannot be properly stored on site, it shall be immediately removed from the site.
I. Lighting: Any lighting used to illuminate an off street parking area shall be hooded and so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining property,
abutting residential uses, and public rights-of-way, and shall be in compliance with section 11-16-6 of this title.
J. Signs: No sign shall be so located as to restrict the sight lines and orderly operation and traffic movement within any parking lot or driveway. All signs
shall be in conformance with chapter 37 of this title.
K. Required Screening: All open off street parking areas of five (5) or more stalls shall be screened and landscaped from abutting or surrounding
Residential Districts and uses, and the public right-of-way in compliance with section 11-19-3 of this title.
L. Lot Circulation:
1. Except in the case of single-family, two-family, and townhouse dwellings, parking areas shall be designed so that circulation between parking bays or
aisles occurs within the designated parking lot and does not depend upon a public street or alley. Except in the case of single-family, two-family, and
townhouse dwellings, parking area design which requires backing into the public street is prohibited.
2. In the case of single-family, two-family, and townhouse dwellings that front on streets designated as collector, minor arterial, or principal arterial by
the Comprehensive Plan, the installation of a vehicle turnaround area, immediately adjacent to the access driveway is allowed and may be required
by the Zoning Administrator. Said area is to be no larger than ten feet (10') wide and ten feet (10') in length. Where possible, said area shall be
located away from the principal structure and shall be no closer than twenty feet (20') from the street surface. Said stall shall not be utilized for
parking or storage purposes.
M. Within Structures: The off street parking requirements may be furnished by providing a stall so designed within the principal building or one structure
attached thereto; however, unless provisions are made, no building permit shall be issued to convert said parking structure into a dwelling unit or living
area or other activity until other adequate provisions are made to comply with the required off street parking provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2019-04,
2-11-2019)
11-21-8: NUMBER OF REQUIRED STALLS:
The following minimum number of off street parking stalls shall be provided and maintained by ownership, easement and/or lease for and during the life of
the respective uses hereinafter set forth:
Residential:
Multiple-family 2.0 stalls per unit
Senior housing, independent living units 1 stall per dwelling unit or 1 stall per 2 dwelling units when units are within a continuing care
retirement community facility
Single and two-family 2 stalls
Townhouses 2.5 stalls per unit
Institutional:
Auditoriums, theaters, religious
institutions, sports arenas
1 stall per 3 seats of design capacity of the main assembly with a maximum capacity less than or
equal to 1,000 persons or 1 stall per 2.5 seats of design capacity of the main assembly with a
maximum capacity greater than 1,000 persons, plus additional stalls required for adjoined facilities,
not including public or private nonprofit baseball fields (see below)
Community center, physical culture
studio, libraries, museums
10 stalls plus 1 stall per 300 square feet over 2,000 square feet of floor area for the principal
structure
Public or private nonprofit baseball fields
1 stall per 8 seats of design capacity
School, elementary and junior high 1 stall per 7 students based upon building design
School, high school and post-high school
facilities
1 stall per 3 students based on building design capacity, plus 1 stall per classroom
Senior housing, assisted living and
memory care units
4 stalls per 10 dwelling units, plus stalls equal to the number of employees on a maximum shift
Commercial/industrial:
Animal hospital/kennel 1 stall for each 200 square feet of floor area
Auto repair uses 1 stall per 200 square feet of floor area
Auto sales 1 stall per 500 square feet of showroom plus 1 stall for each 3,000 square feet of outdoor sales lot,
plus additional parking required for ancillary service or repair
Use Number Of Required Stalls
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 310/497
Residential:
Auto wash:
Drive through 10 stalls
Self-service 1 stall per wash bay
Motor fuel stations None in addition to that required for the principal use
Beauty or barber shop 2 stalls per chair
Bowling alleys 5 stalls per lane plus stalls as required for other uses within the principal structure
Catering business/commercial kitchen 1 stall per 200 square feet or 1 stall for each employee on the maximum shift, whichever is greater;
plus 1 stall for each business vehicle parked on site
Coffee/doughnut shop with or without
drive through
1 stall per 50 square feet
Commercial self-storage (ministorage)
facilities
3 stalls plus 1 stall per 100 storage units
Daycare facilities:
In a Residential District serving less
than 12 persons
2 stalls per use
All others 1 stall for each 4 persons of licensed capacity
Fast food restaurant with or without drive
through
1 stall per 70 square feet
Fitness centers 1 stall per exercise station (e.g., strength machine or cardiovascular) plus 1 stall per employee on the
largest shift plus additional parking required for ancillary uses
Funeral home 20 stalls per chapel or viewing parlor, plus 1 stall for each company vehicle maintained on site.
Adequate stacking stall shall also be provided for staging funeral processions
Furniture sales 1 stall per 400 square feet for first 25,000 square feet, plus 1 stall per 600 square feet thereafter
Golf course 4 stalls per hole plus 50 percent of the parking stall requirement for any associated retail use; on site
restaurant and/or banquet facilities shall provide parking stalls for that use as required by this section
Hotels/lodging 1 stall per unit, plus 1 stall for every 10 units
Instructional classes, dance studios,
karate centers, music schools and similar
uses
1 stall for each 200 square feet of floor area
Major bus terminal, boat/marine sales
and repair, bottling company, trade shop
with 6 or less employees, garden supply
or building materials sales
8 stalls plus 1 stall per 800 square feet of manufacturing or display floor area over 1,000 square feet
Manufacturing 1 stall per 350 square feet of floor area, plus 1 stall per company vehicle not stored within the
principal structure
Motor fuel stations and auto repair 4 stalls plus 2 stalls for each service stall plus other requirements for uses or sale of goods not
directly auto related
Multiple occupancy retail or service
buildings with 3 or more tenants
1 stall per 160 square feet of gross leasable floor area. The total required stalls may be reduced by
10 percent based upon approval of an administrative permit by the Zoning Administrator
Multiplex theater 1 stall per 3.4 seats (all other theaters shall be subject to the requirements applicable to auditoriums,
theaters, religious institutions and sports arenas established by this section)
Office buildings and professional offices;
banks, public administration, and medical
1 stall for each 200 square feet of floor area
Restaurants, clubs, lodges, brewpubs,
taprooms, tasting rooms
1 stall per 40 square feet of dining area and 1 stall for each 80 square feet of kitchen area
Retail commercial uses (other) 1 stall per 200 square feet
Retail sales and service with 50 percent
or more gross floor area as
storage/warehouse or industry
1 stall for each 200 square feet of public sales/service area, plus 1 stall for each 500 square feet of
storage area
Skating rink, banquet hall, private or
public auction house
20 stalls plus 1 stall per 200 square feet over 2,000 square feet
Truck wash 3 stalls plus 1 stall per service bay
Use Number Of Required Stalls
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 311/497
Residential:
Undertaking 20 stalls per chapel or parlor, plus 1 stall for each company vehicle maintained on site. Adequate
stacking stall shall also be provided for staging funeral processions
Warehousing:
Office 1 stall per 200 square feet
Other 1 stall per 1,000 square feet plus 1 stall per company vehicle not stored within the principal structure
Uses not specified or not precisely identified
Calculated by Zoning Administrator based upon, but not limited to, characteristics for similar uses
and professional studies prepared by APA or ITE
(Ord. 2019-04, 2-11-2019)
11-21-9: PARKING DEFERMENT:
The Zoning Administrator may allow a reduction in the number of required off street parking stalls for commercial, industrial, institutional, and multiplefamily
uses by administrative permit in accordance with chapter 8 of this title.
A. The proposed use will have a peak parking demand less than the required parking under section 11-21-8 of this chapter. Factors to be considered when
reviewing the proposed parking demand shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Size of building, or number of dwelling units and number of bedrooms per dwelling unit.
2. Type and use.
3. Number of employees or residents.
4. Projected volume and turnover of customer traffic.
5. Projected frequency and volume of delivery or service vehicles.
6. Number of company owned vehicles.
7. Storage of vehicles on site.
B. In no case shall the amount of parking provided be less than one-half (1/2) of the number of parking stalls required by this chapter.
C. The site has sufficient property under the same ownership to accommodate the expansion of the parking facilities to meet the minimum requirements of
this chapter if the parking demand exceeds on site supply.
D. Parking shall only occur in areas designed and constructed for parking in accordance with this chapter.
E. The applicant and City enter into a development agreement, to be recorded against the subject property, which includes a clause requiring the owner to
install the additional parking stalls, upon a finding of the Zoning Administrator that such additional parking stalls are necessary to accommodate the
use.
F. A change of use will necessitate compliance with the applicable zoning ordinance standard for parking. (Ord. 2019-04, 2-11-2019)
11-21-10: JOINT FACILITIES:
The City Council may approve an interim use permit, pursuant to chapter 5 of this title, for two (2) or more commercial or industrial businesses to provide
the required off street parking facilities by joint use of one or more sites where the total number of stalls provided is less than the sum of the total required
for each business should they provide them separately. To qualify for joint parking, the following conditions are required to exist.
A. Up to fifty percent (50%) of the parking facilities required for a theater, bowling alley, dance hall, bar, or restaurant may be supplied by the off street
parking facilities provided by types of uses specified as primarily daytime uses in subsection D of this section.
B. Up to fifty percent (50%) of the off street parking facilities required for any use specified under subsection D of this section as primarily daytime uses
may be supplied by the parking facilities provided by the following nighttime or Sunday uses: auditoriums incidental to a public or parochial school,
churches, bowling alleys, dance halls, theaters, bars, apartments or restaurants.
C. Up to eighty percent (80%) of the parking facilities required by this chapter for a church or for an auditorium incidental to a public or parochial school
may be supplied by the off street parking facilities provided by uses specified in subsection D of this section as primarily daytime uses.
Use Number Of Required Stalls
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 312/497
D. For the purposes of this chapter, the following uses are considered as primarily daytime uses: public schools, banks, business offices, retail stores,
personal service shops, household equipment or furniture shops, clothing or shoe repair or service shops, manufacturing, wholesale and similar uses.
E. Conditions required for joint use:
1. The building or use for which application is being made to utilize the off street parking facilities provided by another building or use shall be located
within three hundred feet (300') of such parking facilities.
2. Documentation as specified by the City shall be submitted demonstrating that there is not substantial conflict in the principal operating hours of the
two (2) buildings or uses (for which joint use of off street parking facilities is proposed).
3. A properly drawn legal instrument, executed by the parties concerned for joint use of off street parking facilities, duly approved as to form and
manner of execution by the City Attorney, shall be filed with the City Clerk and recorded with the Wright County Recorder. (Ord. 2019-04, 2-11-2019)
11-21-11: OFF SITE PARKING:
The City Council may approve an interim use permit, pursuant to chapter 5 of this title, use of off-site parking facilities provided that the following
conditions are met:
A. Compliance: Off site parking shall be developed and maintained in compliance with all requirements and standards of this title.
B. Access: Reasonable access from off site parking facilities to the use being served shall be provided.
C. Location:
1. Off site parking for multiple-family dwellings shall not be located more than one hundred feet (100') from any normally used entrance of the principal
use served.
2. Off site parking for nonresidential uses shall not be located more than three hundred feet (300') from the main public entrance of the principal use
being served.
D. Utilization: Any use which depends upon off site parking to meet the requirements of this chapter shall maintain ownership and parking utilization of the
off site location until such time as on site parking is provided or a site in closer proximity to the principal use is acquired and developed for parking.
E. Ownership: Except as provided for by subsection F of this section, the site used for meeting the off site parking requirements of this chapter shall be
under the same ownership as the principal use being served or under public ownership.
F. Lease: Compliance with off street parking requirements provided through leased off street parking may be approved by the City Council, subject to the
following conditions:
1. The lease shall specify the total number and location of parking stalls under contract, and this number, when added to any on site parking required,
must be equal to the total number of parking stalls required.
2. The lease instrument shall legally bind all parties to the lease and provide for amendment or cancellation only upon written approval from the City.
3. The lease agreement shall incorporate a release of liability and any other provisions, as recommended by the City Attorney, that are deemed
necessary to ensure compliance with the intent of this chapter.
G. Signage: No advertising sign or material is to be located on the property where the parking lot is located. (Ord. 2019-04, 2-11-2019)
Chapter 22
OFF STREET LOADING
11-22-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public right-of-way so as to promote the safety and general welfare of the public, by
establishing minimum requirements for off street loading and unloading from motor vehicles in accordance with the specific and appropriate utilization of
various parcels of land or structures. (Prior Code § 20-22-1)
11-22-2: LOCATION:
A. Off Street: All required loading berths shall be off street and located on the same lot as the building or use to be served.
B. Distance From Intersection: All loading berth curb cuts shall be located at a minimum sixty feet (60') from the intersection of two (2) or more street
rights-of-way. This distance shall be measured from the property line.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 313/497
C. Distance From Residential Use: No loading berth shall be located closer than one hundred feet (100') from a residential district unless within a
structure.
D. Prohibited In Front Yards: Loading berths shall not occupy the required front yard setbacks.
E. Conditional Use Permit Required: A conditional use permit shall be required for new loading berths added to an existing structure and/or where the
loading berth is located at the front or at the side of the building on a corner lot.
1. Pedestrians: Loading berths shall not conflict with pedestrian movement.
2. Visibility: Loading berths shall not obstruct the view of the public right-of-way from off street parking access.
3. General Compliance: Loading berths shall comply with all other requirements of this title.
F. Traffic Interference: Each loading berth shall be located with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or public alley in a manner which will
cause the least interference with traffic both on and off site. (Prior Code § 20-22-2)
11-22-3: SURFACING:
Subject to exceptions established for the surfacing of parking areas by this chapter, all loading berths and accessways shall be improved with not less than
six inch (6") Class 5 base and two inch (2") bituminous surfacing to control the dust and drainage according to a plan submitted to and subject to the
approval of the City Engineer. (Prior Code § 20-22-3)
11-22-4: ACCESSORY USE OF BERTHS PROHIBITED:
Any space allocated as a required loading berth or access drive so as to comply with the requirements of this title shall not be used for the storage of
goods, inoperable vehicles, or snow, and shall not be included as part of the space requirements to meet off street parking requirements. (Prior Code § 20-
22-4)
11-22-5: SCREENING:
Except in the case of multiple-family dwellings, all loading areas shall be screened and landscaped from abutting and surrounding residential uses and/or
the public right-of-way in compliance with title 8, chapter 6 of this Code. (Prior Code § 20-22-5; amd. 2018 Code)
11-22-6: SIZE:
A. Nonresidential Developments: Unless otherwise specified in this title, the first loading berth shall be not less than seventy feet (70') in length, and
additional berths required shall be not less than thirty feet (30') in length, and all loading berths shall be not less than ten feet (10') in width and fourteen
feet (14') in height, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space. Reductions to loading berth size may be granted by the Zoning Administrator upon
demonstration of need. (Prior Code § 20-22-6)
B. Multiple-Family Dwellings: The size and location of the required loading berth for multiple-family dwellings shall be subject to the review and approval of
the Zoning Administrator. (Prior Code § 20-22-6; amd. 2018 Code)
11-22-7: NUMBER OF REQUIRED BERTHS:
The number of required off street loading berths shall be as follows:
A. Commercial And Industrial Uses: All buildings shall have at least one off street loading berth. Buildings which are ten thousand (10,000) square feet or
more shall have, at a minimum, two (2) loading berths.
B. Multiple-Family Dwellings: One off street loading berth shall be provided for each principal dwelling structure in excess of four (4) units.
C. Other Uses: Other uses not specifically mentioned herein or unique cases shall be determined on an individual basis by the City Council. Factors to be
considered in such determination shall include (without limitation) size of buildings, type of use, and expected frequency and number of delivery or
service vehicles.
D. Space Reductions: Subject to the review and processing of an administrative permit as regulated by chapter 8 of this title, the Zoning Administrator may
reduce the number of required off street loading spaces when the use can demonstrate in documented form a need which is less than required. In such
situations, the Zoning Administrator may require land to be reserved for loading space development should use or needs change. (Prior Code § 20-22-
7)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 314/497
Chapter 23
LAND FILLING OPERATIONS
11-23-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
Except for a governmental jurisdiction, in cases where a grading and drainage plan for a private development has been approved as part of a subdivision
or other development, or as may be otherwise stipulated by this title, any person who proposes to add a landfill in excess of fifty (50) cubic yards to any
property within the City limits shall apply to the City for site development permit. Notwithstanding the requirements of this chapter, no permit will be
required for depositing landfill on a lot for which a building permit has been issued for construction thereon; provided, that there is compliance with section
11-16-9 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-23-1; amd. 2018 Code)
11-23-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; REQUIRED INFORMATION:
A. Any person desiring a permit hereunder shall present an application on such forms as shall be provided by the Zoning Administrator. Such application
shall be accompanied by five (5) large scale copies and thirteen (13) reduced scale (not less than 11 inches by 17 inches) copies of detailed written
and graphic materials fully explaining the proposed land filling operation. If, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, reduced scale drawings (11
inches by 17 inches) are determined to be illegible, the submission of larger scale materials shall be required. The scale of such materials shall be the
minimum necessary to ensure legibility. The request shall be considered as being officially submitted when all the following information has been
submitted:
1. The name and address of the applicant.
2. The name and address of the owner of the land.
3. The address and legal description of the land involved.
4. The purpose of the landfill.
5. A description of the source, type, and amount of fill material to be placed upon the premises.
6. The highway, street or streets, or other public ways in the City upon and along which any material is to be hauled or carried.
7. An estimate of the time required to complete the landfill.
8. A site plan showing present topography and also including boundary lines for all properties, watercourses, wetlands and other significant features
within three hundred fifty feet (350').
9. A site plan showing the proposed finished grade and landscape plan. Erosion control measures shall be provided on such plan. Final grade shall not
adversely affect the surrounding land or the development of the site on which the landfill is being conducted. Topsoil shall be of a quality capable of
establishing normal vegetative growth.
10. A plan and/or statement demonstrating the proposed activity will in no way jeopardize the public health, safety and welfare or is appropriately
fenced to provide adequate protection.
11. A statement that the applicant will comply with all conditions prescribed by the City. (Prior Code § 20-23-2)
12. The application shall be considered as being officially submitted when there is compliance with all the information requirements. A fee for such
application is submitted based upon the schedule as set out in section 3-1-2 of this Code. (Prior Code § 20-23-2; amd. 2018 Code)
13. A written right of entry is provided to the City and/or its officers to enter the land for the purpose of determining compliance with all applicable
conditions imposed on the operation. (Prior Code § 20-23-2)
11-23-3: PROCESSING AND TECHNICAL REPORTS:
The Zoning Administrator shall process all site development permit applications. Such applications, when determined to be necessary by the Zoning
Administrator and all those for more than fifty (50) cubic yards, shall be forwarded to the City Engineer and building official. Where watersheds, floodplains
and/or wetlands are in question, the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources shall also be contacted. These technical advisors shall be instructed by
the Zoning Administrator to prepare reports for the City Council. (Prior Code § 20-23-3; amd. 2018 Code)
11-23-4: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
Upon receiving information and reports from the City staff and other applicable agencies, the City Council shall make its determination as to whether, and
when, and under what conditions such permit for a landfill greater than fifty (50) cubic yards is to be issued to the applicant by the Zoning Administrator.
(Prior Code § 20-23-4)
11-23-5: CONDITIONS OF OPERATION:
A. Under no circumstances shall any such landfill operation be conducted or permitted if the contents of the landfill or any part thereof shall consist of
garbage, animal or vegetable refuse, poisons, contaminants, chemicals, decayed material, filth, sewage or similar septic or biologically dangerous
material, street sweepings not qualifying for exclusion from the definition of "mixed Municipal solid waste" under the City solid waste ordinance, or any
other material deemed to be unsuitable by the City.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 315/497
B. Unless expressly extended by permit, the hours of operation shall be limited to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M., Monday through
Friday. (Prior Code § 20-23-5)
11-23-6: SECURITY:
The City Council may require either the applicant or the owner or user of the property on which the landfill is occurring to post a security in such form and
sum as the Zoning Administrator, City Attorney, and/or City Engineer shall determine, with sufficient surety provided to the City, conditioned to pay to the
City the extraordinary cost and expense of repairing, from time to time, any highways, streets or other public ways where such repair work is made
necessary by the special burden resulting from hauling and travel in transporting fill material, the amount of such cost and expense to be determined by
the City Engineer; and conditioned further to comply with all requirements of this chapter, and the particular permit, and to pay any expense the City may
incur by reason of doing anything required to be done by any applicant when a permit is issued. (Prior Code § 20-23-6)
11-23-7: FAILURE TO COMPLY:
The City may, for failure of any person to comply with any requirement made of him in writing under the provisions of the permit, as promptly as same can
reasonably be done, proceed to cause there to be compliance with said requirement, and the cost of such work shall be taxed against the property
whereon the landfill is located, or the City may, at its option, proceed to collect such costs by an action against the person to whom such permit has been
issued, and his superiors if a bond exists. In the event that land filling operations requiring a permit are commenced prior to City review and approval, the
City may require work stopped and all necessary applications filed and processed. In such cases, application fees shall be double the normal charge.
(Prior Code § 20-23-7)
11-23-8: COMPLETION OF OPERATION:
A. All landfill operations shall be completed within ninety (90) days of the issuance of the permit. Upon completion, the permit holder shall notify the City in
writing of the date of completion. If additional time beyond the ninety (90) days is needed for completion, the permit holder may apply to the City, and
upon a satisfactory showing of need, the City may grant an extension of time. If such extension is granted, it shall be for a definite period, and the City
shall issue an extension permit. Extensions shall not be granted in cases where the permit holder fails to show that good faith efforts were made to
complete the landfill operation within ninety (90) days and that failure to complete the operation was due to circumstances beyond the permit holder's
control, such as shortage of fill material, teamster's strike, unusually inclement weather, illness or other such valid and reasonable excuse for
noncompletion. In the event a request for an extension is denied, the permit holder shall be allowed a reasonable time to comply with the other
provisions of this chapter relating to grading, leveling and seeding or sodding. What constitutes such "reasonable time" shall be determined by the City
Engineer after inspecting the premises.
B. At the completion of a landfill operation, the premises shall be graded, leveled, and seeded or sodded with grass. The grade shall be such elevation
with reference to any abutting street or public way as the City Engineer shall prescribe in the permit. The site shall also conform to such prerequisites
as the City Engineer may determine with reference to stormwater drainage runoff and stormwater passage or flowage so that the landfill cannot
become a source of, or an aggravation to, stormwater drainage conditions in the area. The City Engineer shall inspect the project following completion
to determine if the applicant has complied with the conditions required thereof. Failure of such compliance shall result in the withholding of any building
permits for the site, and notice of such withholding shall be filed in the Office of the County Recorder for the purposes of putting subsequent purchasers
on notice. (Prior Code § 20-23-8)
11-23-9: LANDFILLS IN PROCESS:
All landfill operations for which a permit has previously been issued shall terminate such operations on the date specified by the permit. (Prior Code § 20-
23-9)
Chapter 24
LAND EXCAVATION AND GRADING
11-24-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Except for a governmental jurisdiction, in cases where a grading and drainage plan for a private development has been approved as part of a subdivision
or other development, or as may be otherwise stipulated by this title, the extraction of sand, gravel, black dirt or other natural material from the land or the
grading of land by a person in the amount of fifty (50) cubic yards or more shall be termed land excavation/grading and shall require a site development
permit. Excavation/grading activities which qualify as mining operations shall be subject to other applicable sections of this Code. (Prior Code § 20-24-1;
amd. 2018 Code)
11-24-2: PERMIT EXCEPTIONS:
It is intended hereunder to cover the removal of natural materials from lands including such activity when carried on as a business, but shall not apply to
basement excavation, other excavation/grading which is already covered by the Building Code or other such regulations of the City. (Prior Code § 20-24-2)
11-24-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
A. Any person desiring a permit hereunder shall present an application on such forms as shall be provided by the Zoning Administrator. Such application
shall be accompanied by five (5) large scale copies and thirteen (13) reduced scale (not less than 11 inches by 17 inches) copies of detailed written
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 316/497
and graphic materials fully explaining the proposed land excavation operation. If, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, reduced scale drawings
(11 inches by 17 inches) are determined to be illegible, the submission of larger scale materials shall be required. The scale of such materials shall be
the minimum necessary to ensure legibility. The request shall be considered as being officially submitted when all the following information has been
submitted:
1. The name and address of the applicant.
2. The name and address of the owner of the land.
3. The address and legal description of the land involved.
4. The purpose of the excavation or grading.
5. A description of the type and amount of material to be excavated or graded from the premises.
6. The highway, street or streets, or other public ways in the City upon and along which any material is to be hauled or carried.
7. An estimate of the time required to complete the excavation or grading.
8. A site plan showing present topography and also including boundary lines for all properties, watercourses, wetlands and other significant features
within three hundred fifty feet (350').
9. A site plan showing the proposed finished grade and landscape plan. Erosion control measures shall be provided on such plan. Final grade shall not
adversely affect the surrounding land or the development of the site on which the excavation is being conducted. Topsoil shall be of a quality capable
of establishing normal vegetative growth.
10. A security statement demonstrating the proposed activity will in no way jeopardize the public health, safety and welfare or is appropriately fenced to
provide adequate protection.
11. A statement that the applicant will comply with all conditions prescribed by the City or its officers or agents.
12. A written right of entry given to the City and/or its officers to enter the land for the purpose of determining compliance with all applicable conditions
imposed on the operation. (Prior Code § 20-24-3)
B. The application shall be considered as being officially submitted when there is compliance with all the information requirements. A fee for such
application shall be paid to the City at the time the application is submitted based upon the schedule as set out in section 3-1-2 of this Code. (Prior
Code § 20-24-3; amd. 2018 Code)
11-24-4: TECHNICAL REPORTS:
The Zoning Administrator shall immediately, upon receipt of such application, forward a copy thereof to the City Engineer and building official. Where
watersheds, floodplains and/or wetlands are in question, the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources shall also be contacted. These technical
advisors shall be instructed by the Zoning Administrator to prepare reports for the City Council. (Prior Code § 20-24-4)
11-24-5: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
Upon receiving information and reports from the City staff and other applicable agencies, the City Council shall make its determination as to whether, and
when, and under what conditions such permit for an excavation is to be issued to the applicant by the City. (Prior Code § 20-24-5)
11-24-6: CONDITIONS OF PERMIT:
A. The City Council, as a prerequisite to the granting of a permit, or after a permit has been granted, may require the applicant to whom such permit is
issued, or the owner or user of the property on which the excavation/grading is located, to:
1. Properly fence the excavation.
2. Slope the banks, and otherwise properly guard to keep the excavation in such condition as not to be dangerous from caving or sliding banks.
3. Properly drain, fill in or level the excavation after it has been created so as to make the same safe and healthful as the City Council shall determine.
4. Keep the excavation/grading within the limits for which the particular permit is granted.
5. Remove excavated/graded material from the excavation, away from the premises upon and along such highways, streets or other public ways as the
City shall order and direct.
6. Retain and store topsoil from the site in question and utilize such materials in the restoration of the site.
B. Unless expressly extended by permit, the hours of operation shall be limited to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M., Monday through
Friday. (Prior Code § 20-24-6)
11-24-7: SECURITY:
The City may require either the applicant or the owner or user of the property on which the excavation/grading is occurring to post a security in such form
and sum as the City Council shall determine, with sufficient surety provided to the City, conditioned to pay to the City the extraordinary cost and expense of
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 317/497
repairing, from time to time, any highways, streets or other public ways where such repair work is made necessary by the special burden resulting from
hauling and travel in transporting excavated material, the amount of such costs and expense to be determined by the City Engineer; and conditioned
further to comply with all requirements of this title, and the particular permit, and to pay any expense the City may incur by reason of doing anything
required to be done by any applicant to whom a permit is issued. (Prior Code § 20-24-7)
11-24-8: FAILURE TO COMPLY:
The City may, for failure of any person to comply with any requirement made of him in writing under the provisions of such permit, as promptly as same
can reasonably be done, proceed to cause compliance with said requirement, and the cost of such work shall be taxed against the property whereon the
landfill is located, or the City may, at its option, proceed to collect such costs by an action against the person to whom such permit has been issued, and
his superiors if a security exists. (Prior Code § 20-24-8)
11-24-9: COMPLETION OF OPERATION:
A. All excavation/grading operations shall be completed within ninety (90) days of the issuance of the permit. Upon completion, the permit holder shall
notify the City in writing of the date of completion. If additional time beyond the ninety (90) days is needed for completion, the permit holder may apply
to the City, and upon a satisfactory showing of need, the City may grant an extension of time. If such extension is granted, it shall be for a definite
period, and the City shall issue an extension permit. Extensions shall not be granted in cases where the permit holder fails to show that good faith
efforts were made to complete the excavation/grading operation within ninety (90) days and that failure to complete the operation was due to
circumstances beyond the permit holder's control, such as teamster's strike, unusually inclement weather, illness or other such valid and reasonable
excuse for noncompletion. In the event request for an extension is denied, the permit holder shall be allowed a reasonable time to comply with the
other provisions of this title relating to grading, leveling and seeding or sodding. What constitutes such "reasonable time" shall be determined by the
City Engineer after inspecting the premises.
B. At the completion of an excavation/grading, the premises shall be graded, leveled, and seeded or sodded with grass. The grade shall be such elevation
with reference to any abutting street or public way as the City Engineer shall prescribe in the permit. The site shall also conform to such prerequisites
as the City Engineer may determine with reference to stormwater drainage runoff and stormwater passage or flowage so that the excavation cannot
become a source of, or an aggravation to, stormwater drainage conditions in the area. The City Engineer shall inspect the project following completion
to determine if the applicant has complied with the conditions imposed as part of the permit. (Prior Code § 20-24-9)
Chapter 25
FARMS
11-25-1: ALLOWED USE:
Farms, farmsteads, and farming shall be allowed pursuant to respective zoning district provisions. (Prior Code § 20-25-1)
11-25-2: WHEN BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED:
The construction of any building or structure on a farm as a part of the farm operation shall require administrative review and approval of the City building
official. All other structures, including residential dwellings and residential accessory structures, shall require a building permit and be in compliance with
the Minnesota State Building Code. (Prior Code § 20-25-2; amd. 2018 Code)
11-25-3: FEEDLOTS:
Animal feedlots are prohibited, except for operations which are allowed to continue operating pursuant to rights as specified in chapters 15 and 27 of this
title. (Prior Code § 20-25-3)
11-25-4: IRRIGATION SYSTEMS:
All proposed irrigation systems shall require a permit from the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources and shall be subject to the approval of the City
Engineer. (Prior Code § 20-25-4)
11-25-5: ANIMAL REGULATIONS:
The keeping of animals on farms shall be regulated by chapter 26 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-25-6)
11-25-6: HOME EXTENDED BUSINESSES:
Home extended businesses may only be allowed as a conditional use within the Agricultural A-1 Zone and shall be subject to the applicable provisions of
chapter 29 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-25-7)
11-25-7: TEMPORARY, SEASONAL SALE OF PRODUCTS:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 318/497
A. A-1 Agricultural Rural Service Zoning District: Within the A-1 Zoning District, the temporary seasonal sale of products produced solely on site of the
respective farm is a permitted accessory use; provided, that:
1. Only members of the family occupying the residence on the farmstead are engaged in such activity.
2. Only temporary, unenclosed display facilities are used to exhibit such items.
3. Adequate off street parking is provided and no parking related to such sales occurs on the public right-of-way.
4. a. Signs are located only on the private property of the farm owner/operator and are no more than one hundred feet (100') from the point of sale.
b. Signs are limited to no more than two (2) structures totaling no more than sixteen (16) square feet.
c. Signs are erected and removed daily and are not to be displayed at times when the sales operation is closed.
B. Other Zoning Districts: The temporary, seasonal sale of products produced solely on the site of the respective farm may be allowed in zoning districts
other than Agriculture A-1 Districts subject to the approval of an administrative permit; provided, that:
1. There is compliance with the standards and requirements as specified in subsection A of this section.
2. The provisions of subsection 11-8-2D of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied. (Prior Code § 20-25-8)
Chapter 26
ANIMALS
11-26-1: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
A. The size, number, species, facilities for and location of animals kept shall be maintained so as not to cause a nuisance or endanger the health, safety,
or general welfare of the community and shall be in compliance with this title and all other applicable provisions of this Code.
B. Animals may only be kept for commercial purposes if such activities are authorized in the zoning district where the animals are to be located.
C. Facilities for housing animal(s) shall be:
1. Constructed of such material as is appropriate for the animal(s) involved.
2. Maintained in good repair.
3. Controlled as to temperature, ventilated and lighted compatible with the health and comfort of the animal(s).
4. Of sufficient size to allow each animal to make normal postural and social adjustments with adequate freedom of movement. Inadequate space may
be indicated by evidence of malnutrition, poor condition of debility, stress or abnormal behavior patterns.
5. Cleaned as often as necessary to prevent contamination of the animal(s) contained therein and to minimize disease hazards and reduce odors.
6. Subject to approval of a building permit by the City building official.
D. Animals kept in pet shops or kennels shall be kept in accordance with regulations for pet shops and kennels in addition to the regulations provided by
this title. (Prior Code § 20-26-1)
11-26-2: DOMESTIC ANIMALS AN ALLOWED USE:
The keeping of domestic animals is an allowed use in all zoning districts, as defined in chapter 50 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-26-2)
11-26-3: DOG KENNELS AND CAT SHELTERS:
A. No person shall maintain or operate any kennel or shelter without a license as regulated by this Code.
B. A minimum lot size of one acre is required to be licensed for operation of a kennel or shelter.
C. Every kennel or shelter shall be enclosed or fenced in such manner as to prevent the running at large or escape of animals confined therein.
D. Both dog kennels and cat shelters shall be open for inspection by the City authorities at any time.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep three (3) or more dogs and/or cats over six (6) months of age on his/her premises in the City without
obtaining a kennel license pursuant to this chapter and this Code. (Prior Code § 20-26-3)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 319/497
11-26-4: FARM ANIMALS:
A. The keeping and maintaining of farm animals, including livestock and horses, shall be an allowed use within the A-1 Zoning District and on sites
qualifying as farms in all other zoning districts.
B. The keeping and maintaining of farm animals, including livestock and horses, shall be allowed by administrative permit in the A-2 District and by
conditional use permit in the R-C Zoning District, provided:
1. The applicable provisions of subsection 11-4-2F or 11-8-2D of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
2. The minimum lot size upon which animals are to be located shall be two and one-half (21/2) acres. (Prior Code § 20-26-4)
3. Farm animals may not be confined in a pen, feedlot, or building within two hundred feet (200') of any residential district, other than an R-C District, or
property line not owned or leased by the operator. (Prior Code § 20-26-4; amd. 2018 Code)
4. The keeping and care of animals is provided as regulated by this Code.
5. The density per acre of farm animals specifically allowed must not exceed the maximum densities as specified below unless permitted by a
conditional use permit:
Animals Number Per Acre
Cattle, horses, mules, donkeys 1
Chickens, rabbits, guinea pigs, hamster, pigeons 50
Goats, sheep 5
Swine 10
Turkeys, ducks, geese 25
6. A shelter or stabling facility shall provide a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet per acre of enclosed area per animal, or fractions thereof, as
based upon the number of animals per acre listed above (example: 100 square feet divided by 5 goats per acre = 20 square feet of enclosed area
per goat).
C. Manure application and stockpiling activities shall comply with the provisions of section 11-27-10 of this title.
D. No manure or waste shall be deposited, stored, kept, or allowed to remain in or upon any site without reasonable safeguards adequate to prevent the
escape or movement of such manure, waste, or a solution thereof from the site which may result in pollution of any public waters or any health hazard.
E. All regulations imposed by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency relating to the keeping of farm animals shall be adhered to and animal feedlots shall
comply with the applicable provisions of chapter 27 of this title.
F. The keeping and maintaining of horses shall be allowed by interim use permit in the R-1 and R-2 Zoning Districts, provided:
1. The provisions of chapter 5 of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
2. The lot lies within the City's rural service area, the boundaries of which are defined within the City Comprehensive Plan.
3. The minimum lot size upon which the horses are to be located shall be two and one-half (2.5) acres.
4. The horses are not confined in a pen, feedlot, or building within two hundred feet (200') of any R-3 Residential District property line not owned or
leased by the operator.
5. The keeping and care of horses is provided as regulated by this Code.
6. The density of horses does not exceed one horse per acre.
7. A shelter or stabling facility shall provide a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet of enclosed area per horse.
G. The keeping and maintaining of chickens, pheasants, doves, pigeons and similar small fowl shall be allowed in all residential districts by issuance of a
fowl keeping license, subject to compliance with the following standards:
1. The number of fowl allowed per property shall be equivalent to 0.1 animal unit per acre.
2. The keeping of roosters, male peacocks and water fowl shall be prohibited.
3. The fowl must be housed within an enclosed accessory building and fenced outdoor yard that conforms to the accessory building provisions
applicable to the district in which they are kept.
4. The accessory building containing the fowl must be within a rear yard and shall be subject to the required setbacks for principal buildings within the
respective zoning district with the additional stipulation that the side yard setbacks must be double those required for principal buildings.
5. The keeping and care of such fowl is provided as regulated by this Code.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 320/497
6. The owner/keeper of the fowl shall control the animal manure and dispose of it properly.
7. If eggs are harvested, they shall not be offered for sale from the premises.
8. The fowl keeping license shall apply only to the named applicant, shall not run with the land, and may not be transferred. It shall automatically
terminate upon the vacation of the property by the applicant.
9. The fee for the fowl keeping license shall be as set forth by section 3-1-2 of this Code. (Prior Code § 20-26-4)
11-26-5: COMMERCIAL STABLES:
A. Commercial stables (operations involving the boarding and care of 2 or more horses not belonging to the property owner or tenant) shall be allowed
only in the City's A-1 Zoning District by conditional use permit.
B. The minimum lot size for a commercial stable shall be ten (10) acres.
C. The density of equine allowed on a commercial riding stable shall be in accordance with section 11-26-4 of this chapter.
D. Manure and other waste materials shall be removed and distributed so as to eliminate unsightly odors and insect and rodent problems or any condition
which otherwise operates as a public or private nuisance. The storage of manure and other waste materials shall be in compliance with chapter 27 of
this title.
E. All areas designated for equine sheltering shall be located at least two hundred feet (200') from the property line. Any agricultural building or shelter
which was being used in a commercial stable prior to the effective date hereof is not required to comply with the requirements of this subsection;
provided, however, that such agricultural building or shelter does not constitute a public nuisance as determined by the City Council.
F. Fences as regulated by section 11-19-4 of this title shall be constructed and maintained so as to adequately and safely contain equine at all times.
G. One agricultural building upon the commercial stable property shall be permitted to contain no more than one caretaker's unit, subject to a
demonstrated need and to the approval of a conditional use permit as regulated by chapter 4 of this title.
H. All equine shall be provided shelter sufficient to protect against potentially injurious weather. All such shelters shall be structurally sound, provide
sufficient ventilation, and be maintained in good repair.
I. Equine stalls shall provide sufficient space for the equine to lie or roll with a minimum danger of injury to itself. Stalls shall be cleaned and kept dry to the
extent that the animal is not required to lie or stand in fluids. Bedding shall be provided in all stalls, kept reasonably clean, and periodically changed.
The nature of the bedding shall not pose a health hazard to the animal.
J. The Zoning Administrator shall inspect every commercial stable as frequently as the City may deem necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of
this chapter and any conditions of the license for such commercial stable. Any person who operates a commercial stable shall, upon request of the
Zoning Administrator and/or City building official, permit access to all parts of the commercial stable for the purpose of inspection. The Zoning
Administrator shall prepare a report of every inspection of a commercial stable. A copy of such report shall be mailed to the person operating the
commercial stable and forwarded to the City Council. (Prior Code § 20-26-5)
11-26-6: ANIMALS OTHER THAN FARM OR DOMESTIC:
A. Conditional Use Permit:
1. Other than may be herein exempted, any animal which does not qualify as a farm animal or domestic animal as defined in section 11-2-2 of this title
shall require a conditional use permit prior to its being kept in the City.
2. Determination of acceptability shall include, but not be limited to:
a. The potential health or safety hazard posed.
b. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
3. Conditions and limitations governing other animals shall include, but not be limited to:
a. Full compliance with State Statutes and Federal regulations governing such species.
b. Provisions for the adequate and safe confinement of such animal, as may be warranted by the potential adverse impact upon neighboring
properties and by safe consideration of the property residents and neighboring uses.
c. Adequate screening, noise, and visual controls as deemed necessary by the City Council to maintain compatibility and protect the health, safety,
and general welfare of the public.
d. Additional requirements and limitations as may be deemed necessary by the City Council so as to ensure compatibility and maintain the health,
safety and general welfare of the public.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 321/497
B. Zoological Programs: Animals being kept as part of the Minnesota Zoological Gardens, St. Paul Como Zoo, or similar institutional teaching programs
are an allowed use in all zoning districts. Before such animals are allowed, however, the participant in the program must notify the Zoning Administrator
in writing of his participation in the program and identify the animal being kept and all details regarding the keeping of the animal as may be applicable.
(Prior Code § 20-26-6)
Chapter 27
FEEDLOTS
11-27-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to prohibit the establishment of new animal feedlots within the City and to regulate existing feedlot operations
within the City in a manner conducive to the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Otsego. These controls are needed due to the recent
incorporation from Township status to City status and the unique location of the City in relation to the metropolitan area. This chapter is also necessary to
promote the planning process within the City and to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City as well as to:
A. Establish conditions under which existing animal feedlots within the City can continue to operate.
B. Prohibit the establishment of new animal feedlots within the City.
C. Prohibit the expansion of existing animal feedlots to levels not conducive with the present character of the City.
D. Provide regulations which can be applied in a fair and equitable nature, but that take into account the inherent fluid nature of an ongoing farm operation
and the difficulty of applying strict numbers as criteria for control of an ongoing operation.
E. Promote best farm management practices.
F. Protect valuable groundwater and surface water resources.
G. Protect human and animal health.
H. Implement specific policies and provisions of the Official City Comprehensive Plan.
I. Promote compatibility of uses.
J. Promote continuance of agricultural uses while protecting the residents from nuisances caused by large, nontraditional, and intense agricultural uses.
K. Coordinate and assist State agencies in the administration of State Statutes and regulations governing livestock operations. (Prior Code § 20-27-1)
11-27-2: ALLOWED FEEDLOTS:
A. Existing Feedlots: Except as provided by subsection B of this section, existing feedlots may continue operations as legal nonconforming uses as set
forth in chapter 15 of this title, and as long as they do not constitute a potential pollution hazard. Such feedlots may only continue on the condition that
they obtain approval from MPCA, if necessary.
1. It is understood that by its nature the raising of animals and farming creates a situation where there are seasonal, natural fluctuations in the number
of animals within a facility. It is also understood that to remain viable, a farming operation must have a reasonable ability to limited expansion. Due to
these peculiar circumstances, and only for purposes of this chapter, the phrase "enlarged" contained in chapter 15 of this title shall be construed as
an enlargement of a legally established preexisting use in the following circumstances:
a. In a case where a new structure is constructed or is proposed for construction for the purpose of housing additional animals.
b. In a case where a lagoon or earthen basin associated with an increase in animal units is constructed or proposed for construction.
c. In a case where an existing animal feedlot is not in compliance with the terms and conditions of an MPCA permit or interim permit.
d. In the case where additional animal units place the facility in violation of current City ordinances regarding the care of animals.
e. Any increase of the total number of animal units in an existing animal feedlot which raises the cumulative total of animal units above twice the
number present upon the facility at the effective date hereof.
f. Any construction, outside of normal maintenance, which has the effect of increasing the size of a building used for the purposes of housing animals
which is done without the conditional use permit required by this chapter.
g. Absent any ongoing violations of other City ordinances.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 322/497
B. Registered Feedlots: Those feedlots registered with the City by October 1, 2000, may continue operations and be allowed limited expansion
opportunities as provided in this section, subject to the following:
1. All existing feedlots shall be registered with the City by October 1, 2000, by administrative permit, subject to the procedures set forth in and regulated
by chapter 8 of this title.
a. An application for an administrative permit to register an existing feedlot shall include the following information:
(1) Owner's and operator's name and address.
(2) Location of the animal feedlot including quarter, section, range and township.
(3) Animal types and existing number of animals of each type confined at the feedlot and maximum number of animal units allowed in
conformance with MPCA permits and guidelines.
(4) A scale drawing clearly indicating the dimensions of the feedlot and showing all existing homes, buildings, manure storage areas and/or
structures, lakes, ponds, watercourses, known wetlands, dry runs, rock outcroppings, roads and wells within one thousand feet (1,000') of the
feedlot.
(5) Plans for buildings and structures as required by this chapter and/or other County and State ordinances and regulations.
(6) A manure and waste management plan as required by the MPCA.
(7) Leases or agreements allowing disposal of manure on land other than that of the feedlot owner/operator. No land may be subject to more than
one such lease or agreement.
(8) Documentation of compliance with all MPCA rules and regulations and approval of MPCA permits, as may be applicable.
(9) Information identified in section 11-9-6 of this title, as may be applicable.
b. An amendment to a registration may be applied for and shall be administered in a manner similar to a new registration application. Amended
registration shall be required for any of the following:
(1) Ownership of an existing feedlot is changed, including, but not limited to, the following:
(A) A change in ownership of buildings and/or land.
(B) A lease for the use of buildings and/or land is entered into, modified or terminated.
(2) There is a substantial change in operation of the feedlot.
(A) The number of animal units is increased two hundred percent (200%) above the number of animal units existing at the feedlot on the date of
registration.
(B) Construction of new buildings or expansion of existing buildings capable of housing animals.
(C) Any change in the operation of a feedlot that would affect the storage, handling, utilization or disposal of manure.
c. Registration of an existing feedlot shall be valid indefinitely; provided, that the operation is in full compliance with the provisions of this title and
County and/or State regulations, as may be applicable. The owner of a feedlot may terminate an approved registration at any time by submitting a
written request to the Zoning Administrator. Once terminated by a feedlot owner, registration shall be permanently forfeited and not reestablished
under any circumstances. Any feedlot for which registration was terminated may continue operations as a legal nonconforming use as outlined in
subsection A1 of this section.
d. Any feedlot not registered with the Zoning Administrator by October 2, 2000, may continue operations as a legal nonconforming use as outlined in
subsection A1 of this section.
C. Rural Service Area: Those feedlots presently existing within the rural service area, designated by the Comprehensive Plan, may continue operations
and be allowed limited expansion opportunities as provided in this section, subject to the following:
1. All existing feedlots shall be registered with the City by October 2, 2000, by administrative permit, subject to the procedures set forth in and regulated
by chapter 8 of this title.
a. An application for an administrative permit to register an existing feedlot shall include the following information:
(1) Owner's and operator's name and address.
(2) Location of the animal feedlot including quarter, section, range and township.
(3) Animal types and existing number of animals of each type confined at the feedlot and maximum number of animal units allowed in
conformance with MPCA permits and guidelines.
(4) A scale drawing clearly indicating the dimensions of the feedlot and showing all existing homes, buildings, manure storage areas and/or
structures, lakes, ponds, watercourses, known wetlands, dry runs, rock outcroppings, roads and wells within one thousand feet (1,000') of the
feedlot.
(5) Plans for buildings and structures as required by this chapter and/or other County and State ordinances and regulations.
(6) A manure and waste management plan as required by the MPCA.
(7) Leases or agreements allowing disposal of manure on land other than that of the feedlot owner/operator. No land may be subject to more than
one such lease or agreement.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 323/497
(8) Documentation of compliance with all MPCA rules and regulations and approval of MPCA permits, as may be applicable.
(9) Information identified in section 11-9-6 of this title, as may be applicable.
b. An amendment to a registration may be applied for and shall be administered in a manner similar to a new registration application. Amended
registration shall be required for any of the following:
(1) Ownership of an existing feedlot is changed, including, but not limited to, the following:
(A) A change in ownership of buildings and/or land.
(B) A lease for the use of buildings and/or land is entered into, modified or terminated.
(2) There is a substantial change in operation of the feedlot.
(A) The number of animal units is increased two hundred percent (200%) above the number of animal units existing at the feedlot on the date of
registration.
(B) Construction of new buildings or expansion of existing buildings capable of housing animals.
(C) Any change in the operation of a feedlot that would affect the storage, handling, utilization or disposal of manure.
c. Registration of an existing feedlot shall be valid indefinitely; provided, that the operation is in full compliance with the provisions of this title and
County and/or State regulations, as may be applicable. The owner of a feedlot may terminate an approved registration at any time by submitting a
written request to the Zoning Administrator. Once terminated by a feedlot owner, registration shall be permanently forfeited and not reestablished
under any circumstances. Any feedlot for which registration was terminated may continue operations as a legal nonconforming use as outlined in
subsection A1 of this section.
d. Any feedlot not registered with the Zoning Administrator by October 2, 2000, may continue operations as a legal nonconforming use as outlined in
subsection A1 of this section. (Prior Code § 20-27-2)
11-27-3: PROHIBITED FEEDLOTS:
No new animal feedlots shall be established within the City. No existing animal feedlot is allowed to expand beyond its level of operation at the date of
March 8, 1999, subject to section 11-27-2 of this chapter. No operation or facility established with ten (10) animal units or less may expand to more than
ten (10) animal units. (Prior Code § 20-27-3)
11-27-4: EXPANSION OF ANIMAL UNITS:
An existing feedlot that is registered pursuant to subsection 11-27-2B of this chapter may be allowed to increase the number of animal units, subject to the
following:
A. The increase in number of permitted animal units shall be based upon the following provisions:
1. For existing feedlots allowed not more than four hundred (400) animal units by MPCA permit on the date of registration, the number of permitted
animal units may be increased up to three hundred percent (300%).
2. For existing feedlots that are allowed more than four hundred (400) animal units by MPCA permit on the date of registration, the number of permitted
animal units may be increased up to two hundred percent (200%).
3. The number of animal units of any existing feedlot shall not be increased to more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) animal units.
B. There are existing building and animal holding areas necessary to adequately house the increase in animal units, in conformance with applicable City
ordinances. Any construction of a new building or expansion of an existing building necessary to adequately house the increase in animal units shall be
subject to section 11-27-5 of this chapter.
C. The feedlot owner/operator shall own or have sufficient land under contract for spreading of manure generated by the expanded feedlot operation.
D. Approval of an amended registration, as outlined in subsection 11-27-2B of this chapter. (Prior Code § 20-27-4)
11-27-5: STRUCTURES FOR HOUSING ANIMALS:
The construction of new buildings or expansion of existing buildings intended to house animals in association with an existing feedlot that is in full
compliance with this chapter shall be subject to the following provisions:
A. Construction of new buildings or expansion of existing buildings for the purpose of housing farm animals is allowed for existing feedlots that are
registered per subsection 11-27-2B of this chapter; provided, that:
1. Any new building intended to house farm animals is within three hundred feet (300') of an existing building that houses farm animals, except by
conditional use permit.
2. Any new building or expansion of an existing building intended to house farm animals may not encroach within one thousand feet (1,000') of an
existing residential use, except by conditional use permit.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 324/497
3. Approval of an amended registration, as outlined in subsection 11-27-2B of this chapter.
B. Construction of new buildings or expansion of existing buildings for the purpose of housing farm animals for existing feedlots that are not registered in
accordance with subsection 11-27-2B of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of subsection A of this section and require approval of a
conditional use permit.
C. Application for a conditional use permit under this section shall be regulated by chapter 4 of this title. Such a conditional use permit may be granted;
provided, that:
1. The applicant provides proof that the proposed building or building expansion is necessary to provide sufficient room for the number of animal units
to be added, and that the number is allowable under this section.
2. That the proposed building or building expansion is the minimum expansion necessary to adequately house said animals and to comply with existing
City ordinances.
3. That the building or building expansion is to be constructed in such a manner as to not increase the nonconformity; to minimize the impact on
surrounding properties; and as may be allowed as follows:
a. For proposed buildings located beyond three hundred feet (300') of an existing building used to house animals, the applicant must demonstrate
physical justification for the increased separation and that the distance from existing buildings is the minimum necessary.
b. For allowed feedlots within one thousand feet (1,000') of an existing residential use, the proposed building or building expansion may not encroach
closer to said residential use.
4. The applicant provides documentation of compliance with all MPCA rules and regulations and approval of MPCA permits, as may be applicable.
5. Approval of an amended registration, as outlined in subsection 11-27-2B of this chapter.
6. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied. (Prior Code § 20-27-5)
11-27-6: COMPLIANCE WITH MPCA REQUIREMENTS:
All existing animal feedlots operating on April 1, 1999, shall continue operating only in strict compliance with all applicable MPCA rules and regulations.
(Prior Code § 20-27-6)
11-27-7: ODORS:
All animal feedlot operations shall take responsible measures to minimize odors which have the effect of creating an adverse impact on the environment
and quality of life for the residents of the City. (Prior Code § 20-27-7)
11-27-8: FEEDLOT SETBACKS:
Lawfully established feedlots existing prior to April 1, 1999, may be continued in the location existing on such date. (Prior Code § 20-27-8)
11-27-9: NEW DWELLING SETBACKS:
No building permit shall be issued for a new dwelling unit within one thousand feet (1,000') of an existing feedlot that is registered under the provisions of
subsection 11-27-2B of this chapter, which also qualifies as a farm as defined by section 11-2-2 of this title. This section shall not apply to dwellings
constructed as a principal residence on the same parcel and under the ownership of the owner/operator of the registered feedlot. (Prior Code § 20-27-9)
11-27-10: MANURE STOCKPILE AND APPLICATION SETBACKS:
The following manure stockpile and application setbacks are required for all existing animal feedlots:
Category
Manure Application
Surface/Irrigation Stockpiles
Incorporated
Or Injected
Municipal wells 200' 200' 300'
Platted subdivisions 300' - surface
1,000' - irrigation
300' 300'
Private wells 200' 200' 200'
Public lake, river, or stream 300' 100' - lake
50' - river/stream
300'
Public or private ditch (including those in a public right-of-way) 300' 100' 300'
Public streets (as measured from the outer boundary of the right-of-way) 25' - surface 10' 25'
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 325/497
300' - irrigation
Residence other than landowner or operator 300' - surface
1,000' - irrigation
300' 300'
(Prior Code § 20-27-10)
11-27-11: DESTRUCTION OF EXISTING FEEDLOTS:
Notwithstanding subsection 11-15-3B of this title, any animal feedlot lawfully existing as an allowed use under section 11-27-2 of this chapter and any
structures or buildings lawfully existing and which are used for the purpose of containing animals associated with an allowed feedlot use, which are
destroyed or partially destroyed to the extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its fair market value, may be restored and the same use resumed (if such
use was lawfully existing as an allowed use, pursuant to section 11-27-2 of this chapter, prior to such damage and destruction) or any conforming use
established; provided, that such reconstruction be completed within twelve (12) months after the date of such damage or destruction. (Prior Code § 20-27-
11)
11-27-12: FACILITY CLOSURE:
A. Responsible Parties: The landowner, owner and operator of an existing animal feedlot shall be responsible for the ongoing management of manure and
the final closure of the facility including the cleaning of buildings and the emptying and proper disposal of manure from all manure holding facilities.
B. Closure: If an existing feedlot operation ceases operation, the owner and/or operator shall be responsible for the following:
1. All wastes from the feedlot operation and its waste control system shall be removed and disposed of on land or in some other legally permissible
manner as soon as practical, but no more than six (6) months, and in a manner conducive to the public health, safety, and welfare.
2. Closure of the operation may be postponed for a period of twelve (12) months if the property is posted for sale.
3. Notification to the City that the feedlot operation has been discontinued, and that the property is in compliance with this chapter.
4. If the property is for sale, notification shall be given to all potential buyers of the status of the feedlot use of the property which must comply with all
presently applicable zoning ordinances if the feedlot operation is discontinued for a period of six (6) months, as well as the other provisions of
chapter 15 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-27-12)
11-27-13: ABANDONED FEEDLOTS:
Owners and operators of animal feedlots, either at the time of abandonment or after, shall have joint and several liability for clean up, closure or
remediation of abandoned feedlot sales. (Prior Code § 20-27-13)
Chapter 28
HOME OCCUPATIONS
11-28-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a means through the establishment of specific standards and procedures by which home occupations can be
conducted in residential neighborhoods without jeopardizing land use harmony and compatibility, and the health, safety and general welfare of the
surrounding neighborhood. In addition, this chapter is intended to provide a mechanism enabling the distinction between permitted home occupations and
special or customarily "more sensitive" home occupations, so that permitted home occupations may be allowed through an administrative process rather
than a legislative hearing process. (Prior Code § 20-28-1)
11-28-2: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS; EXEMPTIONS:
Subject to the nonconforming use chapter and other applicable provisions of this title, all occupations conducted in the home shall comply with the
provisions of this title. This chapter shall not be construed, however, to apply to home occupations related to farming. (Prior Code § 20-28-2)
11-28-3: LICENSING PROVISIONS:
A. Permitted Home Occupation License Requirements:
1. Any permitted home occupation as defined in this chapter shall require a "permitted home occupation license".
2. Such license shall be issued subject to the conditions of this chapter, other applicable provisions of this Code and State law. This license may be
issued by the Zoning Administrator based upon proof of compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Prior Code § 20-28-3)
3. Application for the permitted home occupation license shall be accompanied by a fee as set out in section 3-1-2 of this Code. (Prior Code § 20-28-3;
amd. 2018 Code)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 326/497
4. If the Zoning Administrator denies a permitted home occupation license to an applicant, the applicant may appeal the decision to the Board of
Adjustment and Appeals, which shall make the final decision.
5. The license shall remain in force and effect until such time the activity has ceased for a period of one year, there has been a change in conditions or
violation, there is a change of occupancy on the property, or until such time as the provisions of this chapter have been changed.
6. At such time as the Zoning Administrator has reason to believe that an event has taken place which violates the intent of this chapter, a public
hearing shall be held before the Planning Commission. The City Council shall make a final decision on whether or not the permit holder is entitled to
the license.
B. Special Home Occupation License Requirements:
1. Any home occupation which does not meet the specific requirements for a permitted home occupation as defined in this chapter shall require a
"special home occupation license" which shall be applied for, reviewed and disposed of in accordance with the procedural provisions of chapter 4 of
this title.
2. The City Council may impose such conditions on the granting of a special home occupation license as may be necessary to ensure compatibility and
to carry out the purpose and provisions of this chapter.
3. A special home occupation license may be issued for a period of one year after which the license may be reissued for periods of up to three (3)
years each. Each application for license renewal shall be processed and subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator; except in cases where
written complaints have been received concerning the operation or where there has been a change in conditions or violation, a renewal shall be
processed in accordance with the procedural requirements of the initial special home occupation license.
4. Whenever, within one year after granting a license, the use as permitted by the license shall not have been initiated, or when the activity as allowed
by the special home occupation license has been discontinued for more than one year, then such license shall become null and void unless a petition
for extension of time has been granted by the City Council. Such extension shall be requested in writing and filed with the City at least thirty (30)
days before the expiration of the original license. There shall be no charge for the filing of such petition. The request for extension shall state facts
showing a good faith attempt to initiate the use. Such petition shall be presented to the Planning Commission for a recommendation and to the City
Council for a decision.
C. Reconsideration Of Denied License: Whenever an application for a license has been considered and denied by the City Council, a similar application
for a license affecting the same property shall not be considered again by the Planning Commission or City Council for at least one year from the date
of its denial unless a decision to reconsider such matter is made by not less than four-fifths (4/5) vote of the entire City Council.
D. Renewal Of License: An applicant shall not have a vested right to a license renewal by reason of having obtained a previous license. In applying for and
accepting a license, the license holder agrees that the monetary investment in the home occupation will be fully amortized over the life of the license
and that a license renewal will not be needed to amortize the investment. Each application for the renewal of a license will be reviewed without taking
into consideration that a previous license has been granted. The previous granting or renewal of a license shall not constitute a precedent or basis for
the renewal of a license. (Prior Code § 20-28-3)
11-28-4: GENERAL PROVISIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
All home occupations shall comply with the following general provisions and, according to definition, the applicable requirement provisions:
A. General Provisions:
1. No home occupation shall produce light, glare, noise, fumes, odor, or vibration that will in any way have an objectionable effect upon adjacent or
nearby property.
2. No equipment shall be used in the home occupation which will create electrical interference to surrounding properties. No equipment shall be used
which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises or causes fluctuations in the voltage off the premises.
3. Any home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the premises. Not more than ten percent (10%) of the floor
area of the dwelling unit shall be permanently set aside to be used in the conduct of the home occupation. It shall not change the residential
character thereof, and shall result in no incompatibility or disturbance to the surrounding residential uses.
4. No home occupation shall require internal or external alterations or involve construction features not customarily found in dwellings except where
required to comply with local and State fire and police recommendations.
5. There shall be no exterior storage of equipment or materials used in the home occupation, except personal vehicles used in the home occupation
which comply with applicable provisions of this title may be parked on the site.
6. The home occupation shall meet all applicable Fire and Building Codes.
7. There shall be no exterior display or exterior signs or interior display or interior signs which are visible from outside the dwelling with the exception of
directional and identification/business signs to the extent authorized by the provisions of chapter 37 of this title.
8. All home occupations shall comply with the provisions of this Code.
9. No home occupation shall be conducted between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. unless approved by the City
Council, and said occupation is contained entirely within the principal building and will not require any on street parking facilities.
10. Home occupations shall not create a parking demand in excess of that which can be accommodated in an existing driveway, where no vehicle is
parked closer than fifteen feet (15') from the curb line or edge of paved surface.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 327/497
11. No home occupation (permitted or special) shall involve any of the following: body shops, welding, ammunition manufacturing, flea markets, motor
vehicle sales or repairs, massage or escort business or other adult oriented businesses as defined by this title, or other objectionable uses as
determined by the City Council.
12. A maximum of one full time employee, or equivalent, other than those persons who customarily reside on the premises shall be employed. This
subsection shall not apply where the home occupation is a meeting place for employees and the work is done off premises.
13. All home occupations shall be conducted entirely within the principal building, including attached garage; except, that not less than two hundred
(200) square feet of floor area in such garage shall be reserved for the parking of vehicles. In no case shall home occupations be conducted in a
detached accessory building.
B. Permitted Home Occupation Requirements:
1. Permitted home occupations include and are limited to: art studio, dressmaking, secretarial services, family daycare, foster care, offices, teaching
with musical, dancing and other instructions which consist of no more than one pupil at a time, and similar uses.
2. The permitted home occupation shall not involve any of the following: repair service or manufacturing which requires equipment other than found in a
home; teaching which customarily consists of more than one pupil at a time; over the counter sale of merchandise produced off the premises.
C. Special Home Occupation Requirements:
1. Examples of special home occupations include: barber and beauty services, daycare-group nursery, photography studio, group lessons, saw
sharpening, small appliances and small engine repair, and the like.
2. The special home occupation may involve any of the following: stock in trade incidental to the performance of the service, repair service or
manufacturing which requires equipment other than customarily found in a home, the teaching with musical, dancing and other instruction of more
than one pupil at a time. (Prior Code § 20-28-4)
11-28-5: EXISTING HOME OCCUPATIONS:
Existing home occupations lawfully existing on the effective date hereof may be continued as nonconforming uses. They shall, however, be required to
obtain licenses for their continued operation. Any home occupation that is discontinued for a period of more than one hundred eighty (180) days, or is in
violation of the provisions of the ordinance under which it was initially established, shall be brought into conformity with the provisions of this chapter. (Prior
Code § 20-28-5)
11-28-6: INSPECTIONS:
The City hereby reserves the right upon issuing any home occupation license to inspect, during reasonable hours, without notice, the premises in which
the occupation is being conducted to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter or any conditions additionally imposed. (Prior Code § 20-28-6)
11-28-7: REVOCATION OF LICENSES:
A. Permitted and special home occupation business licenses shall remain in effect until:
1. Such time as the business is not in compliance with any portion of this chapter, any other applicable City ordinance, or any applicable State or
Federal Statute, rule or regulation.
2. Such time as there is any violation of the terms and conditions of license approval.
3. Such time as there is any change in the conditions of operation of the business as it was originally approved; including any change in the nature of
the business, any substantial change in the extent of business, any substantial change in the extent of business operations, any significant
expansion of business facilities, or any other circumstances related to the business which have the potential to significantly effect surrounding
properties, or which may pose a threat to the health, welfare or safety of the general public.
4. Such time as the license expires. At such time that the City has cause to believe that any of the events listed in subsection A1, A2 or A3 of this
section have taken place, the City shall immediately notify the license holder of the allegations of violation and the necessary corrections required to
bring the license into compliance. (Prior Code § 20-28-7)
Chapter 29
HOME EXTENDED BUSINESSES
11-29-1: PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION:
Following the effective date hereof, except in the A-1 Zoning District, no new home extended businesses shall be created or established and no existing
home extended business shall be expanded or enlarged. (Prior Code § 20-29-1)
11-29-2: INTERIM USES FOR AGRICULTURAL, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS:
A. Lawfully approved home extended businesses which were established prior to the effective date hereof and which are located in agricultural,
commercial, or industrial zoning districts shall be classified as existing interim uses pursuant to chapter 5 of this title and shall be subject to conditions
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 328/497
imposed at the time of approval.
B. Unapproved and illegal nonconforming home extended businesses existing upon the effective date hereof and which are located in agricultural,
commercial, or industrial zoning districts may, upon approval by the City Council, be classified as an interim use; provided, that:
1. The owner/operator, within sixty (60) days of written notification by the City, or upon their own initiative, files an application, required supportive
information, and filing fee as specified by chapter 5 of this title.
2. At a minimum, conforms to the following (former Wright County) standards and requirements:
a. Business must be located on the homestead of the business operator.
b. No more than one nonfamily member employee in addition to the owner/operator and immediate resident family.
c. No outside storage of supplies, equipment or maintenance items; all work and work related items shall be kept in an enclosed structure.
d. Shall provide two (2) parking spaces per employee or one space for each four hundred (400) square feet of building area, whichever is greater.
e. Excessive noise levels are prohibited (that which may be considered a nuisance, L10 at 55 dba decibels as regulated in NPC regulations).
f. No more than thirty percent (30%) lot coverage of buildings, parking areas, and drives exists on the site.
g. Site must be capable of supporting necessary on site sanitary facilities; sewer and water.
h. All effluent consisting of any liquid, gaseous, or solid waste substance resulting from any process of manufacturing (i.e., sewage or industrial
waste) shall not be discharged into the soil, water, or air unless it is at a location determined appropriate by the City.
i. A contract shall be required between a refuse hauler and the owner for disposal of all waste including, but not limited to, garbage, decayed wood,
sawdust, shavings, bark, lime, sand, ashes, oil, tar, chemicals, offal, and all other substances not sewage or industrial waste which may pollute or
tend to pollute the waters of the State. The contract shall be provided to the City prior to issuance of the interim use permit and shall state the
destination of the waste and shall be renewed annually on or before January 1 of every year. The City shall be provided with documentation of the
contract recorded.
j. Working hours shall be set by the City.
k. If located on an unimproved road or street, a letter of agreement containing any dust control measures determined necessary by the City shall be
provided prior to issuance of the interim use permit, and said agreement shall be renewed annually (January 1 of every year).
l. All posted road limits shall be obeyed.
m. The distance from the building(s) in which the home extended business is located to the next neighboring property structure shall be at least five
hundred feet (500').
n. The building(s) or portion of buildings in which the home extended business is located shall be no larger than two thousand (2,000) square feet.
o. After two (2) founded nuisance or permit violation complaints have been made and verified with written notice to the holder of the interim use
permit, a hearing shall be called to reconsider the interim use permit within sixty (60) days of the date of the last complaint.
p. The building in which the home extended business is located, as well as the property in general, shall comply with the applicable Building and
Zoning Codes and any ordinances which were in existence at the time when the home extended business was established. Additionally, as may
be considered necessary by the City Council, the buildings and property shall be upgraded to present building and zoning standards.
3. So as to maintain compatibility and protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public, the City Council may impose additional limitations or
requirements as it deems necessary. Additionally, the City Council may require the posting of securities in order to insure compliance with any
condition imposed.
4. A date not to exceed ten (10) years from the effective date hereof is established for termination of the home extended business activity or the
residential use of the property. In making such a determination, the City Council's consideration shall include, but not be limited to:
a. The amount of investment involved in the home extended business.
b. The nature and amount of business equipment which can be physically relocated to an appropriate site.
c. The existing and potential adjoining development which may be adversely impacted by the residences or the home extended business.
d. The extent of pollution and/or other operational problems associated with the home extended business.
5. In those cases where the residential use of the property is terminated and providing the home extended business qualifies as an allowable activity
within the respective zoning district in which it is located, said business shall be allowed to continue as a legal nonconforming use, subject to
minimum improvements deemed necessary by the City Council to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public.
6. At such time as the property upon which the home extended business is sold or title is transferred, either the home extended business or residential
use of the property shall terminate.
7. All home extended businesses, as defined by this section, shall be terminated within ten (10) years of the effective date hereof.
8. No more than one sign may be displayed per property. The sign may not exceed two (2) square feet in area nor a height of five feet (5') above the
street grade. Such a sign shall not be illuminated and may be displayed only upon the property licensed for the home extended business. Lettering
upon the sign shall be limited to the name and/or function of the home extended business. (Prior Code § 20-29-2)
11-29-3: INTERIM USES FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 329/497
A. Lawfully approved home extended businesses which were established prior to the effective date hereof and which are located within residential zoning
districts shall be classified as an existing interim use pursuant to chapter 5 of this title and shall be subject to the conditions imposed at the time of
approval.
B. Continuation and classification as an existing interim use shall be further subject to the following:
1. The activity, use, and property shall fully conform to the ordinances in effect at the time of home extended business approval and conditions imposed
as part of the approval.
2. The use is terminated within five (5) years of the effective date hereof, unless a time extension is applied for and granted by the City Council. A
primary consideration of the City Council in making such a determination shall be the existing or potential neighboring uses which may be adversely
impacted by the home extended business.
3. So as to maintain compatibility and protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public, the City Council may impose additional limitations or
requirements as it deems necessary upon such uses. (Prior Code § 20-29-3)
11-29-4: UNAPPROVED, ILLEGAL BUSINESSES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
A. Unapproved and illegal nonconforming home extended businesses existing upon the effective date hereof and which are located within residential
zoning districts shall cease and terminate home extended business operations within two (2) years from the effective date hereof.
B. Time extensions may be approved by the City Council upon written request of the property owner; provided, that a substantiated, unique situation
warrants a delay to the termination deadline. In considering such requests, a primary consideration of the City Council shall be the existing and
potential development which may be adversely impacted by the home extended business operation. (Prior Code § 20-29-4)
11-29-5: ALLOWED BUSINESSES:
A. Allowed In A-1 District With Interim Use Permit: Home extended businesses may be allowed within the Agricultural A-1 Zoning District upon approval of
a interim use permit.
B. Qualifying Property:
1. The use is located on and part of a farmstead and the occupants are actively engaged in farming activities as a primary source of income.
2. There is only one residential dwelling located on the farmstead, and no other neighboring residence is located within five hundred feet (500') of the
buildings in which the home extended business is conducted.
C. Minimum Conditions:
1. No one other than the immediate family occupying the residence on the farmstead is employed as part of the home extended business.
2. There is no outside storage of supplies or equipment associated with the home extended business.
3. All activities associated with the home extended business are operated within buildings which have been approved for such use as part of the interim
use permit.
4. The home extended business shall be conducted only in buildings existing or constructed as part of traditional farming activities and shall not, in and
of itself, be the principal or primary activity or use of any building.
5. The use is in full compliance with all applicable performance standards as specified by this title.
6. There shall be no public display of retail sales items related to the home extended business occurring on the site.
7. There shall be no exterior display or exterior signs or interior display or interior signs which are visible from outside the dwelling with the exception of
directional and identification/business signs to the extent authorized by the provisions of chapter 37 of this title.
8. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
D. Additional Limitations And/Or Restrictions:
1. So as to maintain compatibility and protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public, the City Council may impose additional limitations or
requirements as it deems necessary.
2. The City Council may impose the posting of a security in order to insure compliance with any condition imposed.
E. Reconsideration Of Permit: After two (2) founded nuisances or Code or permit violation complaints have been made and verified with written notices to
the holder of the conditional use permit, a public hearing shall be called to reconsider the conditional use permit within sixty (60) days of the date of the
last complaint.
F. Exemptions: The limited seasonal sale of products grown solely on the site by the residents of the farmstead shall be exempt from the provisions of this
section. (Prior Code § 20-29-5)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 330/497
Chapter 30
DAYCARE NURSERIES
11-30-1: PURPOSE; MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards and procedures by which daycare facilities can be conducted within the City without jeopardizing the
health, safety and general welfare of the daycare participants and/or the surrounding neighborhood. This chapter establishes the City's minimum
requirements for the establishment of a daycare facility which are not defined as permitted uses by State Statute or which are operated in uses other than
single-family homes. Daycare facilities defined as permitted uses by State Statutes which operate in a single-family dwelling as an accessory use shall be
subject to chapter 28 of this title and processed as a home occupation. (Prior Code § 20-30-1)
11-30-2: CONDITIONAL USE; COMPLIANCE WITH STATE REGULATIONS:
Daycare nursery facilities shall be considered an allowed conditional use within all business zoning districts and the INS District of the City and shall be
subject to the regulations and requirements of chapter 4 of this title. In addition to the City regulations, all daycare facility operations shall comply with the
minimum requirements of the Minnesota Department of Health and Human Services regulations, as may be amended. (Prior Code § 20-30-2)
11-30-3: CONDITIONS OF USE:
The Planning Commission may recommend and the City Council may impose such conditions on the granting of a daycare facility conditional use permit
as may be necessary to carry out the purpose and provisions of this chapter. (Prior Code § 20-30-3)
11-30-4: SITE PLAN REQUIRED:
All applications for a daycare facility conditional use permit shall be accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale and dimension, displaying the information
required by chapter 4 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-30-4)
11-30-5: REQUIREMENTS:
Daycare facilities shall be allowed as a principal or as an accessory use; provided, that the daycare facilities meet all the applicable provisions of this
chapter.
A. Lot Requirements And Setbacks - Principal Use: The proposed site for a daycare facility must have a minimum lot area as required by the applicable
zoning district in which it is located and as determined by the Minnesota Department of Health and Human Services. The City Council may increase the
required lot area in those cases where such an increase is considered necessary to ensure compatibility of activities and maintain the public health,
safety and general welfare. The daycare facility must meet the minimum setback requirements of the respective zoning district. The City Council may
increase setback requirements if considered necessary to ensure compatibility.
B. Lot Requirements And Setbacks - Accessory Use: The site of the proposed daycare facility as an accessory use shall meet all area and setback
provisions of the respective zoning district in which the facility is to be located. The City Council may increase such standards if considered necessary
to maintain compatibility.
C. Sewer And Water: All daycare facilities shall have access to Municipal sewer and water or have adequate private sewer and water to protect the health
and safety of all persons who occupy the facility.
D. Screening: A daycare facility shall provide screening along shared property boundaries. Such required fencing and screening shall comply with the
required fencing and screening provisions of chapter 19 of this title.
E. Parking:
1. For daycare facilities as a principal use, there shall be adequate off street parking which shall be located separately from any outdoor play area and
shall be in compliance with chapter 21 of this title. Parking areas shall be screened from view of surrounding and abutting residential uses in
compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
2. When a daycare facility is an accessory use within a structure containing another principal use, each use shall be calculated separately for
determining the total off street parking spaces required.
F. Passenger Loading: Daycare facilities shall provide off street loading areas for passenger pick up and drop off subject to review and approval of City
staff.
G. Signage: All signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in compliance with the provisions of chapter 37 of this title.
H. Compliance With State Requirements: The structure and operation shall be in full compliance with State of Minnesota, Department of Health and
Human Services regulations and be licensed accordingly. (Prior Code § 20-30-5)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 331/497
11-30-6: EXISTING USES:
Daycare facilities lawfully existing on the effective date hereof may continue as nonconforming uses. They shall, however, be required to obtain permits for
their continued operation. Any existing daycare facility that is discontinued for a period of more than one hundred eighty (180) days, or is in violation of the
provisions of the ordinance under which it was initially established, shall be brought into conformity with the provisions of this chapter. (Prior Code § 20-30-
6; amd. 2018 Code)
11-30-7: INSPECTIONS:
At any and all reasonable hours, with or without notice, the City hereby reserves the right, upon issuing any daycare facility conditional use permit, to
inspect the premises in which the occupation is being conducted to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, this title or any conditions
additionally imposed. (Prior Code § 20-30-7)
Chapter 31
ADULT USES
11-31-1: NARRATIVE AND PURPOSE:
The nature of adult uses is such that they are recognized as having adverse secondary characteristics, particularly when they are accessible to minors and
located near residential property or related residential uses such as schools, daycare centers, libraries or parks. Furthermore, the concentration of adult
uses has an adverse effect upon the use and enjoyment of adjacent areas. The nature of adult uses requires that they not be allowed within certain zoning
districts, or within minimum distances from each other or residential uses. Special regulation of adult uses is necessary to ensure that the adverse
secondary effects would not contribute or enhance criminal activity in the area of such uses nor will it contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the
surrounding property and lessening of its value. (Prior Code § 20-31-1)
11-31-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
Adult uses, as defined in this title, shall be subject to the following general provisions:
A. Activities classified as obscene as defined by Minnesota Statutes section 617.241 are not permitted and are strictly prohibited.
B. Adult uses, either principal or accessory, shall be prohibited from locating in any building which is also utilized for residential purposes.
C. Adult uses, either principal or accessory, shall be prohibited from locating in any place which is also used to dispense or consume alcoholic beverages.
D. An adult use which does not qualify as an accessory use shall be classified as an adult use-principal. (Prior Code § 20-31-2)
11-31-3: PRINCIPAL ADULT USES:
A. Adult use-principal shall be located at least six hundred (600) radial feet, as measured in a straight line from the closest point of the property line of the
building upon which the adult use-principal is located to the property line of:
1. Residentially zoned property.
2. A licensed daycare center.
3. A public or private educational facility classified as an elementary, junior high or senior high.
4. A public library.
5. A public park.
6. Another adult use-principal.
7. An on-sale liquor establishment. (Prior Code § 20-31-3)
B. Adult use-principal shall be located at least six hundred (600) radial feet as measured from another adult use-principal. (Prior Code § 20-31-3; amd.
2018 Code)
C. Adult use-principal activities, as defined by this title, shall be classified as one use. No two (2) adult uses-principal shall be located in the same building
or upon the same property, and each use shall be subject to this subsection and subsection B of this section.
D. Adult use-principal shall adhere to the following signing regulations.
1. Sign messages shall be generic in nature and shall only identify the type of business which is being conducted; and
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 332/497
2. Shall not contain material classified as advertising; and
3. Shall comply with the requirements of size and number for the district in which they are located.
E. Adult use-principal activities shall be prohibited at any public show, movie, caravan, circus, carnival, theatrical, or other performance or exhibition
presented to the general public where minors are permitted. (Prior Code § 20-31-3)
11-31-4: ACCESSORY ADULT USES:
A. Adult use-accessory shall:
1. Comprise no more than ten percent (10%) of the floor area of the establishment in which it is located.
2. Comprise no more than twenty percent (20%) of the gross receipts of the entire business operation.
3. Not involve or include any activity except the sale or rental of merchandise. (Prior Code § 20-31-4)
B. Adult use-accessory shall be restricted from and prohibit access to minors by the physical separation of the following items from areas of general public
access: (Prior Code § 20-31-4; amd. 2018 Code)
1. Movie Rentals: Display areas shall be restricted from general view and shall be located within a separate room, the access of which is in clear view
and under the control of the persons responsible for the operation or controlled in some other effective manner which meets with the approval of the
Zoning Administrator.
2. Magazines: Publications classified or qualifying as adult uses shall not be accessible to minors and shall be covered with a wrapper or other means
to prevent display of any material other than the publication title.
3. Other Uses: Adult uses-accessory not specifically cited shall comply with the intent of this section subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator.
C. Adult use-accessory shall be prohibited from both internal and external advertising and signing of adult materials and products.
D. Adult use-accessory activities shall be prohibited at any public show, movie, caravan, circus, carnival, theatrical or other performance or exhibition
presented to the general public where minors are permitted. (Prior Code § 20-31-4)
Chapter 32
ESSENTIAL SERVICES
11-32-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the installation of essential services such as telephone lines, pipelines, electric transmission lines, substations,
and related structures in such a manner that the health, safety and welfare of the City will not be adversely affected. Essential services should also be
installed in cognizance of existing and projected demands for such services. (Prior Code § 20-32-1)
11-32-2: SPECIAL PERMITS REQUIRED:
All telephone lines, pipelines for local distribution, underground electric transmission lines, and overhead electric transmission lines and substations less
than thirty three (33) kilovolts, and related structures, when installed in any public right-of-way in any zoning district, shall require a special permit approved
by the City Council, upon recommendation from the City Engineer and Zoning Administrator. (Prior Code § 20-32-2)
11-32-3: PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS:
All telephone lines, pipelines for local distribution, underground transmission lines, overhead electric transmission lines less than thirty three (33) kilovolts,
and related structures, which are extended to serve more than one parcel and are proposed to be installed at locations other than in public right-of-way,
shall require a special permit issued by the City Council after review by the City Engineer and Zoning Administrator. Approval by the City shall be based
upon the information furnished in the procedural requirements as outlined in section 11-32-4 of this chapter. (Prior Code § 20-32-3)
11-32-4: INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Prior to the installation of any of the previous essential services, the owner of such service shall file with the Zoning Administrator all maps and other
pertinent information as deemed necessary for the City to review the proposed project.
B. The Zoning Administrator shall transmit the map and accompanying information to the City Engineer and/or other staff for review and recommendation
regarding the project's relationship to the Comprehensive Plan and/or ordinances and parts thereof.
C. City staff shall report in writing to the Zoning Administrator their findings as to the compliance of the proposed project with the Comprehensive Plan and
ordinances of the City.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 333/497
D. In considering applications for the placement of essential services, as regulated in this chapter, the aforesaid City staff shall consider the effects of the
proposed project upon the health, safety and general welfare of the City, as existing and as anticipated; and the effect of the proposed project upon the
Comprehensive Plan. In addition, the following specific performance standards shall be reviewed as they may apply to the application:
1. Lot Requirements: All lots must meet the dimensional standards of the zoning district with respect to width, area, and structure setbacks from
property lines.
2. Parking: The site must provide for required off street parking in conformance with chapter 21 of this title.
3. Building Materials: The essential service buildings must be constructed with exterior building facades that maintain a high standard of architectural
and aesthetic compatibility with surrounding properties and in compliance with standards of this title.
4. Screening And Landscaping: Adequate screening and landscaping from neighboring property shall be provided in accordance with chapter 19 of this
title.
5. Site Access: Direct lot access from major collector or arterial streets shall be discouraged and, where possible, be provided access through shared
access arrangement from an existing curb cut and driveway or a neighboring use. Direct lot access from a minor collector or local street may be
allowed, provided the curb cut access complies with the standards outlined in chapter 21 of this title.
6. Enclosed Equipment: Unless otherwise approved by the City Council, all equipment shall be completely enclosed in a permanent structure with no
outside storage.
E. Upon receiving the recommendations of the staff, the City Council may issue a special permit for the installation and operation of the applicant's
essential services. If the staff reports regarding said permit cause the City Council to deny its issuance, the applicant may appeal said decision to the
Board of Appeals and Adjustments under the rules and procedures as set forth in chapter 7 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-32-4)
11-32-5: CONDITIONAL USE REQUIREMENTS:
A. All receiving or transmission facilities (i.e., facilities not required for local distributing network) and overhead transmission and substation lines in excess
of thirty three (33) kilovolts shall be a conditional use in all districts subject to the following requirements:
1. Adherence to all applicable Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and State performance standards.
2. The performance standards as specified in section 11-32-3 of this chapter are adhered to.
3. The procedural and review standards for conditional use permits are followed as specified in chapter 4 of this title.
4. Any alteration of an existing use (i.e., building expansion, change/intensification in use, etc.) involving items not identified upon initial approved plans
shall require a conditional use permit amendment.
B. Lots reserved specifically for essential services, whether of record or newly subdivided, may be less than the specified dimensions of the applicable
zoning district, both in area and width as a conditional use, under the following stipulations:
1. The lot is of sufficient dimensions to allow the setbacks from all property lines to be equal to the height of the various structures on the parcel or the
setback requirements of the district, whichever are greater. Lesser structure setbacks may be allowed by the City Council upon demonstration that
the facility's design is such that the collapse of said structure will not endanger surrounding property. In no case shall the setbacks be reduced to less
than that required by the individual districts.
2. Applications for subdivision of new lots under this provision are accompanied by the appropriate conditional use permit applications.
3. A restrictive covenant, removable by the City, is recorded against a parcel which prohibits any sale, transfer, or use other than for an essential
service as defined herein so long as the parcel is substandard in size, according to the applicable zoning districts.
4. In the event of abandonment of the essential service for any reason on the substandard lot, all equipment, structures, cables, buildings or any other
improvements to the property shall be removed from said property within a period of three (3) months. At the end of three (3) months, if the above
listed items have not been completely removed, the City may enter said property and remove any of the above listed items and improvements and
charge said costs to the owner(s) of the property, and any such unpaid charge shall be a lien against the affected property, including any and all
administrative, legal and other fees expended by the City in enforcing this subsection.
5. The procedural and review standards for conditional use permits are followed as specified in chapter 4 of this title.
6. Any alteration of an existing use (i.e., building expansion, change/intensification in use, etc.) involving items not identified upon approved initial plans
shall require a conditional use permit amendment. (Prior Code § 20-32-5)
Chapter 33
ANTENNAS
11-33-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish predicable, balanced regulations for the siting and screening of wireless communications equipment in order to
accommodate the growth of wireless communicating systems within the City while protecting the public against any adverse impacts on the City's
aesthetic resources and the public welfare. (Prior Code § 20-33-1)
11-33-2: GENERAL STANDARDS:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 334/497
The following standards shall apply to all personal wireless service, public utility, microwave, radio and television broadcast transmitting, radio and
television receiving, satellite dish and short wave radio transmitting and receiving antennas.
A. All obsolete and unused antennas shall be removed within twelve (12) months of cessation of operation at the site, unless an exemption is granted by
the Zoning Administrator.
B. All antennas shall be in compliance with all City Building and Electrical Code requirements and, as applicable, shall require related permits.
C. Structural design, mounting and installation of the antenna shall be in compliance with manufacturer's specifications and shall be verified and approved
by a registered professional engineer.
D. Unless the antenna/antenna support structure and land is under the same ownership, written authorization for antenna erection shall be provided by the
property owner.
E. No advertising message shall be affixed to the antenna structure.
F. The height of the antenna shall be the minimum necessary to function satisfactorily, as verified by an electrical engineer or other appropriate
professional.
G. Antennas shall not be artificially illuminated unless required by law or by a governmental agency to protect the public's health and safety.
H. When applicable, proposals to erect new antennas shall be accompanied by any required Federal, State, or local agency licenses.
I. If a new antenna support structure is to be constructed, it shall be designed so as to accommodate other users including, but not limited to, other
personal wireless service communication companies and local police, fire and ambulance companies.
J. Antenna support structures under two hundred feet (200') in height shall be painted silver or have a galvanized finish to reduce visual impact, unless
otherwise required by Federal law.
K. Except as may be applicable in cases where a conditional use permit is required, antennas and support structures for Federally licensed amateur radio
stations and used in the amateur radio service are exempt from subsections C, F, and I of this section, and must comply with subsection L of this
section.
L. Amateur radio support structures (towers) must be installed in accordance with the instructions furnished by the manufacturer of that tower model.
Because of the experimental nature of the amateur radio service, antennas mounted on such a tower may be modified or changed at any time so long
as the published allowable load on the tower is not exceeded and the structure of the tower remains in accordance with the manufacturer's
specifications. (Prior Code § 20-33-2)
11-33-3: ACCESSORY AND SECONDARY USE ANTENNAS:
The following standards shall apply to all accessory and secondary use antennas including radio and television receiving antennas, satellite dishes,
TVROs three and one-half meters (3.5 m) or less in diameter, short wave radio dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the operation of electronic
equipment including radio receivers, Federally licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers.
A. Accessory or secondary use antennas shall not be erected in any required yard (except a rear yard) or within public or private utility and drainage
easements, and shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from all lot lines.
B. Guy wires or guy wire anchors shall not be erected within public or private utility and drainage easements, and shall be set back a minimum of five feet
(5') from all lot lines.
C. Accessory or secondary use antennas and necessary support structures, monopoles or towers may extend a maximum of fifteen feet (15') above the
normal height restriction for the affected zoning district, except support structures and antennas used in the amateur radio service may extend a
maximum of seventy feet (70') for the affected zoning district.
D. The installation of more than one support structure per property shall require the approval of a conditional use permit. (Prior Code § 20-33-3)
11-33-4: PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE ANTENNAS:
A. Agricultural And Residential District Standards:
1. Antennas Located Upon Public Structures: Personal wireless service antennas located upon public structures shall require the processing of an
administrative permit and shall comply with the following standards:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 335/497
a. The applicant shall demonstrate by providing a coverage/interference analysis and capacity analysis prepared by a registered professional
engineer that location of the antennas as proposed is necessary to meet the frequency reuse and spacing needs of the personal wireless service
system and to provide adequate portable personal wireless service coverage and capacity to areas which cannot be adequately served by locating
the antennas in a less restrictive district.
b. Transmitting, receiving and switching equipment shall be housed within an existing structure whenever possible. If a new equipment building is
necessary for transmitting, receiving and switching equipment, it shall be situated in the rear yard of the principal use and shall be screened from
view by landscaping where appropriate.
c. An administrative permit is issued in compliance with the provisions of chapter 8 of this title.
2. Antennas Not Located Upon A Public Structure: Personal wireless service antennas not located upon a public structure shall require the processing
of a conditional use permit and shall comply with the following standards:
a. The applicant shall demonstrate by providing a coverage/interference analysis and capacity analysis prepared by a registered professional
engineer that location of the antennas as proposed is necessary to meet the frequency reuse and spacing needs of the personal wireless service
system and to provide adequate portable personal wireless service coverage and capacity to areas which cannot be adequately served by locating
the antennas in a less restrictive district.
b. The antennas shall be located on an existing, nonresidential structure, if possible, and shall not extend more than fifteen feet (15') above the
structural height of the structure to which they are attached.
c. If no existing, nonresidential structure which meets the height requirements for the antennas is available for mounting purposes, the antennas may
be mounted on a single ground mounted pole; provided, that:
(1) The pole not exceed seventy five feet (75') in height.
(2) The setback of the pole from the nearest residential structure is not less than the height of the antenna. Exceptions to such setback may be
granted if a qualified structural engineer specifies in writing that any collapse of the pole will occur within a lesser distance under all foreseeable
circumstances.
d. Transmitting, receiving and switching equipment shall be housed within an existing structure whenever possible. If a new equipment building is
necessary for transmitting, receiving and switching equipment, it shall be situated in the rear yard of the principal use and shall be screened from
view by landscaping where appropriate.
e. Unless the antenna is mounted on an existing, nonresidential structure, a security fence not greater than eight feet (8') in height with a maximum
opacity of fifty percent (50%) shall be provided around the support structure.
f. The conditional use permit provisions of chapter 4 of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
B. Business And Institutional District Standards:
1. Antennas Located Upon A Public Structure: Personal wireless service antennas located upon a public structure shall comply with the following
standards:
a. Transmitting, receiving and switching equipment shall be housed within an existing structure whenever possible. If a new equipment building is
necessary for transmitting, receiving and switching equipment, it shall be situated in the rear yard of the principal use and shall be screened from
view by landscaping where appropriate.
b. An administrative permit is issued in compliance with the provisions of chapter 8 of this title.
2. Antennas Not Located Upon A Public Structure: Personal wireless service antennas not located upon a public structure shall require the processing
of a conditional use permit and shall comply with the following standards:
a. The applicant shall demonstrate by providing a coverage/interference analysis and capacity analysis prepared by a registered professional
engineer that location of the antennas as proposed is necessary to meet the frequency reuse and spacing needs of the personal wireless service
system and to provide adequate portable personal wireless service coverage and capacity to areas which cannot be adequately served by locating
the antennas in a less restrictive district.
b. The antennas shall be located on an existing structure, if possible, and shall not extend more than fifteen feet (15') above the structural height of
the structure to which they are attached.
c. If no existing structure which meets the height requirements for the antennas is available for mounting purposes, the antennas may be mounted on
a single ground mounted pole; provided, that:
(1) The pole not exceed seventy five feet (75') in height.
(2) The setback of the pole from the nearest residential structure is not less than the height of the antenna. Exceptions to such setback may be
granted if a qualified structural engineer specifies in writing that any collapse of the pole will occur within a lesser distance under all foreseeable
circumstances.
d. Transmitting, receiving and switching equipment shall be housed within an existing structure whenever possible. If a new equipment building is
necessary for transmitting, receiving and switching equipment, it shall be situated in the rear yard of the principal use and shall be screened from
view by landscaping where appropriate.
e. Unless the antenna is mounted on an existing structure, a security fence not greater than eight feet (8') in height with a maximum opacity of fifty
percent (50%) shall be provided around the support structure.
f. The conditional use permit provisions of chapter 4 of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
C. Industrial District Standards:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 336/497
1. Antennas Located Upon A Public Structure: Personal wireless service antennas located upon a public structure shall require the processing of an
administrative permit and shall comply with the following standards: An administrative permit is issued in compliance with the provisions of chapter 8
of this title.
2. Antennas Not Located Upon A Public Structure: Personal wireless service antennas not located upon a public structure shall require the processing
of an administrative permit and shall comply with the following standards:
a. The antennas shall be located upon a structure if possible.
b. If no existing structure which meets the height requirements for mounting the antennas, the antennas may be mounted upon a supporting pole or
tower not exceeding one hundred fifty feet (150') in height. Such pole or tower shall be located on a parcel having a dimension equal to the height
of the pole or tower measured between the base of the pole or tower located nearest the property line and said property line, unless a qualified
structural engineer specifies in writing that the collapse of the pole or tower will occur within a lesser distance under all foreseeable circumstances.
c. An administrative permit is issued in compliance with the provisions of chapter 8 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-33-4)
11-33-5: SATELLITE DISHES:
A. Agricultural And Residential District Standards: Single satellite dish TVROs located within agricultural and residential zoning districts of the City shall
comply with the following standards:
1. All accessory and secondary use provisions of section 11-33-3 of this chapter are satisfactorily met.
2. The lot on which the satellite dish antenna is located shall be of sufficient size to assure that an obstruction free receive window can be maintained
within the limits of the property ownership.
3. The satellite dish antenna is not greater than three and one-half meters (3.5 m) in diameter.
B. Business And Institutional District Standards: Satellite dish antennas within the business and institutional zoning districts of the City shall be limited to
those listed as permitted accessory and secondary uses in the applicable zoning district subject to the provisions of sections 11-33-2 and 11-33-3 of
this chapter.
C. Industrial District Standards: Commercial, private and public satellite dish transmitting or receiving antennas in excess of three and one-half meters
(3.5 m) may be allowed as a conditional use within industrial districts of the City and shall comply with the following standards:
1. All accessory and secondary use provisions of section 11-33-3 of this chapter are satisfactorily met.
2. The lot on which the satellite dish antenna is located shall be of sufficient size to assure that an obstruction free transmit-receive window or windows
can be maintained within the limits of the property ownership.
3. The conditional use permit provisions of chapter 4 of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied. (Prior Code § 20-33-5)
11-33-6: COMMERCIAL AND PUBLIC RADIO AND TELEVISION TRANSMITTING ANTENNAS AND PUBLIC UTILITY
MICROWAVE ANTENNAS:
Commercial and public radio and television transmitting and public utility microwave antennas shall comply with the following standards:
A. Such antennas shall be considered an allowed conditional use within the I-1 Limited Industrial District of the City and shall be subject to the regulations
and requirements of chapter 4 of this title.
B. The antennas, transmitting towers, or array of towers shall be located on a continuous parcel having a dimension equal to the height of the antenna,
transmitting tower, or array of towers measured between the base of the antenna or tower located nearest a property line and said property line, unless
a qualified structural engineer specifies in writing that the collapse of any antenna or tower will occur within a lesser distance under all foreseeable
circumstances.
C. Unless the antenna is mounted on an existing structure, a fence not greater than eight feet (8') in height with a maximum opacity of fifty percent (50%)
shall be provided around the support structure and other equipment. (Prior Code § 20-33-6)
Chapter 34
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS (WECS)
11-34-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards and procedures by which the installation and operation of wind energy conversion systems (WECS)
shall be governed within the City. (Prior Code § 20-34-1)
11-34-2: ACCESSORY AND CONDITIONAL USE:
Wind conversion systems may be allowed as an accessory use, or principal use by conditional use permit within any zoning district of the City, subject to
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 337/497
the regulations and requirements of this chapter, provided the property upon which the system is to be located is agricultural, commercial or industrial or is
constructed and maintained on any parcel of land of at least five (5) acres in size. (Prior Code § 20-34-2; amd. 2018 Code)
11-34-3: CONDITIONS OF USE:
The City Council may impose such conditions on the granting of WECS conditional use permit as may be necessary to carry out the purpose and
provisions of this chapter and to maintain compatibility. (Prior Code § 20-34-3)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-07 - SMALL CELL WIRELESS FACILITIES . Go to new ordinance.
11-34-4: SITE PLAN REQUIRED:
All applications for WECS conditional use permits shall be accompanied by a detailed site plan, drawn to scale and dimensioned, displaying the following
information:
A. Lot lines and dimensions.
B. Location and height of all buildings, structures, aboveground utilities, and trees on the lot, including both existing and proposed structures and guy wires
anchors. (Prior Code § 20-34-4)
C. Locations and height of all adjacent buildings, structures, aboveground utilities and trees located within three hundred fifty feet (350') of the exterior
boundaries of the property in question. (Prior Code § 20-34-4; amd. 2018 Code)
D. Existing and proposed setbacks of all structures located on the property in question.
E. Sketch elevation of the premises accurately depicting the proposed WECS and its relationship to structures on adjacent lots. (Prior Code § 20-34-4)
11-34-5: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE BUILDING CODE:
Standard drawings of the structural components of the wind energy conversion system and support structures, including base and footings shall be
provided along with the engineering data and calculations to demonstrate compliance with the structural design provisions of the State Building Code
especially with regard to wind and icing loads. Drawings and engineering calculations shall be certified by a registered engineer. (Prior Code § 20-34-5)
11-34-6: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE ELECTRICAL CODE:
WECS electrical equipment and connections shall be designed and installed in adherence to the State Electrical Code as adopted by the City. (Prior Code
§ 20-34-6)
11-34-7: MANUFACTURER WARRANTY:
The applicant shall provide documentation or other evidence from the dealer or manufacturer that the WECS has been successfully operated in
atmospheric conditions similar to the conditions within the City. The WECS shall be warranted against any system failures reasonably expected in severe
weather operation conditions. (Prior Code § 20-34-7)
11-34-8: DESIGN STANDARDS:
A. Height:
1. The permitted maximum height of a WECS shall be determined in one of two (2) ways. In determining the height of the WECS, the total height of the
system shall be included. System height shall be measured from the base of the tower to the highest possible extension of the rotor.
a. A ratio of one foot (1') to one foot (1') between the distance of the closest property line to the base of the WECS to the height of the system.
b. A maximum system height of one hundred fifty feet (150').
2. The shortest height of the two (2) above mentioned methods shall be used in determining the maximum allowable height of a WECS system. The
height of a WECS must also comply with FAA Regulation part 77 "Objects Affecting Navigable Air Space" and/or MnDOT rule 14, MCAR 1.3015
"Criteria for Determining Obstruction to Air Navigation".
B. Setbacks: No part of a WECS (including guy wire anchors) shall be located within or above any required front, side or rear yard setback, and no part of
the system shall be within ten feet (10') of any property line, whichever is greater. WECS towers shall be set back from the closest property line one
foot (1') for every one foot (1') of system height. A WECS shall not be located within fifty feet (50') of an aboveground utility line.
C. Rotor Size: All WECS rotors shall not have rotor dimensions greater than twenty six feet (26').
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 338/497
D. Rotor Clearance: Blade arcs created by the WECS shall have a minimum of thirty feet (30') of clearance over any structure or tree within a two hundred
foot (200') radius.
E. Rotor Design: The blade design and materials are to be designed and constructed to ensure safe operation in an urban/rural area.
F. Rotor Safety: Each WECS shall be equipped with both a manual and automatic braking device capable of stopping WECS operation in high wind (40
mph or greater) or in conditions of imbalance. (Prior Code § 20-34-8)
G. Lightning Protection: Each WECS shall be grounded to protect against natural lightning strikes in conformance with the State Electrical Code as
adopted by the City. (Prior Code § 20-34-8; amd. 2018 Code)
H. Component Compatibility: The wind turbine and wind turbine tower are to be designed and constructed to be compatible.
I. Tower Access: To prevent unauthorized climbing, WECS towers must comply with one of the following provisions:
1. Tower climbing apparatus shall not be located within twelve feet (12') of the ground.
2. A locked anticlimb device shall be installed on the tower.
3. A tower capable of being climbed shall be enclosed by a locked, protective fence at least eight feet (8') high.
J. Signs: WECS shall have one sign, not to exceed two (2) square feet, at the base of the tower, and said sign shall contain the following information:
1. Warning high voltage.
2. Manufacturer's name.
3. Emergency phone number.
4. Emergency shutdown procedures.
K. Lighting: A WECS shall not have affixed or attached any lights, reflectors, flashers or any other illumination, except for illumination devices required by
FAA Regulations part 77 "Objectives Affecting Navigable Air Space and Lighting".
L. Electromagnetic Interference: A WECS shall be designed and constructed so as not to cause radio and television interference.
M. Noise Emissions: Noises emanating from the operation of a WECS shall be in compliance with and regulated by the State of Minnesota Pollution
Control Standards, Minnesota Regulations NPC 1 and 2, as amended. (Prior Code § 20-34-8)
N. Utility Company Interconnection: No WECS shall be interconnected with the local electrical utility company until the utility company and the City
Engineer have commented upon such proposal. The interconnection of the WECS with the utility company shall adhere to the State Electrical Code as
adopted by the City. (Prior Code § 20-34-8; amd. 2018 Code)
11-34-9: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
Ornamental wind devices that are not a WECS shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter and shall conform to other applicable provisions of this
title and this Code. (Prior Code § 20-34-9)
11-34-10: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED:
A building permit shall be required for the installation of a WECS in the City. (Prior Code § 20-34-10)
11-34-11: INSPECTIONS:
The City hereby reserves the right, upon issuing any WECS conditional use permit, to inspect the premises on which the WECS is located. If a WECS is
not maintained in operational condition and poses a potential safety hazard, the owner shall, upon written notice from the City, take expeditious action to
correct the situation. (Prior Code § 20-34-11)
11-34-12: ABANDONMENT OF USE:
Any WECS or tower which is not used for six (6) successive months shall be deemed abandoned and shall be dismantled and removed from the property
at the expense of the property owner. (Prior Code § 20-34-12)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 339/497
Chapter 35
RESERVED
Chapter 36
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
11-36-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
This chapter is established to provide comprehensive procedures and standards designed to allow greater flexibility, uniqueness, innovative design, and
energy conservation in the development of neighborhoods or areas by incorporating a mixture of densities/intensities or use types when applied to a PUD
District. The PUD process, by allowing deviation from the strict provisions of this title related to setbacks, height, lot area, width and depth, yards, etc., by
conditional use permit or the mix of uses by PUD zoning, is intended to encourage:
A. Innovations in development to the end that the growing demands for all styles of economic expansion may be met by greater variety in type, design,
and sighting of structures and by the conservation and more efficient use of land in such developments.
B. Higher standards of site and building design through the use of trained and experienced land planners, architects and landscape architects.
C. More convenience in location and design of development and service facilities.
D. The preservation and enhancement of desirable site characteristics such as existing vegetation, natural topography and geologic features and the
prevention of soil erosion.
E. A creative use of land and related physical development which allows a phased and orderly transition of land from one activity to another.
F. An efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities and streets thereby lowering development costs and public investments.
G. A development pattern in harmony with the objectives of the Comprehensive Plan. (PUD is not intended as a means to vary applicable planning and
zoning principles.)
H. A more desirable and creative environment than might be possible through the strict application of zoning and subdivision regulations of the City. (Prior
Code § 20-36-1)
11-36-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS:
A. Ownership: An application for PUD must be filed by the landowner or jointly by all landowners of the property included in a project. The application and
all submissions must be directed to the development of the property as a unified whole. In the case of multiple ownership, the approved final plan shall
be binding on all owners.
B. Comprehensive Plan Consistency: The proposed PUD shall be consistent with the City Comprehensive Plan.
C. Compatibility: The proposed PUD shall be compatible with the adjacent land uses.
D. Common Open Space: Common open space at least sufficient to meet the minimum requirements established in the Comprehensive Plan and such
complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the benefit and enjoyment of the residents/users of the PUD shall
be provided within the area of the PUD development.
E. Operation And Maintenance Requirements For PUD Common Open Space/Facilities: Whenever common open space or service facilities are provided
within the PUD, the PUD plan shall contain provisions to assure the continued operation and maintenance of such open space and service facilities to
a predetermined reasonable standard. Common open space and service facilities within a PUD may be placed under the ownership of one or more of
the following, as approved by the City:
1. Dedicated to the public, where a communitywide use is anticipated and the City agrees to accept the dedication.
2. Landlord control, where only use by tenants is anticipated.
3. Property owners' association, provided all of the following conditions are met:
a. Prior to the use or occupancy or sale or the execution of contracts for sale of an individual building unit, parcel, tracts or common area, a
declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions or an equivalent document or document such as specified by Laws 1963, section 457, section
11 and a set of floor plans such as specified by Laws 1963, section 457, section 13 shall be filed with the City, said filing with the City to be made
prior to the filing of said declaration or document or floor plans with the recording officers of Wright County, Minnesota.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 340/497
b. The declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions or equivalent document shall specify that deeds, leases or documents of conveyance
affecting buildings, units, parcels, tracts, townhouses or apartments shall subject said properties to the terms of said declaration.
c. The declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions shall provide that an owners' association or corporation shall be formed and that all
owners shall be members of said association or corporation which shall maintain all properties and common areas in good repair and which shall
assess individual property owners proportionate shares of joint or common costs. This declaration shall be subject to the review and approval of
the City Attorney. The intent of this requirement is to protect the property values of the individual owner through establishing private control.
d. The declaration shall additionally, among other things, provide that in the event the association or corporation fails to maintain properties in
accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the City or fails to pay taxes or assessments on properties as they become due, and in the
event the City incurs any expenses in enforcing its rules and regulations, which said expenses are not immediately reimbursed by the association
or corporation, then the City shall have the right to assess each property its prorate share of said expenses. Such assessments, together with
interest thereon and costs of collection, shall be a lien on each property against which each such assessment is made.
e. Membership must be mandatory for each owner and all successors or assigns.
f. The open space restrictions must be permanent and not for a given period of years.
g. The association must be responsible for liability insurance, local taxes, and the maintenance of the open space facilities to be deeded to it.
h. Property owners must pay a prorate share of the cost of the association by means of an assessment to be levied by the association which meets
the requirements for becoming a lien on the property in accordance with Minnesota Statutes.
i. The association must be able to adjust the assessment to meet changed needs.
j. The bylaws and rules of the association and all covenants and restrictions to be recorded must be approved by the City Council prior to the
approval of the final PUD plan.
F. Staging Of Public And Common Open Space: When a PUD provides for common or public open space, and is planned as a staged development over a
period of time, the total area of common or public open space or land escrow security in any stage of development shall, at a minimum, bear the same
relationship to the total open space to be provided in the entire PUD as the stages or units completed or under development bear to the entire PUD.
G. Density: The maximum allowable density in a PUD Zoning District shall be determined by standards negotiated and agreed upon between the applicant
and the City. In all cases, the negotiated standards shall be consistent with the development policies as contained in the Comprehensive Plan.
Whenever a PUD is to be developed in stages, no such stage shall, when averaged with all previously completed stages, have a residential density
that exceeds one hundred percent (100%) of the proposed residential density of the entire PUD. A PUD by conditional use permit must comply with the
applicable base zoning district.
H. Utilities: In any PUD, all utilities, including telephone, electricity, gas and telecable shall be installed underground, unless approved specifically by the
City Council.
I. Utility Connections: The following requirements must be met with regards to utility connections. Properties within the urban service area where public
water and sanitary sewer service are not provided must demonstrate the ability to meet these requirements once public water and sanitary sewer
service is available.
1. Water Connections: Where more than one property is served from the same service line, individual unit shutoff valves shall be provided as required
by the City.
2. Sewer Connections: Where more than one unit is served by a sanitary sewer lateral which exceeds three hundred feet (300') in length, provision
must be made for a manhole to allow adequate cleaning and maintenance of the lateral. All maintenance and cleaning shall be the responsibility of
the property owners' association or owner.
J. Roadways: All streets shall conform to the design standards contained in the subdivision provisions of this Code, unless otherwise approved by the City.
K. Landscaping: In any PUD, landscaping shall be provided according to a plan approved by the City, which shall include a detailed planting list with sizes
and species indicated as part of the final plan. In assessing the landscaping plan, the City shall consider the natural features of the particular site, the
architectural characteristics of the proposed structures and the overall scheme of the PUD plan.
L. Urban/Rural Servicing Requirements: All development shall be carefully phased so as to ensure that all developable land will be accorded a present
vested right to develop at such time as services and facilities are available. Lands which have the necessary available Municipal facilities and services
may be granted approval in accordance with this Code and development techniques. Lands which lack the available public facilities and services may
be granted approval for development; provided, that there is compliance with all applicable provisions of this title, this Code, and State regulations.
M. Setbacks:
1. The front and side yard restrictions at the periphery of the planned unit development conditional use permit site at a minimum shall be the same as
those imposed in the base zoning districts. A PUD Zoning District shall, at minimum, have a thirty foot (30') front yard setback and ten foot (10') side
yard setback. As appropriate, the City may increase these standards.
2. No building shall be located less than fifteen feet (15') from the back of the curb line along those roadways which are part of the internal street
system.
3. No building within the project shall be nearer to another building than one-half (1/2) the sum of the building heights of the two (2) buildings. (Prior
Code § 20-36-2)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 341/497
11-36-3: SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS:
Five (5) large scale copies and thirteen (13) reduced scale (not less than 11 inches by 17 inches) copies of the following exhibits, analyses and plans shall
be submitted to the City during the PUD process, at the times specified in chapter 3 or 4 of this title, as applicable. If, in the opinion of the Zoning
Administrator, reduced scale drawings (11 inches by 17 inches) are determined to be illegible, the submission of larger scale materials shall be required.
The scale of such materials shall be the minimum necessary to ensure legibility.
A. General Concept Stage:
1. General information as follows:
a. The landowner's name and address and his interest in the subject property.
b. The applicant's name and address if different from the landowner.
c. The names and addresses of all professional consultants who have contributed to the development of the PUD plan being submitted, including
attorney, land planner, engineer, and surveyor.
d. Evidence that the applicant has sufficient control over the subject property to effectuate the proposed PUD, including a statement of all legal,
beneficial, tenancy and contractual interests held in or affecting the subject property and including an up to date certified abstract of title or
registered property report, and such other evidences as the City Attorney may require to show the status of title or control of the subject property.
2. Present status, as follows:
a. The address and legal description of the subject property.
b. The existing zoning classification and present use of the subject property and all lands within one thousand feet (1,000') of the subject property.
c. A map depicting the existing development of the subject property and all land within one thousand feet (1,000') thereof and indicating the location
of existing streets, property lines, easements, water mains and storm and sanitary sewers, with invert elevations on and within one hundred feet
(100') of the subject property.
3. A written statement generally describing the proposed PUD and the market which it is intended to serve and its demand showing its relationship to
the Comprehensive Plan and how the proposed PUD is to be designed, arranged and operated in order to permit the development and use of
neighboring property in accordance with the applicable regulations of the City. (Prior Code § 20-36-3)
4. Graphic reproductions of the existing site conditions at a scale of one hundred feet per inch (1" = 100'). (Prior Code § 20-36-3; amd. 2018 Code)
a. Contours - minimum one-half foot (1/2') intervals.
b. Location, type and extent of tree cover.
c. Slope analysis.
d. Location and extent of water bodies, wetlands and streams and floodplains within three hundred feet (300') of the subject property.
e. Significant rock outcroppings.
f. Existing drainage patterns.
g. Vistas and significant views.
h. Soil conditions as they affect development.
All of the graphics should be the same scale as the final plan to allow easy cross reference. The use of overlays is recommended for clear
reference.
5. Schematic drawing of the proposed development concept including, but not limited to, the general location of major circulation elements, public and
common open space, and internal and surrounding land uses.
6. Schematic drawing of resubdivision plans for the proposed development, if any, in the event of sanitary sewer availability.
7. A statement of the estimated density/intensity of use proposed for the PUD and a tabulation of the proposed approximate allocations of land use
expressed in acres and as a percent of the total project area, which shall include at least the following:
a. Area devoted to uses.
b. Area devoted to use by building type.
c. Area devoted to common open space.
d. Area devoted to public open space.
e. Approximate area devoted to streets.
f. Approximate area devoted to, and number of, off street parking and loading spaces and related access.
8. When the PUD is to be constructed in stages during a period of time extending beyond a single construction season, a schedule for the development
of such stages or units shall be submitted stating the approximate beginning and completion date for each such stage or unit and the proportion of
the total PUD public or common open space and dwelling units to be provided or constructed during each such stage, and the overall chronology of
development to be followed from stage to stage.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 342/497
9. When the proposed PUD includes provisions for public or common open space or service facilities, a statement describing the provision that is to be
made for the care and maintenance of such open space or service facilities.
10. General intents of any restrictive covenants that are to be recorded with respect to property included in the proposed PUD.
11. Schematic utilities plans indicating placement of water, sanitary and storm sewers.
12. The Zoning Administrator may excuse an applicant from submitting any specific item of information or document required in this stage, which is
determined to be unnecessary to the consideration of the specific proposal for PUD approval.
13. The Zoning Administrator may require the submission of any additional information or documentation which is determined to be necessary or
appropriate for full consideration of the proposed PUD or any aspect or stage thereof.
B. Development Stage: Development stage submissions should depict and outline the proposed implementation of the general concept stage for the PUD.
Information from the general concept stage may be included for background and to provide a basis for the submitted plan. The development stage
submissions shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Zoning classification required for development stage submission and any other public decisions necessary for implementation of the proposed plan.
2. Five (5) sets of preliminary plans, drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') or scale requested by the City and
thirteen (13) reduced scale (not less than 11 inches by 17 inches) copies containing at least the information specified in this section. If, in the opinion
of the Zoning Administrator, reduced scale drawings (11 inches by 17 inches) are determined to be illegible, the submission of larger scale materials
shall be required. The scale of such materials shall be the minimum necessary to ensure legibility.
a. Proposed name of the development (which shall not duplicate nor be similar in pronunciation to the name of any plat theretofore recorded in
Wright County).
b. Property boundary lines and dimensions of the property and any significant topographical or physical features of the property.
c. The location, size, use and arrangement, including height in stories and feet and total square feet of ground area coverage and floor area, of
proposed buildings, and existing buildings which will remain, if any.
d. Location and dimensions of all driveways, entrances, curb cuts, parking stalls, loading spaces and access aisles, and all other circulation elements
including bike and pedestrian; and the total site coverage of all elements.
e. Location, designation and total area of all common open space.
f. Location, designation and total area proposed to be conveyed or dedicated for public open space, including parks, playgrounds, school sites and
recreational facilities.
g. Proposed lots and blocks, if any, and numbering system.
h. Proposed resubdivision plan, if any, upon availability of sanitary sewer service.
i. The location, use and size of structures and other land uses on adjacent properties.
j. Detailed sketches and provisions of proposed landscaping.
k. General grading and drainage plans for the developed PUD.
l. Any other information that may have been required by the City in conjunction with the approval of the general concept plan.
3. An accurate legal description of the entire area within the PUD for which final development plan approval is sought.
4. A tabulation indicating the number of residential dwelling units and expected population.
5. A tabulation indicating the gross square footage, if any, of commercial and industrial floor space by type of activity (e.g., drugstore, dry cleaning,
supermarket).
6. Preliminary architectural "typical" plans indicating use, floor plan, elevations and exterior wall finishes of proposed buildings, including mobile homes.
7. A detailed site plan, suitable for recording, showing the physical layout, design and purpose of all streets, easements, rights-of-way, utility lines and
facilities, lots, blocks, public and common open space, general landscaping plan, structure, including mobile homes and uses.
8. Preliminary grading and site alteration plan illustrating changes to existing topography and natural site vegetation. The plan shall clearly reflect the
site treatment and its conformance with the approved concept plan.
9. A preliminary plat prepared in accordance with the subdivision provisions of this Code.
10. A soil erosion control plan acceptable to watershed districts, Department of Natural Resources, Soil Conservation Service, or any other agency with
review authority clearly illustrating erosion control measures to be used during construction and as permanent measures.
11. A statement summarizing all changes which have been made in any document, plan, data or information previously submitted, together with
revised copies of any such document, plan or data.
12. Such other and further information as the Zoning Administrator shall find necessary to a full consideration of the entire proposed PUD or any stage
thereof.
13. The Zoning Administrator may excuse an applicant from submitting any specific item of information or document required in this section if it is found
to be unnecessary to the consideration of the specific proposal for PUD approval.
C. Final Plan Stage: After approval of a general concept plan for the PUD and approval of a development stage plan for a section of the proposed PUD,
the applicant shall submit the following material for review by the City prior to issuance of a building permit:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 343/497
1. Proof of recording any easements and restrictive covenants prior to the sale of any land or dwelling unit within the PUD and of the establishment and
activation of any entity that is to be responsible for the management and maintenance of any public or common open space or service facility.
2. All certificates, seals and signatures required for the dedication of land and recording of documents.
3. Final architectural working drawings of all structures.
4. A final plat and final engineering plans and specifications for streets, utilities and other public improvements, together with a City/applicant
agreement for the installation of such improvements and financial guarantees for the completion of such improvements.
5. Resubdivision plan, if any, upon availability of sanitary sewer service. (Prior Code § 20-36-3)
6. Any other plan, agreements, or specifications necessary for the City to review the proposed construction. All work must be in conformance with the
Minnesota State Building Code. (Prior Code § 20-36-3; amd. 2018 Code)
11-36-4: PROCESSING PROCEDURE:
A. General Processing Requirements: The PUD request shall be processed according to chapter 3 or 4 of this title as may be applicable, except as herein
modified.
B. Application Conference: Prior to filing of an application for PUD, the applicant of the proposed PUD is encouraged to arrange for and attend a
conference with the Zoning Administrator. The primary purpose of the conference shall be to provide the applicant with an opportunity to gather
information and obtain guidance as to the general suitability of the proposal for the area for which it is proposed and its conformity to the provisions of
this chapter before incurring substantial expense in the preparation of plans, surveys and other data.
C. General Concept Plan:
1. Purpose: The general concept plan provides an opportunity for the applicant to submit a plan to the City showing the basic intent and the general
nature of the entire development without incurring substantial cost. The following elements of the proposed general concept plan represent the
immediately significant elements for City review and comment:
a. Overall maximum PUD density/intensity range.
b. General location of major streets and pedestrianways.
c. General location and extent of public and common open space.
d. General location of residential and nonresidential land uses with approximate type and intensities of development.
e. Staging and time schedule of development.
f. Other special criteria for development. (Prior Code § 20-36-4)
2. Schedule:
a. The applicant shall file the concept stage application, together with all supporting data and filing fee as set out in section 3-1-2 of this Code. (Prior
Code § 20-36-4; amd. 2018 Code)
b. Within fifteen (15) working days after verification by the City that the application and required supportive material is completed and adequate, the
request shall be processed in accordance with the applicable procedures and schedule as defined by chapter 3 or 4 of this title.
3. Optional Submission Of Development Stage Plan: In the case of single stage PUDs or where the first stage of a multiple stage PUD is to begin
immediately, the applicant may initially submit development stage plans and supportive material. In such case, the City shall consider and act upon
such plans according to the applicable provisions of this chapter.
4. Effect Of Concept Plan Approval: Unless the applicant shall fail to meet time schedules for filing development stage and final plans or shall fail to
proceed with development in accordance with the plans as approved or shall in any other manner fail to comply with any condition of this title or of
any approval granted pursuant thereto, a general concept plan which has been approved shall not be modified, revoked or otherwise impaired
pending the application of development stage and final plans by any action of the City without the consent of the applicant.
5. Limitation On General Concept Plan Approval: Unless a development stage plan covering at least ten (10) dwelling units or the area designated in
the general concept plan as the first stage of the PUD, whichever is greater, has been filed within six (6) months from the date the City grants general
concept plan approval, or in any case where the applicant fails to file development stage and final plans and to proceed with development in
accordance with the provisions of this title and of an approved general concept plan, the approval shall be null and void and shall lapse. Upon
request by the applicant, the City Council, at its discretion, may extend for additional periods not in excess of six (6) months each the filing deadline
for any development stage plan, when, for good cause shown, such extension is necessary.
D. Development Stage:
1. Purpose: The purpose of the development stage plan is to provide a specific and particular plan upon which the Planning Commission will base its
recommendation to the City Council and with which substantial compliance is necessary for the preparation of the final plan.
2. Submission Of Plan: Upon approval of the general concept plan, and within the time established in subsection C5 of this section, the applicant shall
file with the City a development stage plan consisting of the information and submissions required by subsection B of this section for the entire PUD
or for one or more stages thereof in accordance with a staging plan approved as part of the general concept plan. The development stage plan shall
refine, implement, and be in substantial conformity with the approved general concept plan.
3. Review And Action By City Staff And Planning Commission:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 344/497
a. Immediately upon receipt of a completed development stage plan, said plan shall be referred to the following City staff and/or official bodies for the
indicated action.
(1) The City Attorney for legal review of all documents.
(2) The City Engineer for review of all engineering data and the City/developer agreement.
(3) The building official for review of all building plans.
(4) The Zoning Administrator or designated agent for review of all plans for compliance with the intent, purpose and requirements of this title and
conformity with the general concept plan and Comprehensive Plan.
(5) The Planning Commission for review and recommendation to the City Council.
(6) When appropriate, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, to other special review agencies and governmental jurisdictions.
b. The review and action by City staff and/or official bodies so designated shall be completed within ninety (90) days of the receipt of a completed
development stage plan.
4. Council Action: Except when a delay is requested in writing by the applicant, within one hundred eighty (180) days of the receipt of a completed
development stage plan, the City Council shall act to deny or approve the request.
5. PUD Enactment: Final approval of a PUD conditional use permit or PUD Zoning District map amendment shall be considered granted only at the
time of development stage plan approval by the City Council.
6. Limitation On Plan Approval: Unless a final plan covering the area designated in the development stage plan as the first stage of the PUD has been
filed within six (6) months from the date the City Council grants development stage plan approval, or in any case where the applicant fails to file final
plans and to proceed with development in accordance with the provisions of this title and/or an approved development stage plan, the approval shall
be null and void and shall expire. Upon application by the applicant, the City Council, at its discretion, may extend for not more than six (6) months
the filing deadline for any final plan when, for good cause shown, such extension is necessary.
7. Site Improvements: At any time following the approval of a development stage plan by the City Council, and completion and execution of a PUD
agreement governing the project, the applicant may, pursuant to the applicable City Code provisions apply for, and the City may issue, grading
permits for the area within the PUD for which development stage plan approval has been given. Securities as appropriate may be required of the
applicant.
E. Final Plan:
1. Purpose: The final plan is to serve as a complete, thorough and permanent public record of the PUD and the manner in which it is to be developed. It
shall incorporate all prior approved plans and all approved modifications thereof resulting from the PUD process. It shall serve in conjunction with
other City Code provisions as the land use regulation application to the PUD. The final plan is intended only to add detail to and to put in final form
the information contained in the development stage plan and shall conform to the development stage plan in all respects.
2. Schedule:
a. Upon approval of the development stage plan, and within the time established in subsection D6 of this section, the applicant shall file with the City
a final plan consisting of the information and submissions required in subsection D of this section for the entire PUD or for one or more stages.
This plan will be reviewed and approved or denied by City staff, subject to appeal.
b. Within thirty (30) days of its approval, the applicant shall cause the final plan, or such portions thereof as are appropriate, to be recorded with the
Wright County Recorder. The applicant shall provide the City with a signed copy verifying County recording within forty (40) days of the date of
approval or the approval shall be null and void.
3. Building And Other Permits: Except as otherwise expressly provided herein, upon receiving notice from the City that the approved final plan has
been recorded and upon application of the applicant pursuant to the applicable provisions of this Code, the City may issue building and other permits
to the applicant for development, construction and other work in the area encompassed by the approved final plan; provided, however, that no such
permit shall be issued unless the City is first satisfied that the requirements of all codes and provisions of this Code which are applicable to the
permit sought, have been met.
4. Limitation Of Final Plan Approval: Within one year after the approval of a final plan for PUD, or such shorter time as may be established by the
approved development schedule, construction shall commence in accordance with such approved plan. Failure to commence construction within
such period shall, unless an extension shall have been granted as hereinafter provided, automatically render void the PUD permit and all approvals
of the PUD plan, and the area encompassed within the PUD shall thereafter be subject to those provisions of this title and other City Code provisions
applicable in the district in which it is located. In such cases, the City Council shall forthwith adopt an ordinance repealing the PUD permit and all
PUD approvals and reestablishing the zoning provisions and other provisions of this Code that would otherwise be applicable. The time limit
established may, at the discretion of the Council, be extended for not more than one year.
5. Inspections During Development:
a. Compliance With Overall Plan: Following final plan approval of a PUD, or a stage thereof, the City shall, at least annually until the completion of
the development, review all permits issued and construction undertaken and compare actual development with the approved development
schedule.
b. Failure To Follow Schedule Or Plan: If the City finds that development is not proceeding in accordance with the approved schedule, or that it fails
in any other respect to comply with the PUD plans as finally approved, the City shall either by ordinance revoke the PUD permit, and the land shall
thereafter be governed by the regulations applicable in the district in which it is located; or shall take such steps as it shall deem necessary to
compel compliance with the final plans as approved; or shall require the landowner or applicant to seek an amendment to the final plan. (Prior
Code § 20-36-4)
11-36-5: PROGRESS EVALUATION:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 345/497
If periodic review of a PUD project is included as a condition to the approval of a PUD permit, such a project shall be reviewed by the City Council. The
Council may, at its discretion, call a public hearing as part of its review. Notice of such hearing shall be given in the same manner as outlined in section 11-
36-4 of this chapter. (Prior Code § 20-36-5)
11-36-6: AMENDMENT OF PUD PERMIT:
A. Application Procedures: Any deviation or modification from the terms or conditions of an approved PUD permit or any alteration in a project for which a
PUD permit has been approved shall require an amendment of the original permit. An application for amendment of the original PUD permit specifying
the proposed variance or alteration shall be submitted to the City, together with a fee established by section 3-1-2 of this Code and such information as
is required by the City or as the applicant deems necessary to fully explain his application. Should the applicant request an amendment of a PUD
permit to erect an additional building or buildings, the applicant fee therefor shall be established by section 3-1-2 of this Code. In either case, the
applicant also shall pay, as an additional fee, any consulting expenses which are incurred by the City in review of the application. The same application
and hearing procedure for an amendment of a PUD permit shall be followed as was followed with respect to the applicant's initial request, as outlined in
section 11-36-4 of this chapter. (Prior Code § 20-36-6; amd. 2018 Code)
B. Action By Planning Commission And City Council: The same review procedure by the Planning Commission and City Council shall be followed for an
amendment of a PUD permit as was followed with respect to the applicant's initial request, outlined in section 11-36-4 of this chapter. The affirmative
vote of four-fifths (4/5) of the full Council shall be required for approval of an amendment of a PUD permit. (Prior Code § 20-36-6)
11-36-7: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Records: The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of all PUD permits issued by the City, including information on a project's permitted uses, all
pertinent project plans, any conditions imposed on a project by the City Council, and such other information as the Zoning Administrator may deem
appropriate.
B. Withdrawal Of Application: Any application under this chapter may be withdrawn by an applicant without prejudice at any time prior to final City Council
action thereon.
C. Financial Security To Assure Compliance: In order to ensure that all improvements contained in a PUD are completed in accordance with said plan and
to ensure that an applicant fully complies with all conditions of a PUD permit, the applicant may be required to post a letter of credit guaranteeing the
faithful performance of such work and compliance with such conditions. Such security shall be in a form satisfactory to the City, shall be in an amount
established by the City Council, and shall cover each segment or each phase of a PUD project. The amount of said security may be reduced or a
portion of said bond may be released as specific segments of each phase of development have been completed, upon approval by the City Council.
D. Conveyance Of Property Within A PUD Project: In the event that any real property within an approved PUD project is conveyed in total or in part, the
buyer(s) thereof shall be bound by all provisions of the PUD permit and the plan of development for that project. However, nothing in this title shall be
construed as to make such conveyed property nonconforming with regard to normal zoning standards as long as the conveyed property conforms with
the approved PUD permit and the plan of development for a project. (Prior Code § 20-36-7)
Chapter 37
SIGNS
11-37-1: FINDINGS, PURPOSE AND EFFECT:
A. Findings: The City Council hereby finds as follows:
1. Exterior signs have a substantial impact on the character and quality of the environment.
2. Signs provide an important medium through which individuals may convey a variety of messages.
3. Signs can create traffic hazards, aesthetic concerns and detriments to property values, thereby threatening the public health, safety and welfare.
4. This Code has included the regulation of signs in an effort to provide adequate means of expression and to promote the economic viability of the
business community, while protecting the City and its citizens from a proliferation of signs of a type, size, location and character that would adversely
impact the aesthetics of the community and threaten the health, safety and welfare of the community. The regulation of physical characteristics of
signs within the City has had a positive impact on traffic safety and the overall appearance of the community.
B. Purpose And Intent: It is not the purpose or intent of this chapter to regulate the message displayed on any sign; nor is it the purpose or intent of this
chapter to regulate any building design or any display not defined as a sign, or any sign which cannot be viewed from outside a building. The purpose
and intent of this chapter is to:
1. Regulate the number, location, size, type, illumination and other physical characteristics of signs within the City in order to promote the public health,
safety and welfare.
2. Maintain, enhance and improve the aesthetic environment of the City by preventing visual clutter that is harmful to the appearance of the community.
3. Improve the visual appearance of the City, while providing for effective means of communication, consistent with constitutional guarantees and the
City's goals of public safety and aesthetics.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 346/497
4. Provide for fair and consistent enforcement of the sign regulations set forth herein under the zoning authority of the City.
C. Effect: A sign may be erected, mounted, displayed or maintained in the City if it is in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. The effect of this
chapter, as more specifically set forth herein, is to:
1. Allow a wide variety of sign types in commercial zones and a more limited variety of signs in other zones, subject to the standards set forth in this
chapter.
2. Allow certain small, unobtrusive signs incidental to the principal use of a site in all zoning districts, subject to the standards set forth in this chapter.
3. Prohibit signs whose location, size, type, illumination or other physical characteristics negatively affect the environment and where the
communication can be accomplished by means having a lesser impact on the environment and the public health, safety and welfare.
4. Provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (Prior Code § 20-37-1)
11-37-2: SUBSTITUTION OF COPY:
The owner of any sign which is otherwise allowed by this chapter may substitute noncommercial copy in lieu of any other commercial or noncommercial
copy. This substitution of copy may be made without any additional approval or permitting. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent
favoring of commercial speech over noncommercial speech, or favoring of any particular noncommercial message over any other noncommercial
message. This provision prevails over any more specific provision to the contrary. (Prior Code § 20-37-2)
11-37-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. No signs, other than those of governmental jurisdictions, shall be permitted within public rights-of-way or roadway easements.
B. No sign or sign structure, unless otherwise regulated by this chapter, shall be closer to any lot line than ten feet (10'). On corner lots, no sign shall be
located within the visibility triangle required by section 11-16-4 of this title.
C. No sign shall be placed within any drainage or utility easement.
D. No signs, guys, stays or attachments shall be erected, placed or maintained on rocks, fences, or trees, nor interfere with any electric light, power,
telephone or telegraph wires or the supports thereof, with the exception of signs necessary for security, or to preserve public safety, as determined by
the City Council.
E. No sign shall be attached or be allowed to hang from any building until all necessary wall and roof attachments have been approved by the City building
official.
F. No sign shall be permitted to obstruct any window, door, fire escape, stairway or opening intended to provide light, air, ingress or egress of any building
or structure.
G. The installation of electrical signs shall be subject to the State Electrical Code. Electrical service to such sign shall be underground.
H. 1. Illuminated signs shall comply with section 11-16-6 of this title and shall be shielded to prevent lights from being directed onto residential property, or
at oncoming traffic in such brilliance that it impairs the vision of the driver. Nor shall such signs interfere with or obscure an official traffic sign or signal.
This includes indoor signs which are visible from public streets and highways.
2. No sign may be illuminated in any way so as to exceed a maximum intensity of five thousand (5,000) nits during daylight hours or five hundred (500)
nits from sunset to sunrise measured at the sign face at maximum brightness.
3. Signs using fluorescent, neon or incandescent light sources shall not exceed twelve (12) watts per square foot of sign surface area.
4. All signs installed after October 22, 2012, shall be equipped with a mechanism that automatically adjusts the brightness to ambient lighting
conditions to conform to the requirements of this chapter.
5. The owner of any illuminated sign shall provide certification as to compliance with subsections H2 and H3 of this section to the City upon request by
the Zoning Administrator.
I. Landscaping that accompanies signage must be approved by the Zoning Administrator with regards to installation, design and maintenance.
J. Signs and sign structures shall be properly maintained and kept in a safe condition. Sign or sign structures which are rotted, unsafe, deteriorated or
defaced, as determined by the City building official or Zoning Administrator, shall be removed, repainted, repaired, or replaced by the permit holder,
owner or agent of the property upon which the sign stands.
K. The owner, lessee or manager of any ground sign and the owner of the land on which the same is located shall keep grass or weeds and other growth
cut and debris and rubbish cleaned up and removed from the lot on which a sign is located. (Prior Code § 20-37-3)
11-37-4: PERMITTED AND PROHIBITED SIGNS:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 347/497
A. Permitted Signs: The following signs are allowed without issuance of a sign permit as provided by subsection 11-37-7A of this chapter:
1. In addition to the signs allowed by this section, two (2) signs not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet shall be allowed per lot.
2. In accordance with Minnesota Statutes section 211B.045, all noncommercial signs of any size may be posted in any number from August 1 until ten
(10) days following the Tuesday after the first Monday of November of each year.
3. Window signs shall be allowed subject to the sign area allowances of the respective zoning districts; provided, that the sign not exceed twenty five
percent (25%) of the total area of the window in which they are displayed.
4. Any signs in the public interest erected by, or on the order of public officers in the performance of their public duty, such as directional signs,
regulatory signs, warning signs, and informational signs and all warning signs posted by public utilities whether or not such signs are in the public
rights-of-way. (Prior Code § 20-37-4)
B. Prohibited Signs: The following signs are prohibited:
1. Any sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles any official traffic control device or railroad sign or signal,
or emergency vehicle signs, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any
official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal unless required by this chapter or this Code.
2. All signs over two hundred (200) square feet in area, except within the INS District.
3. Off premises signs.
4. Balloon signs.
5. Content classified as "obscene" as defined by Minnesota Statutes section 617.241.
6. Dynamic display signs, including but not limited to electronic changeable copy, electronic graphic display, and/or video display signs except as
specifically allowed by this chapter.
7. Flashing signs.
8. Motion signs.
9. Multivision signs.
10. Portable signs including signs on or attached to equipment such as vehicles, semi-truck trailers or other portable trailers where signing is a principal
use of the equipment on either a temporary or permanent basis.
11. Roof signs.
12. Rotating signs.
13. Shimmering signs.
14. Signs painted, attached or in any other manner affixed to trees or similar natural surfaces, or attached to utility poles, bridges, towers, or similar
public structures.
15. Only those signs installed at the direction of the Minnesota Department of Transportation, Wright County or the City of Otsego shall be located
within public rights-of-way. (Ord. 2018-02, 4-9-2018)
11-37-5: SIGNS IN ZONING DISTRICTS:
A. Regulations for agricultural zoning districts as defined by section 11-50-1 of this title are as follows: (Prior Code § 20-37-5)
1. All signs as outlined in subsection 11-37-4A of this chapter are allowed.
2. One sign is allowed; provided, that: (Prior Code § 20-37-5; amd. 2018 Code)
a. The area of the sign shall not exceed sixty four (64) square feet.
b. Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of eight feet (8').
3. In addition to the signs allowed by subsections A1 and A2 of this section, one sign shall be allowed subject to the following provisions:
a. The area of the sign shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet.
b. Freestanding signs shall not exceed a maximum height of eight feet (8').
c. The sign shall be displayed for not more than twenty one (21) days within a calendar year, except by interim use permit.
4. Forestry, nursery, greenhouse and tree farm uses shall be allowed the following signs:
a. Total Area: The total area of all signs displayed on a lot shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the total building facade fronting not more than
two (2) public streets. (Prior Code § 20-37-5)
b. Freestanding: Not more than one double sided freestanding sign is allowed. The sign area may not exceed one hundred (100) square feet each
side with a maximum height of twenty feet (20'); except, that for signs within the Freeway Corridor District, the sign area shall not exceed two
hundred (200) square feet each side with a maximum height of fifty feet (50'). (Prior Code § 20-37-5; amd. 2018 Code)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 348/497
c. Wall, Canopy Or Marquee: Wall, canopy, or marquee signs shall be permitted on one facade fronting a public street, except in the case of a corner
lot or through lot where wall signs may be installed on two (2) facades fronting a public street. The area of individual signs shall not exceed one
hundred (100) square feet; except, that for signs within the Freeway Corridor Districts, the area of signs installed on the facade of a principal
building fronting to a principal arterial roadway shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet.
B. Regulations for residential zoning districts as defined by section 11-50-1 of this title are as follows: (Prior Code § 20-37-5)
1. All signs as outlined in subsection 11-37-4A of this chapter are allowed.
2. One sign is allowed; provided, that: (Prior Code § 20-37-5; amd. 2018 Code)
a. The area of the sign shall not exceed sixty four (64) square feet.
b. Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of eight feet (8').
3. In addition to the signs allowed by subsections B1 and B2 of this section, one sign shall be allowed subject to the following provisions:
a. The area of the sign shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet.
b. Freestanding signs shall not exceed a maximum height of eight feet (8').
c. The sign shall be displayed for not more than twenty one (21) days within a calendar year, except by interim use permit.
C. Regulations for business and industrial zoning districts as defined by section 11-50-1 of this title are as follows:
1. Total Area: The total area of all signs displayed on a lot shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the total building facade fronting not more than two
(2) public streets.
2. Freestanding: Not more than one double sided freestanding sign. The sign area may not exceed one hundred (100) square feet each side with a
maximum height of twenty feet (20').
3. Wall, Canopy Or Marquee: Wall, canopy, or marquee signs shall be permitted on one facade fronting a public street, except in the case of a corner
lot or through lot where wall signs may be installed on two (2) facades fronting a public street with the area of individual signs shall not exceed one
hundred (100) square feet.
4. Multiple Principal Buildings And Multiple Tenant Buildings: When property is developed with two (2) or more principal buildings on one property or a
principal building has more than two (2) tenants each with an exclusive exterior entrance, signs shall be allowed subject to review and approval of
the Zoning Administrator based upon the following requirements:
a. A comprehensive sign plan is submitted that includes all of the following information:
(1) A site plan to scale showing the location of lot lines, buildings, structures, parking areas, existing and proposed signs and any other physical
features of the area included within the proposed comprehensive sign plan.
(2) Elevations to scale of buildings included within the comprehensive sign plan including the location of existing or proposed wall, canopy or
marquee signs.
(3) To scale plans for all existing and proposed signs of any type included within the comprehensive sign plan indicating area, dimensions, height,
materials, colors and means of illumination (if any).
(4) No permit shall be issued for a new or replacement sign for an individual use except upon a determination by the Zoning Administrator that it is
consistent with the approved comprehensive sign plan for the site.
b. One temporary sign as provided by subsection C6c of this section shall be allowed for each tenant; provided, that only one such sign per property
is displayed at any time.
5. Adjoining Properties: Separate commercial and industrial uses on adjoining properties with a common lot line may each locate a sign on one
freestanding structure subject to approval by the Zoning Administrator; provided, that:
a. The area of each of the individual business signs shall be consistent with the applicable district provisions in this subsection C.
b. The height of the freestanding sign may be increased by ten feet (10') above the applicable district provisions in this subsection C.
c. The maximum number of signs displayed on a single structure is two (2).
d. No additional freestanding signs shall be displayed on the individual properties except secondary freestanding signs as may be allowed by
subsection C6 of this section.
e. An agreement addressing construction, maintenance, and repair responsibilities and access rights is established and filed with the Wright County
Recorder against the titles of the two (2) properties involved in the collocated freestanding sign prior to issuance of a sign permit. Amendment or
cancellation of the agreement shall be allowed only upon written approval by the Zoning Administrator.
6. Additional Signs:
a. One additional double sided freestanding sign shall be allowed for lots abutting an arterial or collector street but to which there is no driveway
access subject to the following:
(1) The sign shall be located in a yard abutting the street to which the lot has access.
(2) The maximum area of the sign shall be sixty four (64) square feet.
(3) The maximum height of the sign shall be fifteen feet (15').
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 349/497
b. Additional double sided sign(s) shall be allowed subject to the following:
(1) The maximum area of the sign shall be four (4) square feet.
(2) The maximum height of the sign shall be three feet (3').
(3) The signs shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from front and side lot lines and spaced a minimum of fifteen feet (15') between signs.
c. One sign shall be allowed on a temporary basis subject to the following provisions:
(1) The area of the sign shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet.
(2) Freestanding signs shall not exceed a maximum height of eight feet (8').
(3) The sign shall be displayed for not more than twenty one (21) days within one calendar year, except by interim use permit.
D. Regulations for institutional zoning districts as defined by section 11-50-1 of this title are as follows: (Prior Code § 20-37-5)
1. All signs as outlined in subsection 11-37-4A of this chapter are allowed.
2. Not more than one double sided freestanding sign is allowed. Sign area may not exceed one hundred (100) square feet each side with a maximum
height of twenty feet (20'). (Prior Code § 20-37-5; amd. 2018 Code)
3. Wall, canopy, or marquee signs shall be permitted on any facade fronting a public street. There shall be no limit as to the area of individual signs.
(Prior Code § 20-37-5)
4. In addition to the signs allowed by subsections D1, D2, and D3 of this section, one sign shall be allowed subject to the following provisions: (Prior
Code § 20-37-5; amd. 2018 Code)
a. The area of the sign shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet.
b. Freestanding signs shall not exceed a maximum height of eight feet (8').
c. The sign shall be displayed for not more than twenty one (21) days within one calendar year, except by interim use permit. (Prior Code § 20-37-5)
11-37-6: SPECIAL USE REGULATIONS:
A. Area Identification Signs: Signs at the entrance to an area or subdivision from collector or arterial street defined by the Otsego Comprehensive Plan
shall be allowed; provided, that:
1. Not more than one sign shall be allowed at each entrance from a collector or arterial street.
2. a. For agricultural and residential districts, the area of each sign shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet.
b. For business, industrial or institutional districts, the area of each sign shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet.
3. a. For agricultural and residential districts, the maximum height of each sign shall be eight feet (8').
b. For business, industrial and institutional districts, the maximum height of each sign shall be twelve feet (12').
4. Signs shall be located on outlots of sufficient size and area to accommodate said structure. An association or other form of deed restriction and
ownership deemed acceptable by the City Council and involving all the properties within the designated area shall be required, which shall own and
be responsible for the upkeep, perpetual maintenance, taxes, insurance, utilities and other costs associated with the sign(s) and the outlot upon
which it is located. The association rules or bylaws, or similar legal document, shall specify how the aforementioned sign responsibilities will be
delegated and paid for. Such legal document shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Attorney.
5. Outlots for signs shall be considered and planned for at the time of preliminary plat application and be included in the final plat. The subdivision
development contract between the City and the developer shall specify the designated use of the outlot, its ownership and the respective
responsibilities regarding the outlot.
6. The outlot area around the sign shall be landscaped in such a manner to accent and enhance the sign while remaining sensitive to the natural
features of the site. Detailed site and landscape plans shall be included with each sign permit application and shall be subject to City Council review
and comment.
7. The design and construction of area identification signs shall be done with the highest quality materials and workmanship to keep maintenance and
upkeep costs to a minimum and to minimize the potential for vandalism. Area identification signs are to be aesthetically pleasing when designed and
constructed. The sign shall be compatible with nearby structures in the area. Detailed construction plans and a materials list shall be included with
each sign permit application and shall be subject to City Council review and approval.
8. The City reserves the right to require the removal, at the owner's expense, of any sign when the requirements of this section are not completely
followed and adhered to, or if the sign is not properly maintained or falls into a state of disrepair. The City shall not have any obligation or liability to
replace any sign when removed by the City.
B. Motor Fuel Station: Signs for motor fuel stations shall be regulated by the sign provisions for the zoning district in which the station is located; except,
that a sign not to exceed thirty two (32) square feet shall be allowed to display current fuel prices in accordance with Minnesota State Statutes section
239.751.
C. Planned Unit Development District: Within a Planned Unit Development District as defined by section 11-50-1 of this title, sign allowances shall be
based upon the individual uses and structures within the development in compliance with the standards applied for the conventional zoning district
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 350/497
where such uses are allowed. (Prior Code § 20-37-6)
D. Changeable Copy Signs:
1. For commercial and industrial uses, one sign with a maximum area of forty (40) square feet of changeable copy (but not including electronic
changeable copy signs) shall be allowed per site, provided that the changeable copy area of the sign is integrated into the allowed freestanding sign
for the respective zoning district.
2. Within the INS District, one dynamic display sign may be allowed provided that:
a. Operation: The operation of the electronic sign shall require issuance of a license pursuant to title 4, chapter 11 of this Code.
b. Location:
(1) The sign shall be displayed only in a yard abutting an arterial, residential collector, or commercial/industrial collector street as defined by the
Comprehensive Plan.
(2) The sign shall be set back a minimum of fifty feet (50') from any side or rear lot line abutting a residential district.
c. Sign Structure:
(1) The electronic dynamic display shall be incorporated as part of the freestanding sign allowed by subsection 11-37-5D of this chapter.
(2) The sign including the dynamic display element shall be a monument sign constructed as follows with a base extending horizontally for a
minimum of the entire width of the sign face; the sign base and supporting material constructed of stone, brick, or decorative masonry shall be
equal to at least forty percent (40%) of the total sign area, but shall not be counted toward the sign area and shall not contain any sign copy.
(3) The total height of the sign structure including the base shall not exceed sixteen feet (16'). (Ord. 2018-02, 4-9-2018)
E. Time And Temperature Sign: Within commercial and industrial zoning districts, an area not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet within a freestanding or
wall sign shall be allowed for display of an electronic time and temperature sign subject to the sign provisions for the zoning district in which the sign is
located and Minnesota Statutes section 173.16, subdivision 3.
F. Freeway Corridor District: Uses within business and industrial districts located within the Freeway Corridor District defined by this subsection shall be
allowed the following signs:
1. Boundaries:
a. I-94 Corridor: The Freeway Corridor District surrounding the I-94 corridor shall include those parcels located within two thousand six hundred forty
feet (2,640') of the I-94 right-of-way.
b. TH 101 Corridor: The Freeway Corridor District surrounding the TH 101 corridor shall include those parcels meeting at least one of the following
criteria:
(1) Land located within six hundred sixty feet (660') of the right-of-way for TH 101 or land within that area between the rights-of-way of Quaday
Avenue and TH 101 and lands between the rights-of-way of Queens Avenue and TH 101, whichever is more restrictive.
(2) Those lots abutting the east right-of-way line of Queens Avenue between 53rd Street (CSAH 36) and 70th Street (CSAH 37). (Prior Code § 20-
37-6)
(3) Those lots developed with convenience food, hotel, motor fuel and restaurant uses located between the rights-of-way of Parrish Avenue, River
Road and Quaday Avenue west of TH 101 or located between the rights-of-way of River Road and Queens Avenue east of TH 101. (Prior Code
§ 20-37-6; amd. 2018 Code)
2. Sign Area: The total area of all signs displayed on a lot shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the total building facade fronting not more than two
(2) public streets. (Prior Code § 20-37-6)
3. Freestanding Sign:
a. One double sided freestanding sign shall be allowed subject to the following: (Prior Code § 20-37-6; amd. 2018 Code)
(1) The maximum area of the sign shall be two hundred (200) square feet each side.
(2) The maximum height of the sign shall be:
(A) Fifty feet (50'); or
(B) Seventy feet (70') or twenty feet (20') above the elevation of the nearest interchange with TH 101 for properties with an elevation below the
elevation of TH 101 measured at the centerline of the right-of-way perpendicular to the sign location, whichever is less. (Prior Code § 20-37-6)
b. One additional double sided freestanding sign shall be allowed subject to the following: (Prior Code § 20-37-6; amd. 2018 Code)
(1) The sign shall be located in a yard abutting the street to which the lot has access.
(2) The maximum area of the sign shall be sixty four (64) square feet.
(3) The maximum height of the sign shall be fifteen feet (15').
4. Wall, Canopy Or Marquee:
a. Wall, canopy, or marquee sign(s) shall be permitted on one facade, except in the case of a corner lot or through lot where wall signs may be
installed on two (2) facades.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 351/497
b. The area of individual signs shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet.
5. Area Identification Signs: One sign located in a yard abutting the TH 101 or I-94 rights-of-way shall be allowed for a minimum of three (3) or more
lots all of which are located within the Freeway Corridor District; provided, that:
a. The sign is allowed in lieu of individual signs as provided by subsection F3a of this section.
b. The maximum area of each sign shall not exceed three hundred twenty (320) square feet.
c. The maximum height of the sign shall be:
(1) Fifty feet (50'); or
(2) Seventy feet (70') or twenty feet (20') above the elevation of the nearest interchange with TH 101 for properties with an elevation below the
elevation of TH 101 measured at the centerline of the right-of-way perpendicular to the sign location, whichever is less.
d. Signs shall be located on outlots or within private easements of sufficient size and area to accommodate said structure.
e. An association or other form of deed restriction and ownership deemed acceptable by the City Attorney and recorded with the title of each property
within the designated area prior to issuance of a sign permit shall be required, which shall own and be responsible for the upkeep, perpetual
maintenance, taxes, insurance, utilities and other costs associated with the sign(s) and the outlot upon which it is located. The association rules or
bylaws, or similar legal document, shall specify how the aforementioned sign responsibilities will be delegated and paid for. (Prior Code § 20-37-6)
11-37-7: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; INSPECTION AND REMOVAL:
A. Permit Required; Exceptions: Except as provided in subsection 11-37-4A of this chapter, no sign or structure shall be erected, constructed, altered,
rebuilt or relocated until a permit has first been issued by the Zoning Administrator.
1. Application For Permit: The following information for a sign permit shall be supplied by an applicant upon submission of a sign permit application:
a. Name, address and telephone number of the person making the application.
b. Name, address and telephone number of the person owning the sign.
c. Name, address, telephone number and signature of the person owning the property upon which the sign is to be located.
d. A site plan to scale showing the location of lot lines, building structures, parking areas, existing and proposed signs and any other physical
features.
e. Plans, location and specifications and method of construction and attachment to the buildings or placement method in the ground.
f. Landscape plans for area around signs.
g. Written consent of the owner or lessee of any site on which the sign is to be erected.
h. Any electrical permit required and issued for the sign.
i. Future maintenance plans.
j. Sign value.
k. The applicant shall certify that the application is in full compliance with this title and all other applicable provisions of this Code.
2. Processing Of And Action On Permit:
a. Within fifteen (15) working days of receiving an application for a sign permit, the Zoning Administrator shall review it for completeness. If the
application is complete, it shall then be processed. If the Zoning Administrator finds that it is incomplete, the Zoning Administrator shall, within such
fifteen (15) working day period, send to the applicant a notice of the specific ways in which the application is deficient, with appropriate references
to the applicable sections of this title and/or this Code.
b. Upon receipt of a complete application, the Zoning Administrator shall review and comment upon the application and shall either:
(1) Issue the sign permit, if the sign(s) that is the subject of the application conforms in every respect with the requirements of this title and this
Code.
(2) Reject the sign permit if the sign(s) that is the subject of the application fails in any way to conform with the requirements of this title and this
Code.
c. In case of a rejection, the building official shall specify in the rejection the section or sections of this title and/or this Code with which the sign(s) is
inconsistent.
d. If the work authorized under a permit has not been initiated within sixty (60) days after the date of issuance, the permit shall be null and void.
3. Permit Fees: Fees for the review and processing of sign permit applications shall be imposed in accordance with section 3-1-2 of this Code.
B. Inspections: All signs shall be subject to inspection by the Zoning Administrator and/or building official.
C. Removal Of Signs:
1. The Zoning Administrator and/or building official shall order the removal of any illegal nonconforming sign erected or maintained in violation of this
title. Notice in writing shall be given by the City to the owner of such sign, or of the building, structure or property on which such sign is located, to
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 352/497
remove the sign or to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this chapter within fifteen (15) days from the date of said notice.
2. Upon failure to remove the sign or to comply with this notice, the City may remove the sign. Any costs of removal incurred by the City shall be
assessed to the owner of the property on which such sign is located and may be collected in the manner of ordinary debt or in the manner of taxes,
and all costs shall be assessed against the property.
3. The Zoning Administrator and/or building official may order the immediate removal of any sign without notice which is in violation of the following:
a. Signs located within the public right-of-way.
b. Temporary signs that have exceeded the time limits allowed in this chapter.
c. The condition of the sign is such as to present an immediate threat to the safety of the public. (Prior Code § 20-37-7)
11-37-8: NONCONFORMING SIGNS AND USES:
A. Nonconforming Signs: Any nonconforming on premises sign lawfully existing upon the effective date hereof may be continued at the size and in the
manner existing upon such date, subject to the following provisions:
1. Maintenance And Repair: Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as relieving the owner or user of a legal nonconforming sign or owner of the
property on which the legal nonconforming sign is located from the provisions of this chapter regarding safety, maintenance, and repair of signs;
provided, that any repainting, cleaning, and other normal maintenance or repair of the sign or sign structure shall not modify the sign structure or
copy in any way which makes it more nonconforming or the sign shall lose its legal nonconforming status. Illegal, nonconforming signs shall be
removed by the property owner within ten (10) days of notice from the City.
2. Prohibited Alterations: A nonconforming sign may not be:
a. Structurally altered except to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
b. Enlarged.
c. Reestablished after its removal or discontinuance.
d. Repaired or otherwise restored, unless the damage is to less than fifty percent (50%) of the sign structure value as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.
e. Replaced (applies to structure only and not message).
B. Nonconforming Uses: When the principal use of land is legally nonconforming under this title, all existing or proposed signs in conjunction with that land,
unless otherwise provided by this title or this Code, shall be considered conforming if they are in compliance with the sign provisions for the zoning
district in which the principal use is allowed. (Prior Code § 20-37-8)
Chapter 38
BUILDING RELOCATION
11-38-1: REVIEW PROCESS:
The relocation of any building or structure on a lot or onto another lot within the City shall be subject to the processing requirements, regulations and
conditions of chapter 4, "Administration - Conditional Use Permits", of this title as well as section 11-38-3 of this chapter. (Prior Code § 20-38-1)
11-38-2: EXEMPTIONS:
The following are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
A. Relocations which occur solely within the confines of a single lot or parcel.
B. Manufactured homes within manufactured home parks.
C. Prefabricated and industrialized/modular buildings as defined by the Minnesota State Building Code being relocated to their first permanent building
site. (Prior Code § 20-38-2)
11-38-3: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
The following performance standards shall apply: (Prior Code § 20-38-3)
A. Upon relocation, the building shall comply with the applicable requirements of the Minnesota State Building Code. (Prior Code § 20-38-3; amd. 2018
Code)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 353/497
B. The proposed relocated building shall comply with the character of the neighborhood in which it is being relocated as determined by the City Council.
C. The relocated use will not result in a depreciation of neighborhood or adjacent property values.
D. The relocated structure shall be similar to the market valuation of adjacent principal structures as determined by the City or County Assessor.
E. The relocated structure shall be ready for occupancy within six (6) months from the date of location on the site. (Prior Code § 20-38-3)
11-38-4: PERFORMANCE SECURITY:
A performance security shall be provided to the City as specified in section 11-4-7 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-38-4)
Chapter 39
RESERVED
Chapter 40
RESERVED
Chapter 41
RESERVED
Chapter 42
RESERVED
Chapter 43
RESERVED
Chapter 44
RESERVED
Chapter 45
RESERVED
Chapter 46
RESERVED
Chapter 47
RESERVED
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 354/497
Chapter 48
RESERVED
Chapter 49
RESERVED
Chapter 50
GENERAL ZONING DISTRICT PROVISIONS
11-50-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
In order to classify, regulate and restrict the location of trade and industry and the location of buildings designated for specific uses, to protect residential
uses, to regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings hereafter erected or altered, to regulate and limit the intensity of the use of lot areas, and to
regulate and determine the areas of yards, recreation and open space within and surrounding such buildings, the City is hereby divided into zoning
districts. The use, height and area regulations shall be uniform in each district, and said districts shall be known as:
Agricultural Districts:
A-1 Agricultural-Rural Service District
A-2 Agricultural-Long Range Urban Service District (General)
Residential Districts:
R-C Residential-Rural Open Space Cluster District
R-1 Residential-Long Range Urban Service District (River Frontage)
R-2 Residential-Long Range Urban Service District (Large Lot)
R-3 Residential-Long Range Urban Service District (General)
R-4A Residential-Suburban Single-Family District
R-4 Residential-Urban Single-Family District
R-5 Residential-Single- and Two-Family District
R-6 Residential-Medium Density District
R-7 Residential-High Density District
R-MH Manufactured Housing Residential District
Business Districts:
B-1 Transition Business District
B-2 Highway Commercial District
B-3 General Business District
B-4 Business Office District
Industrial Districts:
I-1 Limited Industrial District
I-2 General Industrial District
I-3 Special Industrial District
Special Districts:
INS Institutional District
PUD Planned Unit Development District
S Shoreland Management Overlay District
W Wetlands Overlay District
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 355/497
FP Floodplain Overlay District
WSRR Wild and Scenic Recreational River District
HPS Heritage Preservation Sites
(Prior Code § 20-50-1; amd. 2018 Code)
11-50-2: DETERMINATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
Zoning district boundary lines established by this title generally follow lot lines, the centerlines of railroad right-of-way lines, street rights-of-way,
watercourses or the corporate limit lines, all as they exist upon the effective date hereof.
A. Appeals concerning the exact location of a zoning district boundary line shall be heard by the City Council serving as the Board of Adjustment and
Appeals pursuant to chapter 7 of this title.
B. Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the City, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley or
public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation, and all area included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to
all appropriate regulations of the extended districts.
C. All streets, alleys, public ways and railroad rights-of-way, if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the
property in the most restrictive classification immediately abutting upon such alleys, streets, public ways or railroad rights-of-way. Where the centerline
of a street, alley, public way or railroad right-of-way serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such areas, unless otherwise specifically designated,
shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such centerline.
D. All areas within the corporate limits of the City which are under water and which are not shown as included within any zone shall be subject to all
regulations of the zone which immediately adjoins such water area. If such water area adjoins two (2) or more zones, the boundaries of each zone shall
be construed to be extended into the water area in a straight line until they meet the other district at the half-way point and/or to the corporate limits.
(Prior Code § 20-50-2)
11-50-3: ZONING MAP:
The location and boundaries of the districts established by this chapter are hereby set forth on the Zoning Map entitled "Zoning Map of Otsego". Said map
shall be on file with the Zoning Administrator, and hereinafter referred to as the "Zoning Map". Said map and all the notations, references and other
information shown thereon shall have the same force and effect as if fully set forth herein and thereby made a part of this title by reference. (Prior Code
§ 20-50-3)
11-50-4: ZONING OF ANNEXED LAND:
All territory hereafter annexed to the City which is not shown on the Zoning Map shall automatically upon annexation be classified within the A-1 District
and shall be subject to all regulations, notations, references and conditions as are applicable to said district until such time that a determination may be
made as to the proper district classification for such territory and an amendment can be made to that effect. (Prior Code § 20-50-4)
Chapter 51
A-1 AGRICULTURAL-RURAL SERVICE DISTRICT
11-51-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The A-1 Agricultural-Rural Service District is established for the purpose of preserving, promoting, maintaining and enhancing the use of land for
commercial agricultural purposes, to prevent scattered and leap frog urbanization and non-farm growth, to protect and preserve natural resource areas,
and to stabilize increases in public expenditures for such public services as roads and road maintenance, police and fire protection, and schools. The A-1
Agricultural District is further intended to govern and implement the Rural Service District as established by the Comprehensive Plan. (Prior Code § 20-51-
1)
11-51-2: PERMITTED USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted uses in an A-1 District:
A. Essential services as regulated by chapter 32 of this title.
B. Farms, farmsteads, farming and agricultural related buildings and structures subject to Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, but not including animal
feedlots or other commercial operations.
C. Forestry, nurseries, greenhouses, and tree farms, excluding retail sales.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 356/497
D. Hobby farms.
E. Personal wireless service antennas located upon a public structure, as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
F. Public parks, playgrounds, recreational uses, wildlife areas and game refuges.
G. Residential care facilities serving six (6) or fewer persons.
H. Single-family detached dwellings at a density of not more than one dwelling unit per quarter-quarter section located on limited agricultural production
land.
I. Temporary seasonal stands for the sale of agricultural products restricted to farms as regulated by section 11-25-7 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-51-2;
amd. 2018 Code)
11-51-3: INTERIM USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are interim uses in the A-1 District and are governed by chapter 5 of this title:
A. Excavation for transport or importation of fill operations of more than fifty (50) cubic yards not related to an approved subdivision or site plan; provided,
that:
1. The use will be in compliance with the provisions of chapters 23 and 24 of this title and other provisions of this Code.
2. The interim use permit shall terminate at a date determined by the City Council to be adequate to allow for completion of the operation based upon:
a. The quantity of material to be removed and the plan of operation.
b. Compatibility with present and future land uses in the area.
c. Compliance with the requirements of this title and conditions specific to the interim use permit approval.
B. Extended home business as regulated by chapter 29 of this title.
C. Non-farm related seasonal produce sales as a principal use; provided, that:
1. Retail produce sales may only be conducted on the subject site between April 1 and October 31 of any given year.
2. The sales area devoted to produce not grown on the subject site shall be limited to not more than ten percent (10%) of the gross floor area of the
principal use.
3. The area devoted to retail sales of nonproduce goods shall be limited to not more than five percent (5%) of the gross floor area of the principal use.
4. Municipal sanitary sewer and water service is not presently available to the subject site.
5. The use has frontage to an arterial or collector street and direct access from a paved City street.
6. Adequate off street parking space and surface is provided and no parking related to such sales occurs on the public right-of-way.
7. Signs:
a. Are located only on the subject site and are not more than one hundred feet (100') from the point of sale.
b. Are limited to no more than two (2) structures totaling not more than sixteen (16) square feet.
c. Are erected and removed daily and are not to be displayed at times when the sales operation is closed. (Prior Code § 20-51-3; amd. 2018 Code)
11-51-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted accessory uses in the A-1 District:
A. Fences.
B. Home occupations as regulated by chapter 28 of this title.
C. In home daycare serving fourteen (14) or fewer persons in a single-family detached dwelling.
D. Operation and storage of such vehicles, equipment and machinery which are incidental and customary to permitted or conditional uses allowed in this
district.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 357/497
E. Private garages, parking spaces and carports for licensed and operable passenger cars and trucks.
F. Private recreational vehicles and equipment.
G. Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs, short wave radio dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the
operation of household electronic equipment including radio receivers, Federal licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers, as regulated
by chapter 33 of this title.
H. Tool houses, sheds and similar buildings for storage of domestic and farm supplies and noncommercial recreational equipment. (Prior Code § 20-51-4)
11-51-5: CONDITIONAL USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are conditional uses allowed in an A-1 District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon
procedures set forth in and regulated by chapter 4 of this title.)
A. Cemeteries; provided, that:
1. The site accesses on a major collector.
2. The site is landscaped in accordance with chapter 19 of this title.
3. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
B. Commercial outdoor recreation; provided, that:
1. The land upon which such use is to be located is marginal in terms of agricultural production.
2. The use will not negatively impact neighboring farming operations or residential uses.
3. The potential traffic generated by such use can be adequately accommodated (both volume and weight) upon the City streets serving the property
upon which the use is located.
4. Adequate, improved off street parking is provided.
5. The amount of land devoted to buildings is minimized to the extent possible but in no case shall exceed five percent (5%) of the lot area up to a
maximum of four thousand (4,000) square feet.
6. An adequate septic system and well can be established on the site and which, if the use is approved, shall be subject to applicable provisions of this
Code.
7. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
C. Commercial riding stables, dog kennels, animal hospitals with overnight care and similar uses; provided, that:
1. The provisions of chapter 27 of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
2. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
D. Governmental and public regulated utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the City; provided, that:
1. When abutting a residential use in a residential use district, the property is screened and landscaped in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
2. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
E. Mining, sand and gravel extraction, land reclamation and alteration; provided, that:
1. The use will be in compliance with the provisions of chapters 23 and 24 of this title or other applicable provisions of this Code.
2. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
F. Personal wireless service towers and antennas not located on a public structure as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
G. Residential lot sizes larger than two and one-half (21/2) acres for lots of record and preliminary platted lots established prior to October 14, 2002;
provided, that:
1. All other applicable provisions of subsection 11-51-8A of this chapter are met.
2. The lot size expansion is the result of:
a. Existing buildings occupying an area larger than the lot size minimum.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 358/497
b. The land involved in the subdivision is nontillable and marginal for use in agricultural production.
3. In no case shall the lot area exceed ten (10) acres.
4. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and satisfactorily met.
H. Single-family residential development rights may be transferred to property under the same ownership for the purpose of preserving productive
farmlands; provided, that:
1. All single-family lots resulting from the transfer conform to the minimum standards established for this district with regards to lot area, dimensions,
setbacks and frontage on a public road.
2. Single-family residential lots are clustered or grouped in a contiguous fashion, except in cases where such clusters may disrupt agricultural activities
as determined by the City Council.
3. The quarter-quarter section or contiguous forty (40) acres from which the development rights are transferred have frontage on a public road.
4. Each quarter-quarter section or contiguous forty (40) acres shall contain no more than one cluster or grouping of single-family residential lots.
5. The cluster or grouping of single-family residential lots does not adversely affect the adjacent properties.
6. If a quarter-quarter section or contiguous forty (40) acres does not have frontage on a public road, but is part of a larger parcel which does have
frontage on a public road, then the residential development rights of said quarter-quarter section or contiguous forty (40) acres may be transferred to
the parcel which has public road frontage.
7. A deed restriction shall be placed upon the quarter-quarter section or contiguous forty (40) acres from which the development rights have been
transferred to prohibit additional development.
8. The average density of one dwelling unit per forty (40) acres is maintained over the area affected by the transfer.
9. The purpose of allowing such transfers is to preserve productive farmlands, and the Planning Commission shall consider the effects and advisability
of the transfer(s) on the environment, the surrounding neighborhood and nearby farm operations during its deliberation.
10. The single-family residential lots are capable of accommodating a private well and septic system.
11. The division is processed according to the City's subdivision ordinance.
12. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and are determined to be satisfied. (Prior Code § 20-51-5)
11-51-6: LOT AREA, DENSITY, AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an A-1 District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this
title:
A. Lot Area, Width And Depth:
Lots Of Record And Preliminary Platted Lots Established Prior To October 14,
2002
Lots Of Record After October 14,
2002
Minimum lot area
1 acre 20 acres
Maximum lot area
2.5 acres None
Minimum lot width
150 feet 450 feet
Minimum lot depth
150 feet None
B. Density: Not greater than one dwelling per forty (40) acres.
C. Principal Structure Setbacks:
1. Front yard:
Setbacks From Centerline
Setbacks From
Right-Of-Way Lines
Arterial/major collector street 130 feet 65 feet
Local street 65 feet 35 feet
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 359/497
2. Side yards:
a. Interior: Ten feet (10').
b. Corner: As required for the front yard.
3. Rear yard:
a. Interior: Fifty feet (50').
b. Through lot: As required for the front yard.
D. Accessory Structure Setbacks: Accessory structure setbacks are as regulated by section 11-18-2 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-51-6)
11-51-7: BUILDING HEIGHT:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an A-1 District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this
title:
A. The maximum height of all principal buildings shall not exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories or forty five feet (45').
B. Accessory structures shall be governed by subsection 11-18-2F of this title. (Prior Code § 20-51-7)
11-51-8: QUARTER-QUARTER RESIDENTIAL DIVISIONS:
In a complete quarter-quarter section which contains no dwellings, one parcel may be subdivided, the division to be used as a residential site; provided,
that:
A. The division shall conform to all the lot area, density, and setback requirements of section 11-51-6 of this chapter.
B. A deed restriction shall be placed upon parcels that have exercised development rights to prohibit additional subdivision, unless it is rezoned.
C. The initial quarter-quarter section is under common ownership.
D. The division is processed in accordance with the City's subdivision ordinance.
E. The site is capable of accommodating a private well and septic system. (Prior Code § 20-51-8)
Chapter 52
A-2 AGRICULTURAL-LONG RANGE URBAN SERVICE DISTRICT (GENERAL)
11-52-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the A-2 District is to provide suitable areas of the City to be retained and utilized for low density residential, open space, and/or agricultural
uses and to prevent rapid urbanization and provide economy in public expenditures. The A-2 District is further intended to govern and implement the long
range urban service area of the City as defined by the Comprehensive Plan. (Prior Code § 20-52-1)
11-52-2: PERMITTED USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted uses in the A-2 District:
A. Essential services.
B. Farms, farmsteads, farming and agricultural related buildings and structures subject to Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, but not including animal
feedlots or other commercial operations.
C. Forestry, nurseries, greenhouses, and tree farms excluding retail sales.
D. Hobby farms.
E. Personal wireless service antennas located upon a public structure, as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 360/497
F. Public parks, playgrounds, recreational uses, wildlife areas and game refuges.
G. Residential care facilities serving six (6) or fewer persons.
H. Single-family detached dwellings at a density of not more than four (4) dwelling units per forty (40) acres of land. (Prior Code § 20-52-2)
11-52-3: INTERIM USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are interim uses in the A-2 District and are governed by chapter 5 of this title:
A. Excavation for transport or importation of fill of more than fifty (50) cubic yards not related to an approved subdivision or site plan; provided, that:
1. The use will be in compliance with the provisions of chapters 23 and 24 of this title and other provisions of this Code.
2. The interim use permit shall terminate at a date determined by the City Council to be adequate to allow for completion of the operation based upon:
a. The quantity of material to be removed and the plan of operation.
b. Compatibility with present and future land uses in the area.
c. Compliance with the requirements of this title and conditions specific to the interim use permit approval.
B. Extended home business as regulated by chapter 29 of this title.
C. Farm wineries with tasting rooms. (Prior Code § 20-52-3; amd. 2018 Code)
11-52-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted accessory uses in the A-2 District:
A. Fences.
B. Home occupations as regulated by chapter 28 of this title.
C. In home daycare serving fourteen (14) or fewer persons in a single-family detached dwelling.
D. Operation and storage of such vehicles, equipment and machinery which are incidental and customary to permitted or conditional uses allowed in this
district.
E. Private garages, parking spaces and carports for licensed and operable passenger cars and trucks.
F. Private recreational vehicles and equipment.
G. Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs, short wave radio dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the
operation of household electronic equipment including radio receivers, Federal licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers, as regulated
by chapter 33 of this title.
H. Tool houses, sheds and similar buildings for storage of domestic and farm supplies and noncommercial recreational equipment. (Prior Code § 20-52-4)
11-52-5: CONDITIONAL USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are conditional uses allowed in an A-2 District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon
procedures set forth in and regulated by chapter 4 of this title.)
A. Cemeteries; provided, that:
1. At minimum, the site accesses on a major collector.
2. The site is landscaped in accordance with chapter 19 of this title.
3. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 361/497
B. Commercial outdoor recreational areas including golf courses and country clubs, swimming pools and similar facilities; provided, that:
1. The principal use, function or activity is open and outdoor in character.
2. Not more than five percent (5%) of the land area up to a maximum of four thousand (4,000) square feet of the site shall be covered by buildings or
structures.
3. The use will not negatively impact abutting or neighboring existing or potential residential uses.
4. When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the property is screened and landscaped in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
5. The traffic generated by the use can be adequately accommodated (both volume and weight) upon the City streets serving the property upon which
the use is located.
6. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
C. Governmental and public regulated utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the City; provided, that:
1. When abutting a residential use in a residential use district, the property is screened and landscaped in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
2. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
D. Mining, sand and gravel extraction, land reclamation and alteration; provided, that:
1. The use will be in compliance with the provisions of chapters 23 and 24 of this title and other applicable provisions of this Code.
2. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
E. Personal wireless service towers and antennas not located on a public structure as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
F. Residential development density rights may be transferred to property under the same ownership for the purpose of preserving productive farmlands;
provided, that:
1. Lots conform to the minimum standards established for this district.
2. The parcels are clustered in a contiguous fashion, except in cases where such clusters may disrupt agricultural activities.
3. Each cluster shall not contain more than eight (8) residential parcels.
4. The cluster does not adversely affect the adjacent properties.
5. A deed restriction shall be placed upon the parcels from which the development rights have been transferred to prohibit additional development.
6. The average density of four (4) dwelling units per forty (40) acres is maintained over the area affected.
7. The purpose of allowing such transfers is to preserve productive farmlands, and the Planning Commission shall consider the effects and advisability
of the transfer(s) on the environment, the surrounding neighborhood and nearby farm operations during its deliberation.
8. The sites are capable of accommodating a private well and septic system.
9. The division is processed according to the City subdivision ordinance.
10. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and satisfactorily met.
G. Residential lot sizes less than twenty (20) acres in area and less than four hundred fifty feet (450') in width for lots established after October 14, 2002;
provided, that:
1. There is compliance with all other applicable requirements of section 11-52-6 of this chapter.
2. A concept plan utilizing all development rights allowed by subsection 11-52-6B of this chapter is submitted and recorded with the subdivision.
3. Lots are to be clustered and the overall subdivision designed in such a manner so as to provide for logical future street and utility extensions.
4. No lot shall be less than one acre in size or one hundred fifty feet (150') in width.
5. The maximum lot size for clustered lots in the urban service reserve area shall be two and one-half (2.5) acres, except if one of the following
conditions is met:
a. Topography, soils, wetlands, or other natural features dictate a larger minimum lot area.
b. The location of existing buildings cannot be fully accommodated in compliance with applicable setback requirements of subsection 11-52-6C of
this chapter.
c. One development right as allowed by subsection 11-52-6B of this chapter is used for a dwelling located on the parent parcel outside of the
residential cluster.
6. A resubdivision plan for future division of each lot with availability of Municipal sanitary sewer service is submitted and recorded on the deed for each
lot. Principal and accessory buildings shall be located on each lot in conformance with all present and future setback requirements based on the
resubdivision plan.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 362/497
7. A deed restriction is placed on the parcel exercising development rights and all subdivided lots to prohibit additional subdivision unless it conforms to
applicable zoning district requirements.
8. Each lot is capable of accommodating a private well and septic system.
9. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and satisfactorily met.
H. State licensed medical cannabis production facilities; provided, that:
1. The facility shall be licensed by the State of Minnesota as a medical cannabis manufacturer and shall be developed and operated in accordance with
Minnesota Rules chapter 4770, as amended.
2. The use shall not include a distribution facility for medical cannabis as defined by Minnesota Rules chapter 4770.0200 subparagraph 13, as
amended.
3. The traffic generated by the proposed use can be adequately accommodated (both volume and weight) by the streets accessing the property upon
which the use is located.
4. The principal building shall be constructed with exterior materials as required for uses developed in industrial districts established in chapter 17 of
this title.
5. All fencing shall comply with the requirements of section 11-19-4 of this title.
6. The site shall be landscaped and screened in accordance with chapter 19 of this title.
7. All exterior lighting shall comply with the requirements of section 11-16-6 of this title applicable to industrial uses.
8. Any odor emissions shall be within the limits established by section 11-16-9 of this title.
9. The use shall have adequate sewage disposal facilities in accordance with section 11-16-11 of this title or section 8-1-3 of this Code, as may be
applicable.
10. All off street parking areas and drive aisles shall be constructed in accordance with the design and construction standards of chapter 21 of this title.
11. All loading areas shall be constructed in accordance with the design and construction standards of chapter 22 of this title.
12. All signs shall comply with the provisions of chapter 37 of this title.
13. The use shall not include any outdoor storage.
I. Temporary seasonal sales of products proposed on site (farms only) as regulated by section 11-25-7 of this title. (Prior Code § 11-52-5)
11-52-6: LOT AREA, DENSITY, AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an A-2 District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this
title:
A. Lot Area, Width And Depth:
Lots Of Record And Preliminary Platted Lots Established Prior To October 14,
2002
Lots Of Record After October 14,
2002
Minimum lot area
1 acre 20 acres
Minimum lot width
150 feet 450 feet
Minimum lot depth
150 feet None
B. Density: Not greater than one dwelling unit per ten (10) acres, subject to the following:
1. In a complete quarter-quarter section, four (4) parcels may be subdivided, the divisions to be used for residential or hobby farm uses; provided, that:
a. Lots conform to the minimum standards established for this district.
b. The division covers all lands within the section.
c. A deed restriction shall be placed upon the section which is exercising development rights to prohibit additional subdivision, unless it conforms to
applicable zoning district requirements.
d. The initial quarter-quarter section is under common ownership.
e. The division is processed according to the City's subdivision ordinance.
f. The sites are capable of accommodating a private well and septic system.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 363/497
2. Quarter-quarter sections containing lots of record as defined by section 11-2-2 of this title, established prior to July 1, 1992; provided, that:
a. Lots conform to the minimum standards established for this district.
b. A deed restriction shall be placed upon any new parcels which are exercising development rights to prohibit additional subdivision, unless it is
conforming to applicable zoning district requirements.
c. The division is processed according to the City subdivision ordinance.
d. The sites are capable of accommodating a private well and septic system.
C. Principal Structure Setbacks:
1. Front yard:
Setbacks From Centerline
Setbacks From
Right-Of-Way Lines
Arterial/major collector street 130 feet 65 feet
Local street 65 feet 35 feet
2. Side yards:
a. Interior: Ten feet (10').
b. Corner: As required for the front yard.
3. Rear yard:
a. Interior: Fifty feet (50').
b. Through lot: As required for the front yard.
D. Accessory Structure Setbacks: Accessory structure setbacks are as regulated by section 11-18-2 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-52-6)
11-52-7: BUILDING HEIGHT:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an A-2 District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this
title:
A. The maximum height of all principal buildings shall not exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories or forty five feet (45'). (Prior Code § 20-52-7)
B. The height of accessory structures shall be governed by subsection 11-18-2F of this title. (Prior Code § 20-52-7; amd. 2018 Code)
Chapter 53
RESERVED
Chapter 54
RESERVED
Chapter 55
RESERVED
Chapter 56
RESERVED
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 364/497
Chapter 57
RESERVED
Chapter 58
RESERVED
Chapter 59
RESERVED
Chapter 60
R-C RESIDENTIAL-RURAL OPEN SPACE CLUSTER DISTRICT
11-60-1: PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES:
The purpose of the R-C District is to implement the goals and policies with regard to the rural residential preserve area as defined within the
Comprehensive Plan. Residential development within the rural residential preserve is encouraged to be clustered in a pattern which satisfies the following
planning objectives:
A. Preservation of contiguous common open spaces for scenic enjoyment, recreational use, and rural identity.
B. Creation of cohesive neighborhoods in order to establish local identity and community interaction.
C. Physical integration of neighborhoods, open spaces, and places of destination in order to establish Municipal identity and community interaction.
D. The diagrams are provided to demonstrate graphically the purpose of the R-C District, its performance standards and strategies by which the internal
development pattern described in this chapter may be achieved.
E. Creative application of this chapter is encouraged while preserving its purpose and intent. (Prior Code § 20-60-1)
11-60-2: PERMITTED USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted uses in the R-C District:
A. Essential services.
B. Farm wineries with tasting rooms.
C. Farms, farmsteads, farming and agricultural related buildings and structures subject to Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, but not including animal
feedlots or other commercial operations.
D. Forestry, nurseries, greenhouses, and tree farms excluding retail sales.
E. Personal wireless service antennas located upon a public structure, as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
F. Public parks, playgrounds, recreational uses, wildlife areas and game refuges.
G. Residential care facilities serving six (6) or fewer persons.
H. Single-family detached dwellings. (Prior Code § 20-60-2)
11-60-3: INTERIM USES:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 365/497
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are interim uses in the R-C District and are governed by chapter 5 of this title:
A. Temporary seasonal sales of products produced on site (farms only) as regulated by section 11-25-7 of this title.
B. The keeping of horses and farm animals, not including feedlots, as regulated by subsection 11-26-4B of this title. (Prior Code § 20-60-3)
11-60-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted accessory uses in the R-C District:
A. Fences.
B. Home occupations as regulated by chapter 28 of this title.
C. In home daycare serving fourteen (14) or fewer persons in a single-family detached dwelling.
D. Operation and storage of such vehicles, equipment and machinery which are incidental and customary to permitted or conditional uses allowed in this
district.
E. Private garages, parking spaces and carports for licensed and operable passenger cars and trucks.
F. Private recreational vehicles and equipment.
G. Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs, short wave radio dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the
operation of household electronic equipment including radio receivers, Federal licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers, as regulated
by chapter 33 of this title.
H. Swimming pools, tennis courts and other recreational facilities which are operated for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal
use and their guests.
I. Tool houses, sheds and similar buildings for storage of domestic and farm supplies and noncommercial recreational equipment. (Prior Code § 20-60-4)
11-60-5: CONDITIONAL USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are conditional uses allowed in an R-C District. (Requires a conditional use permit based upon
procedures set forth in and regulated by chapter 4 of this title.)
A. Cemeteries; provided, that:
1. At minimum, the site accesses on a major collector.
2. The site is landscaped in accordance with chapter 19 of this title.
3. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
B. Commercial outdoor recreational areas including golf courses and country clubs, swimming pools and similar facilities; provided, that:
1. The principal use, function or activity is open and outdoor in character.
2. Not more than five percent (5%) of the land area up to a maximum of four thousand (4,000) square feet of the site shall be covered by buildings or
structures.
3. The use will not negatively impact abutting or neighboring existing or potential residential uses.
4. When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the property is screened and landscaped in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
5. The traffic generated by the use can be adequately accommodated (both volume and weight) upon the City streets serving the property upon which
the use is located.
6. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
C. Governmental and public regulated utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the City; provided, that:
1. The property is screened and landscaped in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 366/497
2. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
D. Personal wireless service towers and antennas not located on a public structure as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
E. Planned unit development as regulated by chapter 36 of this title.
F. Transfer of development rights to subdivisions within the R-C District; provided, that:
1. At its discretion, the City Council may allow an increase of density for the proposed subdivision up to as much as twenty five percent (25%) or a
maximum density of fifteen (15) dwellings per forty (40) acres to encourage creative implementation of this district as described by the
Comprehensive Plan and section 11-60-1 of this chapter.
2. The proposed development shall conform to the open space, neighborhood and general development standards of the R-C District.
3. The property from which the development rights are to be transferred shall be located within the rural residential preserve established by the
Comprehensive Plan.
4. Not less than one development right shall be retained by the parcel transferring development rights.
5. A deed restriction is recorded on the parcel transferring development rights to prohibit additional subdivision or development unless allowed by the
Comprehensive Plan. (Prior Code § 20-60-5)
11-60-6: DENSITY:
Development within the R-C District shall be limited to a gross density of four (4) units per forty (40) acres, except in cases where the City Council may
allow an increase in density, up to as much as twelve (12) units per forty (40) acres, as an incentive to encourage creative implementation of this district as
described by the Comprehensive Plan and section 11-60-1 of this chapter. (Prior Code § 20-60-6)
11-60-7: OPEN SPACE PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
The proposed development plan for an open space cluster development must provide common open spaces, in addition to park dedication requirements
of the City subdivision ordinance, in a site design appropriate to the location of building lots, consistent with the following provisions, subject to review and
approval of the City Council:
A. Area Regulations:
1. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the net buildable land subdivided for development shall be dedicated to open space consisting of natural habitat,
neighborhood recreation, and/or pedestrian corridor open space (see figure 60-A of this section). Land to be dedicated to conform with park
dedication requirements of section 10-8-15 of this Code may be taken from the fifty percent (50%) of net buildable area referenced above.
2. All designated open space shall be platted as outlot parcels held as open space in perpetuity.
3. Each open space outlot shall be classified as natural habitat, neighborhood recreation, or pedestrian corridor open space, and shall conform to the
type of use, location criteria, and deed restrictions of that classification.
FIGURE 60-A
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 367/497
Natural habitat, pedestrian corridor and neighborhood recreation open spaces are located on the development site according to the type of use.
B. Location Criteria: Open space outlots shall be located on the development site according to the following locational criteria:
1. View Sheds: The open space outlots shall preserve the maximum quantity of view shed open space for the anticipated homesite lots on the
development tracts (see figure 60-B of this section).
FIGURE 60-B
View sheds are directional vistas from a homesite between tree stands and other neighborhood structures.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 368/497
2. Natural Habitat: The development shall preserve the maximum quantity of natural habitat open spaces in a contiguous, connected configuration.
Natural agricultural habitat open spaces may include, but are not limited to, fields, pastures, wetlands, slopes, bluffs, dense woods, lakes, ponds,
streams, shorelands, and other environmentally sensitive areas or desirable view sheds.
3. Pedestrian Corridors: The development shall locate pedestrian corridor open spaces in strategic places such that larger open space outlots and
designated places of destination both on the development tract and adjacent tracts are connected with one another. Pedestrian corridor open spaces
may include, but are not limited to, established regional trails, local pathways, paved walkways, and shorelines. Pedestrian corridor outlots shall be a
minimum of twenty feet (20') in width.
4. Neighborhood Recreation: The development shall locate neighborhood recreation open spaces such that they are an integral part of the
neighborhood of surrounding homesites, at an elevation appropriate to their intended recreational use, defined by coherent boundaries, and
accessible to all neighborhood residents. Neighborhood recreation open spaces may include, but are not limited to, greens, commons, playgrounds,
ball fields, gardens, or other recreational areas.
C. Accessibility: Open spaces shall be accessible to pedestrians at not less than one thousand three hundred twenty foot (1,320') intervals along public
streets. Where necessary, pedestrian access corridor outlots between private lots shall be at least twenty feet (20') in width.
D. Deed Restrictions: Deed restrictions shall be recorded upon all open space outlots at the time of subdivision specifying allowed use of the outlot in
conformance with its open space classification. Amendments to the allowed uses of the open space outlots shall be subject to approval of the City
Council.
1. Natural habitat open spaces shall be considered conservation easements and are for responsible use and enjoyment as passive open space,
pasture or agricultural fields. Construction in these areas shall be limited to trails (paved or unpaved), open air shelters, bridges, benches,
birdhouses, wood fencing, communal drain fields, and other uses as approved by the City Council.
2. Neighborhood recreation open spaces shall be used for active or passive recreational purposes, including gardening. Construction in these areas
shall be limited to gravel or paved walkways, open air shelters, birdhouses, garden storage sheds no larger than one hundred fifty (150) square feet,
wood fencing, landscaping planting, play equipment, outdoor furniture, facilities for active recreation, and other uses as approved by the City Council.
3. Pedestrian corridor open space shall be used for pedestrian or bicycle travel. Motorized vehicles shall be prohibited. Construction in these areas
shall be limited to gravel or paved pathways, wood fencing, and landscape planting. Other uses or structures may be allowed by City Council
approval.
4. Habitable structures shall not be permitted in any open space outlot.
E. Ownership And Management: Each designated open space outlot shall be owned and managed according to one of the following means, subject to
City Council approval.
1. Open space may be owned in common by the property owners created through subdivision of the original tract. Management shall be the
responsibility of that subdivision's homeowner association. In the case where at least one outlot of open space is held in common ownership, a
homeowner association shall be established for that subdivision, and membership in the association by all property owners in the subdivision shall
be mandatory.
2. Open space may be deeded to an established land trust. Management shall be the responsibility of the land trust. Maintenance may be performed
by the neighborhood homeowner association, through written agreement between the association and the land trust.
3. Open space may be deeded to the City of Otsego, subject to acceptance by the City Council. Management shall be the responsibility of the City.
(Prior Code § 20-60-7)
11-60-8: NEIGHBORHOOD PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
The proposed development plan for an open space cluster development is intended to promote neighborhoods that offer a variety of lot sizes and
configurations. Review and approval of the subdivision by the City Council shall be based upon an evaluation that the proposed development plan
provides a cohesive neighborhood(s) in a site design appropriate to the location of common open spaces consistent with the following provisions:
A. Neighborhood Configuration:
1. To establish a cohesive neighborhood unit, residential lots shall be located in a neighborhood cluster. A neighborhood cluster shall include a
minimum of five (5) lots or twenty five percent (25%) of the allowable number of lots on the parcel to be subdivided, whichever is greater. An
efficiency of land utilization and community development should be encouraged by maximizing the number of lots in any one cluster development,
while adhering to the underlying density and open space requirements of this title (see figures 60-C.1 and 60-C.2 of this section). Development of
neighborhood clusters is encouraged in locations which minimize the visual impact of the development on the landscape to the greatest extent
reasonably possible.
FIGURE 60-C.1
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 369/497
An example of a neighborhood cluster development pattern encouraged by this section.
FIGURE 60-C.2
Example of a cul-de-sac development pattern that is discouraged by this section.
2. A neighborhood cluster shall be oriented toward an identifiable feature which all residential units share in common (see figures 60-D.1 through 60-
D.5 of this section). Neighborhood identity may be established by one or more of the following features:
a. View Shed: The lots of a neighborhood may be arranged such that a majority of the principal structures will take visual advantage of a field,
wetlands, woods, lake, stream, or other open space which could be described as a view shed.
b. Physical Amenity: The lots of a neighborhood may be arranged such that a majority of the principal structures will face a green, playground, ball
field, rock outcropping, stand of trees, church, school, or other physical feature unique to that particular neighborhood.
c. Streetscape: The lots may be arranged such that the principal structures face a street space enhanced with landscaping, street trees, boulevards,
medians, or other landscaping techniques appropriate to the City's street design standards.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 370/497
FIGURE 60-D.1
An example neighborhood cluster oriented toward a view shed or a physical amenity.
FIGURE 60-D.2
An example neighborhood cluster oriented toward a corner park or green streetscape.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 371/497
FIGURE 60-D.3
An example neighborhood cluster oriented toward a park or green area at an intersection.
FIGURE 60-D.4
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 372/497
An example neighborhood cluster oriented toward a park or green streetscape.
FIGURE 60-D.5
An example of a neighborhood cluster oriented toward a streetscape and illustrating subdivision design based on "coving" principals.
B. Lot Area, Width And Depth: The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an R-C District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions
and modifications set forth in this title.
1. Lot area: Not less than one acre net buildable area (excluding wetlands, floodplain, steep slopes, etc.) and not greater than two and one-half (21/2)
acres net buildable area.
2. Lot width: Not less than one hundred feet (100').
3. Lot depth: Not less than one hundred fifty feet (150').
C. Building Envelope Regulations:
1. Principal Structure Setbacks:
a. Front yard:
Setbacks
From Centerline
Setbacks From
Right-Of-Way Lines
Arterial/major collector street 130 feet 65 feet
Local street 65 feet 35 feet
b. Side yards:
(1) Interior: Fifteen feet (15').
(2) Corner: As required for the front yard.
c. Rear yard:
(1) Interior: Fifty feet (50').
(2) Through lot: As required for the front yard.
2. Accessory Structure Setbacks: Accessory structure setbacks as regulated by section 11-18-2 of this title, except as follows:
a. All detached accessory buildings shall be:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 373/497
(1) Located behind the rear most building line of the principal structure.
(2) Structures larger than one hundred fifty (150) square feet shall be within the side and rear setbacks required in subsection C1 of this section.
(3) Within an area one hundred fifty feet (150') from the rear most building line of the principal structure.
D. Building Height: The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an R-C District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and
modifications set forth in this title:
1. The maximum height of principal buildings shall not exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories or forty five feet (45').
2. Accessory structures shall be governed by subsection 11-18-2F of this title.
E. Building Design: Attached garages having doors facing the lot front shall not represent more than forty percent (40%) of the principal structure facade
facing the lot front.
F. Landscaping: Homesite lots shall be prepared according to the tree preservation measures described in this title. (Prior Code § 20-60-8)
11-60-9: GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A. Streets: The design and construction of all streets within the R-C District shall be consistent with the provisions of the City's subdivision ordinance with
the following additions:
1. Local streets should be so planned as to discourage their use for regional traffic.
2. Streets shall connect with one another or be terminated by other streets.
3. Dead end streets are prohibited, and cul-de-sacs shall be permitted only where topography or other physical conditions necessitate their use.
B. Stormwater Management: Stormwater management techniques shall be consistent with the City subdivision ordinance, with the following additions:
1. All retention basins shall resemble natural ponds to the maximum extent possible.
2. Retention basin landscaping shall include indigenous plants and landscaping materials.
C. Property Owners' Association: The development contract for a project developed under the provisions of the R-C District shall contain provisions to
assure the continued maintenance of open space outlots and other commonly owned facilities within the project to a predetermined reasonable
standard, subject to approval of the City Council in conformance with the following conditions:
1. Prior to the use or occupancy or sale or the execution of contracts for sale of an individual building unit, parcel, tracts or common area, a declaration
of covenants, conditions and restrictions or an equivalent document or document such as specified by Laws 1963, section 457, section 11 and a set
of floor plans such as specified by Laws 1963, section 457, section 13 shall be filed with the City, said filing with the City to be made prior to the
filings of said declaration or document or floor plans with the recording officers of Wright County, Minnesota.
2. The declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions or equivalent document shall specify that deeds, leases or documents of conveyance
affecting buildings, units, parcels, tracts, townhouses or apartments shall subject said properties to the terms of said declaration.
3. The declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions shall provide that an owners' association or corporation shall be formed and that all owners
shall be members of said association or corporation which shall maintain all properties and common areas in good repair and which shall assess
individual property owners proportionate shares of joint or common costs. This declaration shall be subject to the review and approval of the City
Attorney. The intent of this requirement is to protect the property values of the individual owner through establishing private control.
4. The declaration shall additionally, among other things, provide that in the event the association or corporation fails to maintain properties in
accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the City or fails to pay taxes or assessments on properties as they become due and in the
event the City incurs any expenses in enforcing its rules and regulations, which said expenses are not immediately reimbursed by the association or
corporation, then the City shall have the right to assess each property its prorate share of said expenses. Such assessments, together with interest
thereon and costs of collection, shall be a lien on each property against which each assessment is made.
5. Membership must be mandatory for each owner and all successors or assigns.
6. The open space restrictions must be permanent and not for a given period of years.
7. The association must be responsible for liability insurance, local taxes, and the maintenance of the open space facilities to be deeded to it.
8. Property owners must pay a prorate share of the cost of the association by means of an assessment to be levied by the association which meets the
requirements for becoming a lien on the property in accordance with Minnesota Statutes.
9. The association must be able to adjust the assessment to meet changed needs.
10. The bylaws and rules of the association and all covenants and restrictions to be recorded must be approved by the City Council prior to the
approval of the final plat. (Prior Code § 20-60-9)
Chapter 61
R-1 RESIDENTIAL-LONG RANGE URBAN SERVICE DISTRICT (RIVER FRONTAGE)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 374/497
11-61-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the R-1 Residential-Long Range Urban Service District (River Frontage) is to provide suitable areas for low density residential uses within
selected areas of the Mississippi River corridor and is intended to implement and govern such areas pursuant to the Comprehensive Plan. (Prior Code
§ 20-61-1)
11-61-2: PERMITTED USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted uses in an R-1 District:
A. Essential services.
B. Farms, farmsteads, farming and related agricultural activities.
C. Personal wireless service antennas located upon a public structure, as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
D. Public parks, playgrounds, recreational uses, wildlife areas, and game refuges.
E. Residential care facilities serving six (6) or fewer persons.
F. Single-family detached dwellings. (Prior Code § 20-61-2)
11-61-3: INTERIM USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are interim uses in the R-1 District and are governed by chapter 5 of this title:
A. Home extended businesses as regulated by chapter 29 of this title.
B. The keeping of horses as regulated by subsection 11-26-4F of this title. (Prior Code § 20-61-3)
11-61-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted accessory uses in the R-1 District: (Prior Code § 20-61-4)
A. Accessory uses incidental and customary to the uses permitted in sections 11-61-2, 11-61-3 and 11-61-5 of this chapter. (Prior Code § 20-61-4; amd.
2018 Code)
B. Except as otherwise limited, private recreational facilities, only accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same lot and which are operated
for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their occasional guests.
C. Fences.
D. Home occupations.
E. In home daycare serving fourteen (14) or fewer persons in a single-family detached dwelling.
F. Living quarters within the principal structure of persons employed on the premises.
G. Noncommercial greenhouses, provided they do not exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area.
H. Private garages and off street parking.
I. Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs, short wave radio dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the
operation of household electronic equipment including radio receivers, Federal licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers, as regulated
by chapter 33 of this title.
J. Recreational vehicles and equipment.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 375/497
K. Tool houses, sheds and other such structures for the storage of domestic supplies and equipment. (Prior Code § 20-61-4)
11-61-5: CONDITIONAL USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are conditional uses in an R-1 District. (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures
set forth in and regulated by chapter 4 of this title.)
A. Commercial outdoor recreational areas including golf courses and country clubs, swimming pools and similar facilities; provided, that:
1. The principal use, function or activity is open and outdoor in character.
2. Not more than five percent (5%) of the land area of the site shall be covered by buildings or structures.
3. When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the property is screened and landscaped for the protection of the abutting use, according
to the provisions of chapter 19 of this title.
4. The land area of the property containing such use or activity meets the minimum established for the district.
5. The use will not negatively impact the natural setting intended for this district or neighboring residential uses.
6. The traffic generated by the use can be adequately accommodated (volume and weight) upon City streets serving the use.
7. An adequate septic system and well can be established on the site.
8. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
B. Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the City; provided, that:
1. When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the property is screened and landscaped in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
2. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
C. Personal wireless service towers and antennas not located on a public structure as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
D. Planned unit development as regulated by chapter 36 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-61-5)
11-61-6: LOT AREA AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an R-1 District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this
title:
A. Lot Area, Width And Depth:
1. Lot area: Two and one-half (21/2) acres.
2. Lot width: Two hundred feet (200').
3. Lot depth: One hundred fifty feet (150').
B. Principal Structure Setbacks:
1. Front yard:
Setbacks
From Centerline
Setbacks From
Right-Of-Way Lines
Arterial/major collector street 130 feet 65 feet
Local street 65 feet 35 feet
2. Side yards:
a. Interior: Ten feet (10').
b. Corner: As required for the front yard.
3. Rear yard:
a. Interior: Fifty feet (50').
b. Through lot: As required for the front yard.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 376/497
C. Accessory Structure Setbacks: Accessory structure setbacks as regulated by section 11-18-2 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-61-6)
11-61-7: LOT COVERAGE AND HEIGHT:
The following lot coverage and height requirements shall be observed in an R-1 District:
A. The total ground area of all buildings shall not exceed a lot coverage of five percent (5%).
B. All single-family residences shall be limited to a maximum height of two and one-half (21/2) stories or forty five feet (45'). (Prior Code § 20-61-7)
C. The height of accessory uses shall be governed by subsection 11-18-2F of this title. (Prior Code § 20-61-7; amd. 2018 Code)
Chapter 62
R-2 RESIDENTIAL-LONG RANGE URBAN SERVICE DISTRICT (LARGE LOT)
11-62-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the R-2 Residential-Long Range Urban Service District (Large Lot) is to provide for areas of the City where low density residential
development can take place and where urban services can be provided. The properties are large in size and would commonly overlay sensitive areas of
the community. The intent of the R-2 District is to govern and implement portions of the Comprehensive Plan for the long range urban service area. (Prior
Code § 20-62-1)
11-62-2: PERMITTED USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted uses in an R-2 District:
A. Essential services.
B. Personal wireless service antennas located upon a public structure, as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
C. Public parks, playgrounds and recreational uses.
D. Residential care facilities serving six (6) or fewer persons.
E. Single-family detached dwellings. (Prior Code § 20-62-2)
11-62-3: INTERIM USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are interim uses in the R-2 District and are governed by chapter 5 of this title:
A. Farms, farmsteads, and farming.
B. Home extended business as regulated by chapter 29 of this title.
C. Model homes as regulated by chapter 20 of this title.
D. The keeping of horses as regulated by subsection 11-26-4F of this title. (Prior Code § 20-62-3)
11-62-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted accessory uses in the R-2 District:
A. Accessory uses incidental and customary to the uses permitted in sections 11-62-2, 11-62-3 and 11-62-5 of this chapter.
B. Except as otherwise limited, private recreational facilities, only accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same lot and which are operated
for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their occasional guests.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 377/497
C. Fences.
D. Home occupations.
E. In home daycare serving fourteen (14) or fewer persons in a single-family detached dwelling.
F. Noncommercial greenhouses, provided they do not exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area.
G. Private garages and off street parking.
H. Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs, short wave radio dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the
operation of household electronic equipment including radio receivers, Federal licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers, as regulated
by chapter 33 of this title.
I. Recreational vehicles and equipment.
J. Tool houses, sheds and other such structures for the storage of domestic supplies and equipment. (Prior Code § 20-62-4)
11-62-5: CONDITIONAL USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are conditional uses in an R-2 District. (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures
set forth in and regulated by chapter 4 of this title.)
A. Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the City; provided, that:
1. When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the property is screened and landscaped in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
2. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
B. Personal wireless service towers and antennas not located on a public structure as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
C. Planned unit development as regulated by chapter 36 of this title.
D. Public or semipublic recreational buildings and neighborhood or community centers; public and private educational institutions limited to elementary,
junior high and senior high schools; and religious institutions such as churches, chapels, temples and synagogues; provided, that:
1. Side yards shall be double that required for the district.
2. Adequate screening from abutting residential uses and landscaping is provided in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
3. Adequate off street parking and access is provided on the site in compliance with chapter 21 of this title and that such parking is adequately
screened and landscaped from surrounding and abutting residential uses in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
4. Adequate off street loading and service entrances are provided and regulated where applicable by chapter 22 of this title.
5. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied. (Prior Code § 20-62-5)
11-62-6: LOT AREA AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an R-2 District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this
title:
A. Lot Area, Width And Depth:
1. Lot area: Two and one-half (21/2) acres.
2. Lot width: One hundred fifty feet (150').
3. Lot depth: One hundred fifty feet (150').
B. Principal Structure Setbacks:
1. Front yard:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 378/497
Setbacks
From Centerline
Setbacks From
Right-Of-Way Lines
Arterial/major collector street 130 feet 65 feet
Local street 65 feet 35 feet
2. Side yards:
a. Interior: Ten feet (10').
b. Corner: As required for the front yard.
3. Rear yard:
a. Interior: Fifty feet (50').
b. Through lot: As required for the front yard.
C. Accessory Structure Setbacks: Accessory structure setbacks as regulated by section 11-18-2 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-62-6)
11-62-7: LOT COVERAGE AND HEIGHT:
The following lot coverage and height requirements shall be observed in an R-2 District:
A. The total ground area of all residential use buildings shall not exceed a lot coverage of five percent (5%).
B. All single-family residences shall be limited to a maximum height of two and one-half (21/2) stories or forty five feet (45'). (Prior Code § 20-62-7)
C. The height of accessory uses shall be governed by subsection 11-18-2F of this title. (Prior Code § 20-62-7; amd. 2018 Code)
Chapter 63
R-3 RESIDENTIAL-LONG RANGE URBAN SERVICE DISTRICT (GENERAL)
11-63-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the R-3 Residential-Long Range Urban Service District (General) is to provide for low to medium density single-family detached dwelling
units and directly related, complementary uses in the long range urban service area as designated by the Comprehensive Plan. (Prior Code § 20-63-1)
11-63-2: PERMITTED USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted uses in the R-3 District:
A. Essential services.
B. Personal wireless service antennas located upon a public structure, as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
C. Public parks, playgrounds, and residential uses.
D. Residential care facilities serving six (6) or fewer persons.
E. Single-family detached dwellings. (Prior Code § 20-63-2)
11-63-3: INTERIM USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are interim uses in the R-3 District and are governed by chapter 5 of this title:
A. Farms, farmsteads, and farming.
B. Home extended businesses as regulated by chapter 29 of this title.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 379/497
C. Model homes as regulated by chapter 20 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-63-3)
11-63-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted accessory uses in the R-3 District:
A. Accessory uses incidental and customary to the uses permitted in sections 11-63-2, 11-63-3 and 11-63-5 of this chapter.
B. Except as otherwise limited, private recreational facilities, only accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same lot and which are operated
for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their occasional guests.
C. Fences.
D. Home occupations.
E. In home daycare serving fourteen (14) or fewer persons in a single-family detached dwelling.
F. Noncommercial greenhouses, provided they do not exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area.
G. Private garages and off street parking.
H. Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs, short wave radio dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the
operation of household electronic equipment including radio receivers, Federal licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers, as regulated
by chapter 33 of this title.
I. Recreational vehicles and equipment.
J. Tool houses, sheds and other such structures for the storage of domestic supplies and equipment. (Prior Code § 20-63-4)
11-63-5: CONDITIONAL USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are conditional uses in an R-3 District. (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures
set forth in and regulated by chapter 4 of this title.)
A. Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the City; provided, that:
1. When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the property is screened and landscaped in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
2. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
B. Personal wireless service towers and antennas not located on a public structure as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
C. Planned unit development as regulated by chapter 36 of this title.
D. Public or semipublic recreational buildings and neighborhood or community centers; public and private educational institutions limited to elementary,
junior high and senior high schools; and religious institutions such as churches, chapels, temples and synagogues; provided, that:
1. Side yards shall be double that required for the district.
2. Adequate screening from abutting residential uses and landscaping is provided in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
3. Adequate off street parking and access is provided on the site in compliance with chapter 21 of this title and that such parking is adequately
screened and landscaped from surrounding and abutting residential uses in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
4. Adequate off street loading and service entrances are provided and regulated where applicable by chapter 22 of this title.
5. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied. (Prior Code § 20-63-5)
11-63-6: LOT AREA AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an R-3 District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this
title:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 380/497
A. Minimum Lot Area, Width And Depth:
1. Lot area: One acre.
2. Lot width:
a. Interior: One hundred fifty feet (150').
b. Corner: One hundred seventy five feet (175').
3. Lot depth: One hundred feet (100').
B. Principal Structure Setbacks:
1. Front yard:
Setbacks
From Centerline Setbacks From Right-Of-Way Lines
Arterial/major collector street 130 feet 65 feet
Local street 65 feet 35 feet
2. Side yards:
a. Interior: Ten feet (10').
b. Corner: As required for the front yard.
3. Rear yard:
a. Interior: Fifty feet (50').
b. Through lot: As required for the front yard.
C. Accessory Structure Setbacks: Accessory structure setbacks as regulated by section 11-18-2 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-63-6)
11-63-7: LOT COVERAGE AND HEIGHT:
The following requirements shall be observed in an R-3 District:
A. The total ground area of all residential buildings shall not exceed a lot coverage of thirty percent (30%).
B. All single-family residences shall be limited to a maximum height of two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35'). (Prior Code § 20-63-7)
C. The height of accessory structures as governed by subsection 11-18-2F of this title. (Prior Code § 20-63-7; amd. 2018 Code)
Chapter 64
R-4A RESIDENTIAL-SUBURBAN SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICT
11-64-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the R-4A Residential-Suburban Single-Family District is to provide for low density single-family detached dwelling units and directly related
complementary uses served by Municipal sanitary sewer in areas of the City with unique natural features and amenities. (Prior Code § 20-64-1)
11-64-2: PERMITTED USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted uses in the R-4A District:
A. Essential services.
B. Personal wireless service antennas located upon a public structure, as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
C. Public parks and playgrounds.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 381/497
D. Residential care facilities serving six (6) or fewer persons.
E. Single-family detached dwellings. (Prior Code § 20-64-2)
11-64-3: INTERIM USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are interim uses in the R-4A District and are governed by chapter 5 of this title:
A. Farms, farmsteads, and farming.
B. Home extended businesses as regulated by chapter 29 of this title.
C. Model homes as regulated by chapter 20 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-64-3)
11-64-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted accessory uses in the R-4A District:
A. Accessory uses incidental and customary to the uses permitted in sections 11-64-2, 11-64-3 and 11-64-5 of this chapter.
B. Except as otherwise limited, private recreational facilities, only accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same lot and which are operated
for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their occasional guests.
C. Fences.
D. Home occupations.
E. In home daycare serving fourteen (14) or fewer persons in a single-family detached dwelling.
F. Noncommercial greenhouses, provided they do not exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area.
G. Private garages and off street parking.
H. Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs, short wave radio dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the
operation of household electronic equipment including radio receivers, Federal licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers, as regulated
by chapter 33 of this title.
I. Recreational vehicles and equipment.
J. Secondary dwelling unit within a single-family shall be allowed subject to approval of an administrative permit pursuant to chapter 8 of this title in
compliance with the following performance standards:
1. The design and construction of the principal building is not a two-family dwelling as defined in this title.
2. There shall be an interior connection between the main living area and accessory living quarters that is able to be unlocked from each side of the
connection and that is not secured by a deadbolt or keyed lockset.
3. The principal building shall be served by single Municipal water, sanitary sewer, gas and/or electric utility service lines each with a single meter for
the respective utility where applicable.
4. The principal building shall have one heating and air conditioning system.
5. There shall be a minimum of three (3) garage stalls having direct exterior access (not in a tandem arrangement) attached to the principal building
with a driveway access in front of each stall so as to allow direct vehicle maneuvering to each of the stalls.
6. The property shall have one street address.
K. Tool houses, sheds and other such structures for the storage of domestic supplies and equipment. (Prior Code § 20-64-4)
11-64-5: CONDITIONAL USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are conditional uses in an R-4A District. (Requires a conditional use permit based upon
procedures set forth and regulated by chapter 4 of this title.)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 382/497
A. Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the City; provided, that:
1. When abutting a residential use in a residential use district, the property is screened and landscaped in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
2. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
B. Personal wireless service towers and antennas not located on a public structure as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
C. Planned unit development as regulated by chapter 36 of this title.
D. Public or semipublic recreational buildings and neighborhood or community centers; public and private educational institutions limited to elementary,
junior high and senior high schools; and religious institutions such as churches, chapels, temples and synagogues; provided, that:
1. Side yards shall be double that required for the district.
2. Adequate screening from abutting residential uses and landscaping is provided in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
3. Adequate off street parking and access is provided on the site in compliance with chapter 21 of this title and that such parking is adequately
screened and landscaped from surrounding and abutting residential uses in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
4. Adequate off street loading and service entrances are provided and regulated where applicable by chapter 22 of this title.
5. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied. (Prior Code § 20-64-5)
11-64-6: LOT AREA AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an R-4A District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this
title:
A. Single-Family Lot Requirements:
1. Minimum lot area: Eighteen thousand (18,000) square feet.
2. Minimum lot width:
a. Interior: One hundred feet (100').
b. Corner: One hundred thirty feet (130').
3. Minimum lot depth: One hundred fifty feet (150').
B. Principal Structure Setbacks:
1. Front yard:
Setbacks
From Centerline
Setbacks From
Right-Of-Way Lines
Arterial/major collector street 130 feet 65 feet
Local street 65 feet 35 feet
2. Side yards:
a. Interior: Ten feet (10').
b. Corner: As required for the front yard.
3. Rear yard:
a. Interior: Twenty feet (20').
b. Through lot: As required for the front yard.
C. Accessory Structure Setbacks: Accessory structure setbacks as regulated by section 11-18-2 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-64-6)
11-64-7: LOT COVERAGE AND HEIGHT:
The following lot coverage and height requirements shall be observed in an R-4A District:
A. The total ground area of all residential buildings shall not exceed a lot coverage of thirty percent (30%).
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 383/497
B. All residences shall be limited to a maximum height of two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35'). (Prior Code § 20-64-7)
C. The height of accessory uses as regulated by subsection 11-18-2F of this title. (Prior Code § 20-64-7; amd. 2018 Code)
Chapter 65
R-4 RESIDENTIAL-URBAN SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICT
11-65-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the R-4 Residential-Urban Single-Family District is to provide for high density single-family dwelling units within public or semipublic
sewered areas of the community at a relatively dense urban scale and to be established only when such services are available. (Prior Code § 20-65-1)
11-65-2: PERMITTED USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted uses in the R-4 District:
A. Essential services.
B. Personal wireless service antennas located upon a public structure, as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
C. Public parks and playgrounds.
D. Residential care facilities serving six (6) or fewer persons.
E. Single-family detached dwellings. (Prior Code § 20-65-2)
11-65-3: INTERIM USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are interim uses in the R-4 District and are governed by chapter 5 of this title:
A. Farms, farmsteads, and farming.
B. Home extended business as regulated by chapter 29 of this title.
C. Model homes as regulated by chapter 20 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-65-3)
11-65-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted accessory uses in the R-4 District:
A. Accessory uses incidental and customary to the uses permitted in sections 11-65-2, 11-65-3 and 11-65-5 of this chapter.
B. Except as otherwise limited, private recreational facilities, only accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same lot and which are operated
for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their occasional guests.
C. Fences.
D. Home occupations.
E. In home daycare serving fourteen (14) or fewer persons in a single-family detached dwelling.
F. Noncommercial greenhouses, provided they do not exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area.
G. Private garages and off street parking.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 384/497
H. Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs, short wave radio dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the
operation of household electronic equipment including radio receivers, Federal licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers, as regulated
by chapter 33 of this title.
I. Recreational vehicles and equipment.
J. Secondary dwelling unit within a single-family shall be allowed subject to approval of an administrative permit pursuant to chapter 8 of this title in
compliance with the following performance standards:
1. The design and construction of the principal building is not a two-family dwelling as defined in this title.
2. There shall be an interior connection between the main living area and accessory living quarters that is able to be unlocked from each side of the
connection and that is not secured by a deadbolt or keyed lockset.
3. The principal building shall be served by single Municipal water, sanitary sewer, gas and/or electric utility service lines each with a single meter for
the respective utility where applicable.
4. The principal building shall have one heating and air conditioning system.
5. There shall be a minimum of three (3) garage stalls having direct exterior access (not in a tandem arrangement) attached to the principal building
with a driveway access in front of each stall so as to allow direct vehicle maneuvering to each of the stalls.
6. The property shall have one street address.
K. Tool houses, sheds and other such structures for the storage of domestic supplies and equipment. (Prior Code § 20-65-4)
11-65-5: CONDITIONAL USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are conditional uses in an R-4 District. (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures
set forth and regulated by chapter 4 of this title.)
A. Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the City; provided, that:
1. When abutting a residential use in a residential use district, the property is screened and landscaped in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
2. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
B. Personal wireless service towers and antennas not located on a public structure as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
C. Planned unit development as regulated by chapter 36 of this title.
D. Public or semipublic recreational buildings and neighborhood or community centers; public and private educational institutions limited to elementary,
junior high and senior high schools; and religious institutions such as churches, chapels, temples and synagogues; provided, that:
1. Side yards shall be double that required for the district.
2. Adequate screening from abutting residential uses and landscaping is provided in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
3. Adequate off street parking and access is provided on the site in compliance with chapter 21 of this title and that such parking is adequately
screened and landscaped from surrounding and abutting residential uses in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
4. Adequate off street loading and service entrances are provided and regulated where applicable by chapter 22 of this title.
5. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
E. Single-family detached dwelling lots less than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet; provided, that:
1. The lot results from the resubdivision of a lot of record platted prior to November 15, 1990.
2. The lot is at least nine thousand (9,000) square feet in size.
3. The lot is at least sixty feet (60') in width.
4. The lot complies with all R-4 setbacks.
5. The lot has publicly controlled sewer service.
6. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied. (Prior Code § 20-65-5)
11-65-6: LOT AREA AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an R-4 District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this
title:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 385/497
A. Single-Family Lot Requirements:
1. Minimum lot area: Twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.
2. Minimum lot width:
a. Interior: Seventy five feet (75').
b. Corner: One hundred feet (100').
3. Minimum lot depth: One hundred feet (100'). (Prior Code § 20-65-6)
B. Principal Structure Setbacks: The following setbacks shall apply within the R-4 District: (Prior Code § 20-65-6; amd. 2018 Code)
1. Front yard:
Setbacks
From Centerline
Setbacks From
Right-Of-Way Lines
Arterial/major collector street 130 feet 65 feet
Local street 65 feet 35 feet
2. Side yards:
a. Interior: Ten feet (10').
b. Corner: As required for the front yard.
3. Rear yard:
a. Interior: Twenty feet (20').
b. Through lot: As required for the front yard.
C. Accessory Structure Setbacks: Accessory structure setbacks as regulated by section 11-18-2 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-65-6)
11-65-7: LOT COVERAGE AND HEIGHT:
The following lot coverage and height requirements shall be observed in an R-4 District:
A. The total ground area of all residential buildings shall not exceed a lot coverage of thirty percent (30%).
B. All residences shall be limited to a maximum height of two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35'). (Prior Code § 20-65-7)
C. The height of accessory uses as regulated by subsection 11-18-2F of this title. (Prior Code § 20-65-7; amd. 2018 Code)
11-65-8: TRANSITION REQUIREMENTS:
Any preliminary plat abutting an R-1, R-2, R-3 or PUD District based on the lot standards of the aforementioned districts shall have a minimum of one tier
of single-family dwelling lots bordering such a district to be subject to the lot standards of the R-4A District. Exemptions to the provisions of this section
may be granted at the time of preliminary plat approval, provided one or more of the following conditions exist:
A. The properties are separated by a major collector or arterial street.
B. The properties are separated by a wetland, water body, floodplain, public open space, park or other such similar publicly reserved and development
restricted area with a minimum width of one hundred feet (100') across its entire length. (Prior Code § 20-65-8)
Chapter 66
R-5 RESIDENTIAL-SINGLE- AND TWO-FAMILY DISTRICT
11-66-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the R-5 Residential-Single- and Two-Family District is to provide for high density single-family dwelling units and to introduce on a
restricted basis, two-family dwelling units and directly related, complementary uses in areas of the City which have publicly controlled sanitary sewer
service. This district is only intended for those portions of the community designated as immediate urban service areas. (Prior Code § 20-66-1)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 386/497
11-66-2: PERMITTED USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted uses in the R-5 District:
A. Essential services.
B. Personal wireless service antennas located upon a public structure, as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
C. Public parks and playgrounds.
D. Residential care facilities serving six (6) or fewer persons.
E. Single-family detached dwellings. (Prior Code § 20-66-2)
11-66-3: INTERIM USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are interim uses in the R-5 District and are governed by chapter 5 of this title:
A. Farms, farmsteads, and farming.
B. Home extended business as regulated by chapter 29 of this title.
C. Model homes as regulated by chapter 20 of this chapter (Prior Code § 20-66-3)
11-66-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted accessory uses in the R-5 District:
A. Accessory uses incidental and customary to the uses permitted in sections 11-66-2, 11-66-3 and 11-66-5 of this chapter.
B. Except as otherwise limited, private recreational facilities, only accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same lot and which are operated
for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their occasional guests.
C. Fences.
D. Home occupations.
E. In home daycare serving fourteen (14) or fewer persons in a single-family detached dwelling.
F. Noncommercial greenhouses, provided they do not exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area.
G. Private garages and off street parking.
H. Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs, short wave radio dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the
operation of household electronic equipment including radio receivers, Federal licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers, as regulated
by chapter 33 of this title.
I. Recreational vehicles and equipment.
J. Secondary dwelling unit within a single-family dwelling shall be allowed subject to approval of an administrative permit pursuant to chapter 8 of this title
in compliance with the following performance standards:
1. The design and construction of the principal building is not a two-family dwelling as defined in this title.
2. There shall be an interior connection between the main living area and accessory living quarters that is able to be unlocked from each side of the
connection and that is not secured by a deadbolt or keyed lockset.
3. The principal building shall be served by single Municipal water, sanitary sewer, gas and/or electric utility service lines each with a single meter for
the respective utility where applicable.
4. The principal building shall have one heating and air conditioning system.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 387/497
5. There shall be a minimum of three (3) garage stalls having direct exterior access (not in a tandem arrangement) attached to the principal building
with a driveway access in front of each stall so as to allow direct vehicle maneuvering to each of the stalls.
6. The property shall have one street address.
K. Tool houses, sheds and other such structures for the storage of domestic supplies and equipment. (Prior Code § 20-66-4; amd. 2018 Code)
11-66-5: CONDITIONAL USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are conditional uses in an R-5 District. (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures
set forth and regulated by chapter 4 of this title.)
A. Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the City; provided, that:
1. When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the property is screened and landscaped in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
2. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
B. Manufactured home parks; provided, that:
1. The minimum area required for a manufactured home park designation shall be twenty (20) acres.
2. The following minimum lot requirements are satisfactorily met:
a. Lot area: Twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.
b. Lot width: Seventy five feet (75').
c. Lot depth: One hundred feet (100').
3. The following principal structure setbacks are satisfactorily met:
a. Front yard:
Road Class
Setbacks
From Centerline
Setbacks From
Right-Of-Way Lines
Principal arterial 130 feet 65 feet
Minor arterial 130 feet 65 feet
Local street 65 feet 35 feet
From cul-de-sac right-of-way n/a 35 feet
Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more roads or highways which bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall
project beyond the front yard line of either road.
b. Side yards: Ten feet (10').
c. Rear yard: Twenty feet (20').
4. Accessory buildings, uses and equipment comply with the applicable provisions of section 11-18-2 of this title.
5. The total ground area of all residential buildings does not exceed a lot coverage of thirty percent (30%).
6. All residences shall be limited to a maximum height of one story or twenty five feet (25').
7. The manufactured home park is developed in accordance with the City subdivision ordinance and all public improvement requirements incorporated
therein.
8. A storm shelter is provided in compliance with Minnesota Statutes. The City may require additional measures as determined necessary to safeguard
the health and safety of persons occupying the manufactured home park. Such measures may include, but shall not be limited to, screening and/or
landscape berms. All emergency storm protection measures shall be subject to City Council approval.
9. The manufactured home park shall comply with Minnesota Statutes section 327.20 et seq., or all applicable City ordinances, whichever is the more
restrictive.
10. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
C. Personal wireless service towers and antennas not located on a public structure as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
D. Planned unit development as regulated by chapter 36 of this title.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 388/497
E. Public or semipublic recreational buildings and neighborhood or community centers; public and private educational institutions limited to elementary,
junior high and senior high schools; and religious institutions such as churches, chapels, temples and synagogues; provided, that:
1. Side yards shall be double that required for the district.
2. Adequate screening from abutting residential uses and landscaping is provided in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
3. Adequate off street parking and access is provided on the site in compliance with chapter 21 of this title and that such parking is adequately
screened and landscaped from surrounding and abutting residential uses in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
4. Adequate off street loading and service entrances are provided and regulated where applicable by chapter 22 of this title.
5. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
F. Two-family detached dwellings; provided, that:
1. They are located and designed so as to be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood.
2. The dwellings conform to all R-5 setback requirements.
3. The lot is served by publicly contracted sewer service.
4. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied. (Prior Code § 20-66-5; amd. 2018 Code)
11-66-6: LOT AREA AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an R-5 District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this
title:
A. Single-Family:
1. Minimum lot area: Nine thousand (9,000) square feet.
2. Minimum lot width:
a. Interior: Sixty feet (60').
b. Corner: Ninety feet (90').
3. Minimum lot depth: One hundred feet (100').
B. Two-Family:
1. Minimum lot area: Fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.
2. Minimum lot area per unit: Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet.
3. Minimum lot width:
a. Interior: One hundred twenty feet (120').
b. Corner: One hundred forty five feet (145').
4. Minimum lot depth: One hundred feet (100').
C. Principal Structure Setbacks:
1. Front yard:
Setbacks
From Centerline
Setbacks From
Right-Of-Way Lines
Arterial/major collector street 130 feet 65 feet
Local street:
Principal building 55 feet 25 feet
Garage face 60 feet 30 feet
2. Side yards:
a. Interior: Seven feet (7').
b. Corner: As required for the front yard.
3. Rear yard:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 389/497
a. Interior: Twenty feet (20').
b. Through lot: As required for the front yard. (Prior Code § 20-66-6)
11-66-7: LOT COVERAGE AND HEIGHT:
The following lot coverage and height requirements shall be observed in an R-5 District:
A. The total ground area of all residential buildings shall not exceed a lot coverage of thirty percent (30%).
B. All residences shall be limited to a maximum height of two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35'). (Prior Code § 20-66-7)
C. The height of accessory structures shall be governed by subsection 11-18-2F of this title. (Prior Code § 20-66-7; amd. 2018 Code)
11-66-8: TRANSITION REQUIREMENTS:
Any preliminary plat approved after March 13, 2006, abutting an R-1, R-2, R-3 or PUD District based on the lot standards of the aforementioned districts
shall have a minimum of one tier of single-family dwelling lots bordering such a district to be subject to the lot standards of the R-4A District. Exemptions to
the provisions of this section may be granted at the time of preliminary plat approval, provided one or more of the following conditions exist:
A. The properties are separated by a major collector or arterial street.
B. The properties are separated by a wetland, water body, floodplain, public open space, park or other such similar publicly reserved and development
restricted area with a minimum width of one hundred feet (100') across its entire length. (Prior Code § 20-66-8)
Chapter 67
R-6 RESIDENTIAL-MEDIUM DENSITY DISTRICT
11-67-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the R-6 Residential-Medium Density District is to provide for low to moderate density through the mixture of one- and two-unit medium
density dwellings and directly related complementary uses. The allowance of such uses and establishment of the district is dependent upon the availability
of publicly controlled sanitary sewer service and only within portions of the City which have been designated as immediate urban service areas. (Prior
Code § 20-67-1)
11-67-2: PERMITTED USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted uses in the R-6 District:
A. Essential services.
B. Personal wireless service antennas located upon a public structure, as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
C. Public parks, playgrounds, and recreational uses.
D. Residential care facilities serving six (6) or fewer persons.
E. Single-family detached dwellings.
F. Townhouses with not more than six (6) dwelling units per building and not more than two (2) common walls per dwelling unit.
G. Two-family dwelling units. (Prior Code § 20-67-2)
11-67-3: INTERIM USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are interim uses in the R-6 District and are governed by chapter 5 of this title:
A. Farms, farmsteads, and farming.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 390/497
B. Home extended business as regulated by chapter 29 of this title.
C. Model homes as regulated by chapter 20 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-67-3)
11-67-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted accessory uses in the R-6 District:
A. Accessory uses incidental and customary to the uses permitted in sections 11-67-2, 11-67-3 and 11-67-5 of this chapter.
B. Except as otherwise limited, private recreational facilities, only accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same lot and which are operated
for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their occasional guests.
C. Fences.
D. Home occupations.
E. In home daycare serving fourteen (14) or fewer persons in a single-family detached dwelling.
F. Noncommercial greenhouses, provided they do not exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area.
G. Off street loading.
H. Private garages and off street parking.
I. Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs, short wave radio dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the
operation of household electronic equipment including radio receivers, Federal licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers, as regulated
by chapter 33 of this title.
J. Recreational vehicles and equipment.
K. Secondary dwelling unit within a single-family dwelling shall be allowed subject to approval of an administrative permit pursuant to chapter 8 of this title
in compliance with the following performance standards:
1. The design and construction of the principal building is not a two-family dwelling as defined by this title.
2. There shall be an interior connection between the main living area and accessory living quarters that is able to be unlocked from each side of the
connection and that is not secured by a deadbolt or keyed lockset.
3. The principal building shall be served by single Municipal water, sanitary sewer, gas and/or electric utility service lines each with a single meter for
the respective utility where applicable.
4. The principal building shall have one heating and air conditioning system.
5. There shall be a minimum of three (3) garage stalls having direct exterior access (not in a tandem arrangement) attached to the principal building
with a driveway access in front of each stall so as to allow direct vehicle maneuvering to each of the stalls.
6. The property shall have one street address.
L. Tool houses, sheds and other such structures for the storage of domestic supplies and equipment. (Prior Code § 20-67-4; amd. 2018 Code)
11-67-5: CONDITIONAL USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are conditional uses in an R-6 District. (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures
set forth and regulated by chapter 4 of this title.)
A. Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the City; provided, that:
1. When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the property is screened and landscaped in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
2. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
B. Manufactured home parks; provided, that:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 391/497
1. The minimum area required for a manufactured home park designation shall be twenty (20) acres.
2. The following minimum lot requirements are satisfactorily met:
a. Lot area: Twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.
b. Lot width: Seventy five feet (75').
c. Lot depth: One hundred feet (100').
3. The following principal structure setbacks are satisfactorily met:
a. Front yard:
Road Class
Setbacks
From Centerline
Setbacks From
Right-Of-Way Lines
Principal/minor arterial 130 feet 65 feet
Collector street 130 feet 65 feet
Local street 65 feet 35 feet
From cul-de-sac right-of-way n/a 35 feet
Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more roads or highways which bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall project
beyond the front yard line of either road.
b. Side yards: Ten feet (10').
c. Rear yard: Twenty feet (20').
4. Accessory buildings, uses and equipment comply with the applicable provisions of section 11-18-2 of this title.
5. The total ground area of all residential buildings does not exceed a lot coverage of thirty percent (30%).
6. All residences shall be limited to a maximum height of one story or twenty five feet (25').
7. The manufactured home park is developed in accordance with the City subdivision ordinance and all public improvement requirements incorporated
therein.
8. A storm shelter is provided in compliance with Minnesota Statutes. The City may require additional measures as determined necessary to safeguard
the health and safety of persons occupying the manufactured home park. Such measures may include, but shall not be limited to, screening and/or
landscape berms. All emergency storm protection measures shall be subject to City Council approval.
9. The manufactured home park shall comply with Minnesota Statutes section 327.20 et seq., or all applicable City ordinances, whichever is the more
restrictive.
10. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
C. Personal wireless service towers and antennas not located on a public structure as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
D. Planned unit development as regulated by chapter 36 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-67-5)
11-67-6: LOT AREA AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an R-6 District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this
title:
A. Lot Area, Width And Depth:
1. Single-family:
a. Minimum lot area: Nine thousand (9,000) square feet.
b. Minimum lot width:
(1) Interior: Sixty feet (60').
(2) Corner: Ninety feet (90').
c. Minimum lot depth: One hundred feet (100').
2. Two-family:
a. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet.
b. Minimum total lot area: Fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 392/497
3. Townhouses, quadraminiums, manor homes:
a. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: Five thousand (5,000) square feet.
b. Minimum total lot area: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
B. Principal Structure Setbacks:
1. Front yard:
Setbacks
From Centerline
Setbacks From
Right-Of-Way Lines
Arterial/major collector street 130 feet 65 feet
Local street:
Principal building 55 feet 25 feet
Garage face 60 feet 30 feet
2. Side yards:
a. Interior: Seven feet (7').
b. Corner: As required for the front yard.
3. Rear yard:
a. Interior: Twenty feet (20').
b. Through lot: As required for the front yard.
C. Accessory Structure Setbacks: Accessory structure setbacks as regulated by section 11-18-2 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-67-6)
11-67-7: LOT COVERAGE AND HEIGHT:
The following lot coverage and height requirements shall be observed in an R-6 District:
A. The total ground area of all residential buildings shall not exceed a lot coverage of thirty percent (30%).
B. All principal buildings shall be limited to a maximum height of three (3) stories or thirty five feet (35'). (Prior Code § 20-67-7)
C. The height of accessory structures shall be governed by subsection 11-18-2F of this title. (Prior Code § 20-67-7; amd. 2018 Code)
11-67-8: TRANSITION REQUIREMENTS:
Any preliminary plat approved after March 13, 2006, abutting an R-1, R-2, R-3 or PUD District based on the lot standards of the aforementioned districts
shall have a minimum of one tier of single-family dwelling lots bordering such a district to be subject to the lot standards of the R-4A District. Exemptions to
the provisions of this section may be granted at the time of preliminary plat approval, provided one or more of the following conditions exist:
A. The properties are separated by a major collector or arterial street.
B. The properties are separated by a wetland, water body, floodplain, public open space, park or other such similar publicly reserved and development
restricted area with a minimum width of one hundred feet (100') across its entire length. (Prior Code § 20-67-8)
Chapter 68
R-7 RESIDENTIAL-HIGH DENSITY DISTRICT
11-68-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the R-7 Residential-High Density District is to provide for high density housing and directly related complementary uses. The allowance of
such uses are dependent upon the availability of publicly controlled sanitary sewer service. (Prior Code § 20-68-1)
11-68-2: PERMITTED USES:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 393/497
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted uses in the R-7 District:
A. Essential services.
B. Multiple-family dwellings.
C. Personal wireless service antennas located upon a public structure, as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
D. Public parks, playgrounds and recreational uses.
E. Residential care facilities serving seven (7) to sixteen (16) persons in a multiple-family structure.
F. Townhouses, quadraminiums, and manor homes.
G. Two-family dwellings. (Prior Code § 20-68-2)
11-68-3: INTERIM USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are interim uses in the R-7 District and are governed by chapter 5 of this title:
A. Farms, farmsteads, and farming.
B. Home extended business as regulated by chapter 29 of this title.
C. Model homes as regulated by chapter 20 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-68-3)
11-68-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted accessory uses in an R-7 District:
A. Accessory uses incidental and customary to the uses permitted in sections 11-68-2, 11-68-3, and 11-68-5 of this chapter.
B. Except as otherwise limited, private recreational facilities, only accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same lot and which are operated
for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their occasional guests.
C. Fences.
D. Home occupations.
E. In home daycare serving fourteen (14) or fewer persons in a single-family detached dwelling.
F. Noncommercial greenhouses, provided they do not exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area.
G. Off street loading.
H. Private garages and off street parking.
I. Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs, short wave radio dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the
operation of household electronic equipment including radio receivers, Federal licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers, as regulated
by chapter 33 of this title.
J. Recreational vehicles and equipment.
K. Tool houses, sheds and other such structures for the storage of domestic supplies and equipment. (Prior Code § 20-68-4)
11-68-5: CONDITIONAL USES:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 394/497
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are conditional uses in an R-7 District. (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures
set forth in and regulated by chapter 4 of this title.)
A. Elderly (senior citizen) housing; provided, that:
1. Not more than ten percent (10%) of the occupants may be persons sixty (60) years of age or under.
2. To continue to qualify for the elderly housing classification, the owner or agency shall annually file with the Zoning Administrator a certified copy of a
monthly resume of occupants of such a multiple dwelling, listing the number of tenants by age and clearly identifying and setting forth the relationship
of all occupants sixty (60) years of age or under to qualified tenants, or to the building.
3. There is adequate off street parking in compliance with chapter 21 of this title.
4. One off street loading space is provided in compliance with chapter 22 of this title.
5. Parking areas are screened and landscaped from view of surrounding and abutting residential districts in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
6. All signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in compliance with the provisions of chapter 37 of this title.
7. The principal use structure is in full compliance with the Minnesota State Building Code.
8. Elevator service is provided to each floor level above ground floor.
9. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
B. Halfway houses, as defined in section 11-2-2 of this title; provided, that:
1. The use is licensed by the State.
2. Provisions are made to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses.
3. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
C. Manufactured home parks; provided, that:
1. The minimum area required for a manufactured home park designation shall be twenty (20) acres.
2. The following minimum lot requirements are satisfactorily met:
a. Lot area: Twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.
b. Lot width: Seventy five feet (75').
c. Lot depth: One hundred feet (100').
3. The following principal structure setbacks are satisfactorily met:
a. Front yard:
Road Class
Setbacks
From Centerline
Setbacks From
Right-Of-Way Lines
Principal arterial/minor arterial 130 feet 65 feet
Collector street 130 feet 65 feet
Local street 65 feet 35 feet
From cul-de-sac right-of-way n/a 35 feet
Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more roads or highways which bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall project
beyond the front yard line of either road.
b. Side yards: Ten feet (10').
c. Rear yard: Twenty feet (20').
4. Accessory buildings, uses and equipment comply with the applicable provisions of section 11-18-2 of this title.
5. The total ground area of all residential buildings does not exceed a lot coverage of thirty percent (30%).
6. All residences be limited to a maximum height of one story or twenty five feet (25').
7. The manufactured home park is developed in accordance with the City subdivision ordinance and all public improvement requirements incorporated
therein.
8. A storm shelter is provided in compliance with Minnesota Statutes. The City may require additional measures as determined necessary to safeguard
the health and safety of persons occupying the manufactured home park. Such measures may include, but shall not be limited to, screening and/or
landscape berms. All emergency storm protection measures shall be subject to City Council approval.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 395/497
9. The manufactured home park shall comply with Minnesota Statutes section 327.20 et seq., or all applicable City ordinances, whichever is the more
restrictive.
10. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
D. Nursing homes and similar group housing, but not including hospitals, sanitariums, or similar institutions; provided, that:
1. Side yards are double the minimum requirements established for this district and are screened in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
2. Only the rear yard shall be used for play or recreational areas. Said area shall be fenced and controlled and screened in compliance with chapter 19
of this title.
3. The site shall be served by an arterial or collector street of sufficient capacity to accommodate traffic which will be generated.
4. All signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in compliance with the provisions of chapter 37 of this title.
5. All State Statutes and regulations governing such use are strictly adhered to and all required operating permits are secured.
6. Adequate off street parking is provided in compliance with chapter 21 of this title.
7. One off street loading space is provided in compliance with chapter 22 of this title.
8. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
E. Personal wireless service towers and antennas not located on a public structure as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
F. Planned unit development as regulated by chapter 36 of this title.
G. Public or semipublic recreational buildings and neighborhood or community centers; public and private educational institutions limited to elementary,
junior high and senior high schools; and religious institutions such as churches, chapels, temples and synagogues; provided, that:
1. Side yards shall be double that required for the district.
2. Adequate screening from abutting residential uses and landscaping is provided in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
3. Adequate off street parking and access is provided on the site in compliance with chapter 21 of this title and that such parking is adequately
screened and landscaped from surrounding and abutting residential uses in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
4. Adequate off street loading and service entrances are provided and regulated where applicable by chapter 22 of this title.
5. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
H. Swimming pools as an accessory use; provided, that:
1. The use is fenced in accordance with chapter 19 of this title.
2. The use is not located within the front yard.
3. The use shall meet setbacks for principal structures.
4. All necessary City permits are obtained for the use.
5. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied. (Prior Code § 20-68-5; amd. 2018 Code)
11-68-6: LOT AREA AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an R-7 District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this
title:
A. Lot Area:
1. Two-family dwellings:
a. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet.
b. Minimum total lot area: Fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.
2. Townhouses, quadraminiums, manor homes:
a. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: Five thousand (5,000) square feet.
b. Minimum total lot area: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
3. Multiple-family dwellings:
a. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: Two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 396/497
b. Minimum total lot area: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
4. Multiple-family dwelling-elderly housing:
a. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: One thousand (1,000) square feet per unit.
b. Minimum total lot area: Forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
B. Principal Structure Setbacks:
1. Front yard:
Setbacks
From Centerline
Setbacks From
Right-Of-Way Lines
Arterial/major collector street 130 feet 65 feet
Local street 65 feet 35 feet
2. Side yards:
a. Interior: Ten feet (10').
b. Corner: As required for the front yard.
3. Rear yard:
a. Interior: Twenty feet (20').
b. Through lot: As required for the front yard.
C. Accessory Structure Setbacks: Accessory structure setbacks are as regulated by section 11-18-2 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-68-6)
11-68-7: SCHEDULE OF ALLOWANCES:
Except for elderly housing, the lot areas per multiple-family dwelling unit prescribed in this section shall be further subject to the following schedule of
allowances, which shall be added to or subtracted from the minimum lot area per dwelling unit as prescribed, thereby relating density requirements to the
location, use and access provided the property.
A. For each parking space provided under the living area of a building or underground, subtract three hundred (300) square feet.
B. If an adjacent site is zoned A-2, R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-4 residential use, add three hundred (300) square feet per unit for that portion of any building within
two hundred feet (200') of said district.
C. If an adjacent site is zoned for commercial, industrial or institutional use, subtract three hundred (300) square feet per unit for that portion of any
building within two hundred feet (200') of said district.
D. For each unit containing bedrooms in excess of two (2), add three hundred (300) square feet.
E. The maximum allowance which may be subtracted under subsections A and C of this section shall be five hundred (500) square feet per unit. (Prior
Code § 20-68-7)
11-68-8: LOT COVERAGE, HEIGHT AND BULK:
The following lot coverage, height and bulk requirements shall be observed in the R-7 District:
A. The total lot coverage of all buildings shall not exceed thirty percent (30%).
B. The maximum floor area ratio (FAR) shall be 0.7.
C. All principal buildings shall be limited to a maximum height of three (3) stories or thirty five feet (35'). (Prior Code § 20-68-8)
D. The height of accessory buildings shall be governed by subsection 11-18-2F of this title. (Prior Code § 20-68-8; amd. 2018 Code)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 397/497
Chapter 69
R-MH MANUFACTURED HOUSING RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
11-69-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the R-MH Manufactured Housing Residential District is to provide a separate district for manufactured housing parks, distinct from other
residential areas. (Prior Code § 20-69-1)
11-69-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted uses in an R-MH District:
A. Personal wireless service antennas located upon a public structure, as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
B. Single-family detached manufactured housing units. (Prior Code § 20-69-2)
11-69-3: ACCESSORY USES:
The following are permitted accessory uses in an R-MH District:
A. Common swimming pool, tennis courts, and other recreational facilities which are operated for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the
park and their guests.
B. Community laundry facilities, storm shelter, park office, recreational building(s); provided, that such structures are of a permanent nature and comply
with the provisions of the Minnesota State Building Code.
C. Home occupations as regulated by chapter 28 of this title.
D. Noncommercial greenhouses and conservatories.
E. Operation and storage of such vehicles, equipment and machinery which are incidental and customary to permitted or conditional uses allowed in this
district.
F. Private garages, parking spaces and carports for licensed and operable passenger cars and trucks.
G. Private recreational vehicles and equipment.
H. Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs, short wave radio dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the
operation of household electronic equipment including radio receivers, Federal licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers, as regulated
by chapter 33 of this title.
I. Tool houses, sheds and similar buildings for storage of domestic supplied and noncommercial recreational equipment. (Prior Code § 20-69-3; amd. 2018
Code)
11-69-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following are conditional uses in an R-MH District. (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by chapter 4
of this title.)
A. Personal wireless service towers and antennas not located on a public structure as regulated by chapter 33 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-69-4)
11-69-5: DESIGN/OPERATIONAL STANDARDS FOR MANUFACTURED HOUSING:
A. General Provisions:
1. All land area shall be: a) adequately drained; b) landscaped to control dust; c) clean and free from refuse, garbage, rubbish or debris.
2. No tents shall be used for other than recreational purposes in a manufactured housing park.
3. There shall not be outdoor camping anywhere in a manufactured housing park.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 398/497
4. Access to manufactured housing parks shall be as approved by the City.
5. All structures (fences, storage, cabana, etc.) shall require a building permit from the building official.
6. The area beneath a manufactured housing unit shall be enclosed; except, that such enclosure must have access for inspection.
7. Laundry and clothing shall be hung out to dry only on lines located in City approved areas established and maintained exclusively for that purpose,
as identified on the manufactured housing park site plan.
8. A manufactured housing park shall have an adequate central community building with the following features: a) laundry drying areas and machines;
b) laundry washing machines; c) public toilets and lavatories; d) storm shelter. Such buildings shall have adequate heating in all areas and shall be
maintained in a safe, clear and sanitary condition. (Prior Code § 20-69-5)
B. Site Plan Requirements: The following site plan provisions are required: (2018 Code)
1. Legal description and size in square feet of the proposed manufactured housing park.
2. Location and size of all manufactured housing unit sites, dead storage areas, recreation areas, laundry drying areas, streets and roadways, parking
sites, and all setback dimensions (parking spaces, exact mobile home sites, etc.).
3. Detailed landscaping plans and specifications.
4. Location and width of sidewalks.
5. Plans for sanitary sewage disposal, surface drainage, water systems, underground electrical service and gas service.
6. Location and size of all streets abutting the manufactured housing park and all driveways from such streets to the manufactured housing park.
7. Street and road construction plans and specifications.
8. Plans for any and all structures. (Prior Code § 20-69-5)
9. Such other information as required or implied by this chapter or requested by the Zoning Administrator. (Prior Code § 20-69-5; amd. 2018 Code)
10. Name and address of developer(s) and/or owner(s).
11. Description of the method of disposing of garbage and refuse.
12. Detailed description of maintenance procedures and grounds supervision.
13. Details as to whether all of the area will be developed a portion at a time.
C. Design Standards:
1. Park Size: The minimum area required for a manufactured housing park designation shall be five (5) acres.
2. Individual Manufactured Housing Sites (Homes 14 Feet Wide Or Less):
a. Each manufactured housing site shall contain at least five thousand (5,000) square feet of land area for the exclusive use of the occupant:
(1) Width: No less than fifty feet (50').
(2) Depth: No less than one hundred feet (100').
b. Each manufactured housing site shall have frontage on an approved street or roadway, and the corner of each manufactured home shall be
marked and each site shall be numbered.
3. Individual Homesites (Homes In Excess Of 14 Feet, But Less Than 18 Feet In Width):
a. Each manufactured housing site shall contain at least six thousand fifty (6,050) square feet of land area for the exclusive use of the occupants:
(1) Width: No less than fifty five feet (55').
(2) Depth: No less than one hundred ten feet (110').
b. Each manufactured housing site shall have frontage on an approved street or roadway, and the corner of each manufactured home site shall be
marked, and each site shall be numbered.
4. Individual Manufactured Housing Sites (Homes Over 18 Feet In Width):
a. Each manufactured housing site shall contain at least six thousand five hundred (6,500) square feet of land area for the exclusive use of the
occupant:
(1) Width: No less than sixty five feet (65').
(2) Depth: No less than one hundred feet (100').
b. Each manufactured housing site shall have frontage on an approved street or roadway, and the corner of each manufactured home site shall be
marked, and each site shall be numbered.
5. Individual Manufactured Housing Unit Site Setbacks:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 399/497
a. In all manufactured housing parks, no housing unit shall be located closer than ten feet (10') to its side lot lines nor closer than thirty feet (30') to its
front lot line, or within ten feet (10') of its rear lot line.
b. All accessory structures such as awnings, cabanas, storage sheds, carports, windbreaks, entryways or solar energy systems shall be located no
closer than three feet (3') from any property line and in no case closer than ten feet (10') to the nearest adjoining manufactured home.
6. Building Requirements:
a. Height: No principal structure shall exceed one story or twenty five feet (25'), whichever is the least. (Prior Code § 20-69-5)
b. Accessory Buildings:
(1) Limitation: Accessory buildings, including garages, shall be limited to one per manufactured home lot. (Prior Code § 20-69-5; amd. 2018 Code)
(2) Allowable Floor Area: Maximum allowable floor area shall not exceed six and one-half percent (6.5%) of the lot size.
(3) Maximum Building Height: Sixteen feet (16').
(4) Location: The manufactured home park site plan shall designate the locations proposed for the development of garages and/or accessory
buildings on each manufactured home lot. Said accessory buildings shall comply with the following setback requirements:
(A) No accessory building shall be located in the front yard.
(B) An accessory building may be located in side or rear yards.
(C) All accessory buildings shall be set back from all adjoining lots a minimum of five feet (5'). Garages may be allowed with a zero lot line
setback and a shared driveway when built as a double garage and shared by adjacent lots.
(D) Accessory buildings shall not be located within any utility easements.
(E) On lots having a lot width of fifty five feet (55') or greater, an accessory building shall be located at least ten feet (10') from any other building
or structure on the same lot. On lots having a fifty foot (50') lot width, accessory buildings shall be located at least nine feet (9') from any building
or structure on the same lot.
c. Compliance: The unit structure is in compliance with the Guidelines for Manufactured Housing Installation, International Conference of Building
Officials, 1983, as may be amended.
d. Parking Limit: No manufactured home stand shall be used for parking more than one manufactured home.
7. Parking:
a. Each manufactured housing site shall have off street parking space for two (2) automobiles. All parking stalls shall be completely on the home lot
they serve.
b. Each manufactured housing park shall maintain additional hard surfaced off street parking lot(s) for guests of occupants in the amount of one
space for each three (3) home sites.
c. Access drives off streets and roads to all parking spaces and unit sites shall be hard surfaced according to specifications established by the City.
8. Utilities:
a. All manufactured housing units shall be connected to a public water and sanitary sewer system or a private water and sewer system approved by
the State Department of Health and the City.
b. All installations for disposal of surface stormwater must be approved by the City.
c. All utility connections shall be as approved by the City.
d. The source of fuel for cooking, heating or other purposes at each manufactured housing site shall be as approved by the City.
e. All utilities shall be underground. There shall be no overhead wires or supporting poles except those essential for street or other lighting purposes.
(Prior Code § 20-69-5)
f. No obstruction shall be permitted that impedes the inspection of plumbing, electrical facilities, and related manufactured home equipment. (Prior
Code § 20-69-5; amd. 2018 Code)
g. The park owner shall pay any required sewer connection fees to the City.
h. The park owner shall pay inspection and testing fees for utility service to the City.
i. Facilities for fire protection shall be installed as required by the City.
9. Internal Roads And Streets:
a. Roads and streets shall be bituminous or concrete surfaced as approved by the City.
b. All roads and streets shall have a concrete (mountable, roll type) curb and gutter.
c. All streets shall be developed with a roadbed of not less than twenty four feet (24') in width. If parking is permitted on the street then the roadbed
shall be at least thirty six feet (36') in width. To qualify for the lesser sized street, adequate additional off street parking, as determined by the City,
shall be provided and demonstrated.
d. The manufactured home park shall have a street lighting plan approved by the City.
10. Recreation:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 400/497
a. All manufactured housing parks shall have at least twenty percent (20%) of the land area developed for recreational use (tennis courts, children's
play equipment, swimming pool, golf green, etc.) developed and maintained at the owner/operator's expense.
b. In lieu of land dedication for public park purposes, a cash contribution as established by the City subdivision ordinance, as amended, shall be paid
to the City.
11. Landscaping:
a. Each site shall be properly landscaped with trees, hedges, grass, fences, windbreaks and the like.
b. A compact hedge, redwood fence or landscaped area shall be installed around each manufactured home park and be maintained in as new
condition at all times as approved.
c. All areas shall be landscaped in accordance with the landscaping plan approved by the City Council.
12. Lighting:
a. Artificial light shall be maintained during all hours of darkness in all buildings containing public toilets, laundry equipment, storm shelters, and the
like.
b. The manufactured housing park grounds shall be lighted as approved by the City from sunset to sunrise.
13. Storage:
a. Enclosed storage lockers (when provided) shall be located, whether adjacent to the manufactured home in a manufactured housing park or at
such other place in the park, as to be convenient to the unit for which it is provided, as approved by the City.
b. Storage of larger items, such as boats, boat trailers, recreational vehicles, etc., shall be accommodated in a separate secured and screened area
of the park, as approved by the City. No parking of such vehicles or equipment shall be permitted on the housing site.
14. Other Standards: For those items not specifically referenced, the design standards, as established by the Otsego subdivision ordinance, as
amended, shall be utilized for general development guidelines. (Prior Code § 20-69-5)
11-69-6: REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. It shall be the duty of the operator of the manufactured housing park to keep a record of all homeowners and occupants located within the park. The
register shall contain the following information:
1. The name and address of each unit occupant.
2. The name and address of the owner of each unit.
3. The make, model, year, and dimensions of each unit.
4. The state, territory or county issuing each unit's license.
5. The date of arrival and departure of each unit.
6. The number and type of motor vehicles of residents in the park.
B. The park operator shall keep the register available for inspection at all times by authorized City, State, and County officials, public health officials, and
other public offices whose duty necessitates acquisition of the information contained in the register. The register shall not be destroyed until after a
period of three (3) years following the date of departure of the registrant from the park. (Prior Code § 20-69-6)
11-69-7: MAINTENANCE REQUIRED:
The operator and/or owner of any manufactured housing park, or a duly authorized attendant and/or caretaker, shall be responsible at all times for keeping
the park, its facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly, operable and sanitary condition. The attendant or caretaker shall be answerable, along with said
operator/owner, for the violation of any provisions of this chapter to which said operator/owner is subject. (Prior Code § 20-69-7)
11-69-8: REVIEW PROCEDURES:
All informational elements as required in section 11-69-5 of this chapter shall be submitted to the City in accordance with the normal time schedule outlined
for zoning district amendments, whether or not the proposal requires a rezoning. Proposals for manufactured housing park expansions on properly zoned
land shall be reviewed for compliance with the applicable standards and requirements contained in section 11-69-5 of this chapter by all designated and
official City bodies. (Prior Code § 20-69-8)
Chapter 70
RESERVED
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 401/497
Chapter 71
RESERVED
Chapter 72
RESERVED
Chapter 73
RESERVED
Chapter 74
RESERVED
Chapter 75
B-1 TRANSITION BUSINESS DISTRICT
11-75-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the B-1 Transition Business District is to provide for the establishment of integrated neighborhood centers for convenient, limited office,
retail or service outlets which deal directly with the customer for whom the goods or services are furnished. The B-1 District is to provide for a transition
between residential and commercial development. (Prior Code § 20-75-1)
11-75-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following are permitted uses in a B-1 District:
A. Adult use, accessory.
B. Banks and other financial institutions.
C. Essential services other than transmission pipelines and transmission or substation lines in excess of thirty three (33) kilovolts and up to one hundred
(100) kilovolts.
D. Funeral homes and mortuaries.
E. Government and utility buildings and structures, City of Otsego only.
F. Instructional classes.
G. Offices and medical offices.
H. On site service businesses.
I. Parks, trails, play fields, playgrounds, and directly related buildings and structures, City of Otsego only.
J. Personal wireless service antennas located on a public structure, as regulated by chapter 33 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-75-2)
11-75-3: INTERIM USES:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 402/497
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are interim uses in the B-1 District and are governed by chapter 5 of this title.
A. Farms, farmsteads, and farming. (Prior Code § 20-75-3)
11-75-4: USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT:
Subject to applicable provisions of this chapter, performance standards established by this title, and processing requirements of section 11-8-2 of this title,
the following are uses allowed in a B-1 District by administrative permit as may be issued by the Zoning Administrator:
A. Open or outdoor sales, rental or display as an accessory use in association with an allowed principal use; provided, that:
1. The area so occupied shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the principal building.
2. No storage or display of merchandise shall be permitted in required rear, side or front yards and shall be limited to the area of the customer
entrances.
3. The outdoor sales, rental or display area shall be included in the calculations for parking spaces required for the use and shall not occupy space
required for parking as stipulated by chapter 21 of this title, except as may be exempted for cause by the Zoning Administrator.
B. Temporary, outdoor promotional events and sales; provided, that:
1. Promotional Events:
a. Such activity is directed towards the general public and includes grand openings, carnivals, craft shows, flea markets, mechanical and animal
rides and displays of materials that are typically not sold or serviced on the site.
b. The event shall not exceed the period specified in the administrative permit and in no case shall exceed three (3) consecutive calendar days per
event.
c. There shall be no more than two (2) promotional events per calendar year per property.
2. Outdoor Sales:
a. Such activity is directed towards the general public and includes warehouse sales, sidewalk sales, inventory reduction or liquidation sales,
distressed merchandise sales, seasonal merchandise sales, and licensed transient merchant and transient product merchant sales.
b. The following specific standards shall apply to all proposed temporary outdoor sales activities allowed by this subsection and by the business
licensing provisions of this Code in addition to other applicable Building and Safety Code requirements as determined by the Zoning Administrator:
(1) The maximum total time for temporary outdoor sales activities shall be the period specified in the administrative permit and, in no case, shall
exceed sixty (60) days per calendar year per property.
(2) There shall be no more sales activities than those specified in the administrative permit and, in no case, shall there be more than ten (10) sales
activities per year per property.
(3) Sales activities may be conducted within a required yard, provided the area is paved and the activity does not interfere with parking, traffic
circulation or emergency vehicle access. Temporary sales on unpaved landscaped areas is prohibited.
c. The following general standards apply:
(1) The event shall be clearly accessory to or promoting the permitted or conditional use approved for the site. Only merchandise which is normally
manufactured, sold, or stocked by the occupant on the subject premises on a regular or seasonal basis shall be sold and/or promoted.
(2) Tents, stands, and other similar temporary structures may be utilized, provided they are clearly identified on the submitted plan; and provided,
that it is determined by the Zoning Administrator that they will not impair the parking capacity, emergency access, or the safe and efficient
movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic on or off the site.
(3) The submitted plan shall clearly demonstrate that adequate off street parking for the proposed event can and will be provided for the duration of
the event. Determination of compliance with this requirement shall be made by the Zoning Administrator who shall consider the nature of the
event and the applicable parking requirements of this title. Consideration shall be given to the parking needs and requirements of other
occupants in the case of multi-tenant buildings. Parking on public rights-of-way and streets is prohibited; except, that parking on local streets
may be allowed on Saturday and Sunday only; provided, that the petitioner arranges for traffic control by authorized enforcement officers, as
approved in writing by the Zoning Administrator, at the petitioner's expense.
(4) Signage related to the event shall be in compliance with the temporary sign standards of this title and shall be allowed for the duration of the
event. Special signage for purposes of traffic direction and control may be authorized by the Zoning Administrator; the erection and removal of
such signage shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
(5) The approved permit shall be displayed on the premises for the duration of the event. (Prior Code § 20-75-4)
11-75-5: ACCESSORY USES:
The following are permitted accessory uses in a B-1 District:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 403/497
A. Commercial or business buildings and structures for a use accessory to the principal use, but such use shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the
gross floor space of the principal use.
B. Off street loading as regulated by chapter 22 of this title.
C. Off street parking as regulated by chapter 21 of this title, but not including semitrailer trucks.
D. Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs three and one-half meters (3.5 m) or less in diameter, short wave radio
dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers, Federal licensed amateur radio stations
and television receivers, as regulated by chapter 33 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-75-5; amd. 2018 Code)
11-75-6: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following are conditional uses in a B-1 District subject to the procedures set forth in and regulated by chapter 4 of this title:
A. Daycare facilities as regulated by chapter 30 of this title.
B. Essential services involving transmission pipelines and transmission or substation lines in excess of thirty three (33) kilovolts and up to one hundred
(100) kilovolts.
C. Fitness centers limited to two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross floor area or less; provided, that:
1. The total number of stations shall not exceed one per one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area.
2. Hours of operation shall be limited to five o'clock (5:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. unless otherwise allowed by the City Council.
D. Governmental and public utility buildings and structures, other than City of Otsego.
E. Mixed uses. Buildings combining residential and nonresidential uses allowed in this district; provided, that:
1. The residential and nonresidential uses shall not conflict in any manner.
2. The residential building standards as outlined in the R-7 District are met.
F. Multiple-family dwelling structures subject to the requirements of the R-7 District.
G. Nursing homes, residential care facilities, continuing care retirement communities and senior housing with service establishments licensed by the
Minnesota Department of Health; provided, that:
1. Side and rear yards shall be screened in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
2. Only the rear yard shall be used for outdoor recreational areas, and said area shall be fenced and controlled and screened in compliance with
chapter 19 of this title.
3. The site shall be served by an arterial or major collector street of sufficient capacity to accommodate traffic which will be generated by the use.
4. The use of exterior building materials shall be as required for buildings in the R-7 District.
5. All State Statutes and rules governing such uses are strictly adhered to and all required operating permits are secured.
H. Personal wireless service towers and antennas not located on a public structure, as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
I. Veterinary clinics; provided, that:
1. All areas in which animals are confined are located indoors and are properly soundproofed from adjacent properties.
2. Animal carcasses are properly disposed of in a manner not utilizing on site garbage facilities or incineration, and the carcasses are properly
refrigerated during periods prior to disposal.
3. An animal kennel is permitted as a use accessory to the veterinary clinic; provided, that:
a. An indoor exercise area shall be provided to accommodate the periodic exercising of animals boarded at the kennel. No outdoor exercising of
animals shall be permitted.
b. A ventilation system shall be designed so that no odors or organisms will spread between wards or to the outside air and will be capable of
completely exchanging internal air at a rate of at least twice per hour. Air temperature must be maintained between sixty degrees Fahrenheit
(60°F) and seventy five degrees Fahrenheit (75°F).
c. A room separate from the kennel area shall be provided of sufficient size to adequately separate animals that are sick or injured from healthy
animals.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 404/497
d. Indoor animal kennel floors and walls shall be made of nonporous materials or sealed concrete to make it nonporous.
e. Animal wastes shall be flushed down an existing sanitary sewer system or enclosed in a container of sufficient construction to eliminate odors and
organisms and shall be properly disposed of at least once per day.
f. All State Health Department and Minnesota Pollution Control Agency requirements for such facilities are met. (Prior Code § 20-75-6)
11-75-7: LOT REQUIREMENTS AND SETBACKS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in a B-1 District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this
title:
A. Lot Area: One acre.
B. Lot Width: One hundred twenty five feet (125').
C. Maximum Lot Coverage:
1. Building and structures: Thirty percent (30%).
2. Impervious surfaces: Seventy percent (70%).
D. Setbacks:
1. Front yard:
a. Setbacks from centerline: Sixty five feet (65').
b. Setbacks from right-of-way lines: Thirty feet (30').
Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets or highways which bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall
project beyond the front yard line of either street.
2. Side yards: Ten feet (10').
3. Rear yard: Twenty five feet (25'). (Prior Code § 20-75-7)
11-75-8: MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT:
A. Principal building: Thirty five feet (35').
B. Accessory building: Per subsection 11-18-2F of this title. (Prior Code § 20-75-8)
Chapter 76
B-2 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
11-76-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the B-2 Highway Commercial District is to provide for and limit the establishment of motor vehicle oriented or dependent high intensity
commercial and service activities. (Prior Code § 20-76-1)
11-76-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following are permitted uses in a B-2 District:
A. Adult uses, principal and accessory.
B. Banks and other financial institutions.
C. Brew on premises.
D. Brewpubs.
E. Commercial recreational uses, indoor only.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 405/497
F. Essential services other than transmission pipelines and transmission or substation lines in excess of thirty three (33) kilovolts and up to one hundred
(100) kilovolts.
G. Fitness centers and health clubs.
H. Funeral homes and mortuaries.
I. Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures, City of Otsego only.
J. Hotels.
K. Instructional classes.
L. Office and medical offices.
M. On site and off site service businesses.
N. Parks, trails, play fields, playgrounds, and directly related buildings and structures, City of Otsego only.
O. Pawnshops.
P. Personal wireless service antennas located on a public structure, as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
Q. Private clubs or lodges serving food and beverages.
R. Restaurants (not convenience type), cafes.
S. Retail sales.
T. Tattoo parlors. (Prior Code § 20-76-2)
11-76-3: INTERIM USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are interim uses in the B-2 District and are governed by chapter 5 of this title:
A. Farms, farmsteads, and farming. (Prior Code § 20-76-3)
11-76-4: USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT:
Subject to applicable provisions of this chapter, performance standards established by this title, and processing requirements of section 11-8-2 of this title,
the following are uses allowed in a B-2 District by administrative permit as may be issued by the Zoning Administrator:
A. Open or outdoor sales, rental or display as an accessory use in association with an allowed principal use; provided, that:
1. The area so occupied shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the principal building.
2. No storage or display of merchandise shall be permitted in required rear, side or front yards and shall be limited to the area of the customer
entrances.
3. The outdoor sales, rental or display area shall be included in the calculations for parking spaces required for the use and shall not occupy space
required for parking as stipulated by chapter 21 of this title, except as may be exempted for cause by the Zoning Administrator.
B. Temporary, outdoor promotional events and sales; provided, that:
1. Promotional Events:
a. Such activity is directed towards the general public and includes grand openings, carnivals, craft shows, flea markets, mechanical and animal
rides and displays of materials that are typically not sold or serviced on the site.
b. The event shall not exceed the period specified in the administrative permit and in no case shall exceed three (3) consecutive calendar days per
event.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 406/497
c. There shall be no more than two (2) promotional events per calendar year per property.
2. Outdoor Sales:
a. Such activity is directed towards the general public and includes warehouse sales, sidewalk sales, inventory reduction or liquidation sales,
distressed merchandise sales, seasonal merchandise sales, and licensed transient merchant and transient product merchant sales.
b. The following specific standards shall apply to all proposed temporary outdoor sales activities allowed by this subsection and by the business
licensing provisions of this Code in addition to other applicable Building and Safety Code requirements as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
(1) The maximum total time for temporary outdoor sales activities shall be the period specified in the administrative permit and, in no case, shall
exceed sixty (60) days per calendar year per property.
(2) There shall be no more sales activities than those specified in the administrative permit and, in no case, shall there be more than ten (10) sales
activities per year per property.
(3) Sales activities may be conducted within a required yard, provided the area is paved and the activity does not interfere with parking, traffic
circulation or emergency vehicle access. Temporary sales on unpaved landscaped areas is prohibited.
c. General standards apply as follows:
(1) The event shall be clearly accessory to or promoting the permitted or conditional use approved for the site. Only merchandise which is normally
manufactured, sold, or stocked by the occupant on the subject premises on a regular or seasonal basis shall be sold and/or promoted.
(2) Tents, stands, and other similar temporary structures may be utilized, provided they are clearly identified on the submitted plan; and provided,
that it is determined by the Zoning Administrator that they will not impair the parking capacity, emergency access, or the safe and efficient
movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic on or off the site.
(3) The submitted plan shall clearly demonstrate that adequate off street parking for the proposed event can and will be provided for the duration of
the event. Determination of compliance with this requirement shall be made by the Zoning Administrator who shall consider the nature of the
event and the applicable parking requirements of this title. Consideration shall be given to the parking needs and requirements of other
occupants in the case of multi-tenant buildings. Parking on public rights-of-way and streets is prohibited; except, that parking on local streets
may be allowed on Saturday and Sunday only; provided, that the petitioner arranges for traffic control by authorized enforcement officers, as
approved in writing by the Zoning Administrator, at the petitioner's expense.
(4) Signage related to the event shall be in compliance with the temporary sign standards of this title and shall be allowed for the duration of the
event. Special signage for purposes of traffic direction and control may be authorized by the Zoning Administrator. The erection and removal of
such signage shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
(5) The approved permit shall be displayed on the premises for the duration of the event. (Prior Code § 20-76-4)
11-76-5: ACCESSORY USES:
The following are permitted accessory uses in a B-2 District:
A. Commercial or business buildings and structures for a use accessory to the principal use, but such use shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the
gross floor space of the principal use.
B. Off street loading as regulated by chapter 22 of this title.
C. Off street parking as regulated by chapter 21 of this title.
D. Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs three and one-half meters (3.5 m) or less in diameter, short wave radio
dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers, Federal licensed amateur radio stations
and television receivers, as regulated by chapter 33 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-76-5; amd. 2018 Code)
11-76-6: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following are conditional uses in a B-2 District subject to the procedures set forth in and regulated by chapter 4 of this title:
A. Commercial drive-through, mechanical and/or self-service car washes; provided, that:
1. The architectural appearance and functional plan of the building and site shall not be so dissimilar to the existing buildings or areas as to cause
impairment in property values or constitute a blighting influence.
2. Magazining or stacking space is constructed to accommodate an appropriate number of vehicles and shall be subject to the approval of the City
Council.
3. At the boundaries of a residential district, a strip of not less than five feet (5') shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with chapter 19 of this
title.
4. Each light standard island and all islands in the parking lot shall be landscaped or covered.
5. Parking or car magazine storage space shall be screened from view of abutting residential districts in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 407/497
6. The entire area, other than occupied by the building or plantings, shall be surfaced with blacktop or concrete which will control dust and drainage
which is subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
7. The entire area shall have a drainage system which is subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
8. All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source is not visible from the public right-of-way or from an abutting residence and shall be
in compliance with chapter 16 of this title.
9. Vehicular access points shall be limited, shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement and shall be subject to the approval of the
City Engineer.
10. All signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in compliance with the provisions of chapter 37 of this title.
11. Provisions are made to control and reduce noise in accordance with chapter 16 of this title.
B. Convenience food restaurants; provided, that:
1. The architectural appearance and functional plan of the building and site shall not be so dissimilar to the existing buildings or area so as to constitute
a blighting influence within a reasonable distance of the lot.
2. At the boundaries of a residential district, a strip of not less than five feet (5') shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with chapter 19 of this
title.
3. Each light standard island and all islands in the parking lot shall be landscaped or covered.
4. Parking areas shall be screened from view of abutting residential districts in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
5. Parking areas and driveways shall be curbed with continuous curbs not less than six inches (6") high above the parking lot or driveway grade.
6. Vehicular access points shall be limited, shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movements, shall comply with chapter 21 of this title
and shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
7. All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source is not visible from the public right-of-way or from an abutting residence and shall be
in compliance with chapter 16 of this title.
8. The entire area shall have a drainage system which is subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
9. The entire area, other than occupied by buildings or structures or plantings, shall be surfaced with blacktop or concrete which is subject to the
approval of the City Engineer.
10. All signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in compliance with the provisions of chapter 37 of this title.
C. Daycare facilities as regulated by chapter 30 of this title.
D. Essential services involving transmission pipelines and transmission or substation lines in excess of thirty three (33) kilovolts and up to one hundred
(100) kilovolts.
E. Governmental and public utility buildings and structures, other than City of Otsego.
F. Micro-distilleries with tasting rooms.
G. Minor automobile repair, provided, that:
1. The hours of operation shall be limited to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. unless extended by the City Council.
2. All repair activities shall be conducted within the principal building with overhead doors to the service area(s) closed at all times, except when moving
vehicles in and out.
3. The emission of odor by a use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota regulation APC
7011, as amended.
4. All flammable materials, including liquids and rags, shall conform with the applicable provisions of the Minnesota State Fire Code.
5. All outside storage is prohibited. Storage of damaged vehicles, vehicles being repaired and vehicle parts and accessory equipment must be
completely inside a principal or accessory building.
H. Motor fuel station.
1. Secondary Uses: Secondary uses occurring within the same property as the motor fuel station shall be allowed as provided for within this zoning
district.
2. Hours: Hours of operation shall be limited to the hours between five o'clock (5:00) A.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight unless extended by the
City Council.
3. Architectural Standards:
a. All elevations of the principal and accessory structures, including the canopy columns, are to have essentially the same or a coordinated
harmonious finish treatment that shall comply with subsection 11-17-4D1a of this title.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 408/497
b. Contrasting colors not defined as earth tones may be used on the exterior of principal and accessory buildings subject to the following:
(1) Ten percent (10%) of the building facade may contain contrasting colors.
(2) The canopy may have contrasting color bands or accent lines not to exceed a cumulative width of twelve inches (12").
4. Canopy: A protective canopy structure may be located over the pump island(s), as an accessory structure, subject to the following performance
standards:
a. The edge of the canopy shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from front and side lot lines; provided, that adequate visibility is
maintained both on site and off site.
b. The canopy shall not exceed eighteen feet (18') in height and must provide fourteen feet (14') of clearance underneath the structure.
5. Landscaping: A minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of the lot, parcel, or tract of land used exclusively for the motor fuel facility shall remain as a
landscaped area including turf grass, trees, shrubbery, plantings, or fencing, subject to the following performance standards:
a. At the boundaries of the lot, the following landscape area shall be required in compliance with section 11-19-3 of this title:
(1) An area not less than fifteen feet (15') wide abutting public rights-of-way.
(2) An area not less than five feet (5') wide along all side and rear lot lines.
(3) A buffer yard of not less than twenty feet (20') wide where the use abuts residentially zoned property.
6. Fuel Pumps: Fuel pumps shall be installed and located in accordance with the following performance standards:
a. All fuel pumps shall be set back a minimum of thirty feet (30') from any property line.
b. Fuel pumps shall be elevated on islands six inches (6") above the drive aisle surface.
c. There shall be a minimum setback of twenty four feet (24') between the curb face of the pump islands.
7. Access And Circulation:
a. Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement and shall comply with chapter 21 of this title.
b. The site design shall accommodate adequate turning radius and vertical clearance for a semitrailer truck.
8. Off Street Parking:
a. Off street parking stalls shall be provided as required by chapter 21 of this title. The number of required parking spaces shall be calculated solely
based upon the use and the square footage of the principal building.
b. The number of parking stalls designed to accommodate Class 4 or larger vehicles shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the total number
of off street parking stalls provided within the property.
c. Parking spaces shall be screened from abutting residential zoned properties in compliance with section 11-19-3 of this title.
9. Pedestrians: An internal site pedestrian circulation system shall be defined and appropriate provisions made to protect such areas from
encroachments by parked or moving vehicles, subject to the following performance standards:
a. There shall be a pedestrian sidewalk a minimum of five feet (5') wide and clear of any obstacle or impediment along the front width of the principal
building. The pedestrian sidewalk may be reduced to a minimum of three feet (3') wide and clear of any obstacle or impediment when segregated
from parking or drive aisles by a physical barrier that prevents vehicles from overhanging the pedestrian sidewalk.
10. Outside Sales And Service: Outside sales and service shall be allowed as an accessory use; provided, that:
a. Areas Indicated: Areas for outdoor sales and services shall be clearly indicated on the site plan and reviewed at the time of application for a
conditional use permit. No outdoor sales or services shall be allowed outside of those areas so designated on the approved site plan without
approval of an amended conditional use permit.
b. Location: Outdoor sales and services shall be located upon a concrete or asphalt surface and shall not encroach into any required principal
building setback, required parking stall, drive aisle, or pedestrian sidewalk required by this chapter, or otherwise impede vehicle and pedestrian
circulation.
c. Outdoor Sales:
(1) The area devoted to outdoor sales shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the gross floor area of the principal building or two hundred (200)
square feet, whichever is less.
(2) The height of sales displays shall not obstruct any window or otherwise impair a clear view of the pump islands from the cashier station within
the building and shall comply with the following:
(A) Displays located between fuel pumps under the canopy shall not exceed three feet (3') in height measured from the grade of the adjacent
drive aisle to the top of the display.
(B) All other outdoor displays shall not exceed five feet (5') in height measured from grade to the top of the display.
(3) Propane sales limited to twenty (20) pound capacity tanks may be allowed provided the propane tanks are secured in a locker and meet all
Building and Fire Codes.
(4) Freezers for ice products may be located at the front of the building, or located in a side or rear yard and screened from view from adjacent
properties or public rights-of-way by materials consistent with the principal building.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 409/497
d. Outdoor Services: Compressed air service, or vacuum machines, and/or electric charging stations shall not be located in a yard abutting
residentially zoned property.
11. Exterior Lighting: A comprehensive lighting plan shall be submitted demonstrating compliance with section 11-16-6 of this title and the following
performance standards:
a. Canopy lighting shall only be permitted under the canopy structure, and consist of recessed canisters with no portion of the light source or fixture
extending below the bottom face of the canopy.
b. Total canopy illumination below the canopy may not exceed one hundred fifteen (115) foot-candles at ground level.
c. The canopy fascia shall not be illuminated except for signs allowed in accordance with this section.
12. Signs:
a. A comprehensive sign plan shall be submitted demonstrating compliance with chapter 37 of this title.
b. Signs may be allowed on a canopy in lieu of any signs mounted on the principal structure elevation facing the yard in which the canopy is located;
provided, that the area of the canopy mounted sign(s) does not exceed more than twenty percent (20%) of the area of the canopy elevation.
13. Noise:
a. Noise control shall be required to comply with section 11-16-10 of this title.
b. A public address system shall not be audible at any property line.
c. Play of music or advertisement from a public address system is prohibited.
14. Litter Control:
a. Exterior trash receptacles shall be provided at convenient locations to facilitate litter control.
b. The operation shall be responsible for litter control on a daily basis within the property.
c. Trash and recycling containers other than receptacles intended for patron use shall be screened within an enclosure as required by section 11-18-
4 of this title.
15. Stormwater Management And Drainage: The entire site other than taken up by a building, structure, or plantings shall be surfaced with asphalt,
concrete, cobblestone, or paving brick subject to the following performance standards:
a. All plans for stormwater management and drainage shall comply with section 11-16-5 of this title, subject to review and approval of the City
Engineer.
b. Drainage from all fueling areas shall be directed to an oil/grit separator that complies with the following minimum design standards:
(1) A minimum of four hundred (400) cubic feet of permanent pool storage capacity per acre of drainage area.
(2) A minimum pool depth of four feet (4').
(3) A minimum oil containment capacity of eight hundred (800) gallons.
(4) Minimum maintenance/inspection of two (2) times per year and/or after measurable spill events as defined by the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency.
(5) Any measurable spill event shall be reported to the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
I. Motor vehicle sales, leasing, and rental including new and used automobiles, light trucks, recreational vehicles and equipment, motorcycles, boats and
marine equipment; provided, that:
1. An enclosed building that complies with the following standards shall be constructed:
Lot Size
Minimum Lot
Coverage By Buildings1
Minimum
Building Size1
Less than 2.00 acres 10 percent 2,500 square feet
2.01 acres to 4.00 acres 10 percent 10,000 square feet
4.01 acres and larger 20 percent 40,000 square feet
Note:
1. Whichever results in a larger building.
2. The architectural appearance and functional plan of the building and site shall not be so dissimilar to the existing buildings or area so as to constitute
a blighting influence.
3. The outdoor sales lot shall be surfaced with bituminous or concrete material and surrounded by perimeter concrete curb.
4. The use shall be fenced or screened from view of adjacent residential districts in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 410/497
5. The lot shall have frontage, if not direct access, to a collector or arterial street as designated by the Comprehensive Plan. Vehicular access points
shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement and shall comply with chapter 21 of this title, subject to approval of the City
Engineer.
6. Off street parking and loading areas shall be provided in conformance with chapters 21 and 22 of this title exclusive of areas used for outdoor sales.
7. Site lighting shall be accomplished in such a way as to have no direct source of light visible from adjacent land in residential use or from the public
right-of-way and the location, type, and illumination field of all site lighting shall comply with chapter 16 of this title.
8. The number, size, and location of all signs and visual communication shall comply with chapter 37 of this title.
9. Accessory major or minor auto repair or car washing shall be allowed; provided, that all activities occur within an enclosed building.
10. Accessory outdoor storage shall be limited to vehicles being serviced which shall be fully screened from view of adjacent properties and the public
right-of-way in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
11. Hours of operation shall be limited to eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. unless otherwise approved by the City Council.
J. Small breweries with tap rooms.
K. Theaters and other places of assembly; provided, that the site shall be served by an arterial or major collector street of sufficient capacity to
accommodate traffic which will be generated by the use.
L. Veterinary clinics and animal kennels; provided, that:
1. All areas in which animals are confined are located indoors and are properly soundproofed from adjacent properties.
2. Animal carcasses are properly disposed of in a manner not utilizing on site garbage facilities or incineration, and the carcasses are properly
refrigerated during periods prior to disposal.
3. An animal kennel is permitted as a use accessory to the veterinary clinic; provided, that:
a. An indoor exercise area shall be provided to accommodate the periodic exercising of animals boarded at the kennel. No outdoor exercising of
animals shall be permitted.
b. A ventilation system shall be designed so that no odors or organisms will spread between wards or to the outside air and will be capable of
completely exchanging internal air at a rate of at least twice per hour. Air temperature must be maintained between sixty degrees Fahrenheit
(60°F) and seventy five degrees Fahrenheit (75°F).
c. A room separate from the kennel area shall be provided of sufficient size to adequately separate animals that are sick or injured from healthy
animals.
d. Indoor animal kennel floors and walls shall be made of nonporous materials or sealed concrete to make it nonporous.
e. Animal wastes shall be flushed down an existing sanitary sewer system or enclosed in a container of sufficient construction to eliminate odors and
organisms and shall be properly disposed of at least once per day.
f. All State Health Department and Minnesota Pollution Control Agency requirements for such facilities are met. (Prior Code § 20-76-6; amd. Ord.
2017-14, 11-13-2017; 2018 Code)
11-76-7: LOT REQUIREMENTS AND SETBACKS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in a B-2 District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this
title:
A. Lot Area: One acre.
B. Lot Width: Two hundred feet (200').
C. Setbacks:
1. Front yard:
a. Setbacks from centerline: Sixty five feet (65').
b. Setbacks from right-of-way lines: Thirty feet (30').
Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets or highways which bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall
project beyond the front yard line of either street.
2. Side yards: Ten feet (10') unless abutting a residential district, then thirty five feet (35').
3. Rear yard: Twenty feet (20') unless abutting a residential district, then thirty five feet (35'). (Prior Code § 20-76-7)
11-76-8: MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 411/497
A. Principal building: Thirty five feet (35').
B. Accessory building: Per subsection 11-18-2F of this title. (Prior Code § 20-76-8)
Chapter 77
B-3 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
11-77-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the B-3 District is to provide specifically for the regulation of high intensity commercial uses located within the General Business District of
the City and other intense commercial areas of the City. (Prior Code § 20-77-1; amd. 2018 Code)
11-77-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following are permitted uses in a B-3 District:
A. Adult uses, principal and accessory.
B. Banks and other financial institutions.
C. Brew on premises.
D. Brewpubs.
E. Commercial recreational uses, indoor only.
F. Essential services other than transmission pipelines and transmission or substation lines in excess of thirty three (33) kilovolts and up to one hundred
(100) kilovolts.
G. Fitness centers and health clubs.
H. Funeral homes and mortuaries.
I. Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures, City of Otsego only.
J. Hotels.
K. Instructional classes.
L. Office and medical offices.
M. On site and off site service businesses.
N. Parks, trails, play fields, playgrounds, and directly related buildings and structures, City of Otsego only.
O. Pawnshops.
P. Personal wireless service antennas located on a public structure, as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
Q. Private clubs or lodges serving food and beverages.
R. Restaurants, not convenience type, cafes.
S. Retail sales.
T. Tattoo parlors. (Prior Code § 20-77-2)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 412/497
11-77-3: INTERIM USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are interim uses in the B-3 District and are governed by chapter 5 of this title:
A. Farms, farmsteads, and farming. (Prior Code § 20-77-3)
11-77-4: USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT:
Subject to applicable provisions of this chapter, performance standards established by this title, and processing requirements of section 11-8-2 of this title,
the following are uses allowed in a B-3 District by administrative permit as may be issued by the Zoning Administrator:
A. Open or outdoor sales, rental or display as an accessory use in association with an allowed principal use; provided, that:
1. The area so occupied shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the principal building.
2. No storage or display of merchandise shall be permitted in the required rear, side or front yard and shall be limited to the area of the customer
entrances.
3. The outdoor sales, rental or display area shall be included in the calculations for parking spaces required for the use and shall not occupy space
required for parking as stipulated by chapter 21 of this title, except as may be exempted for cause by the Zoning Administrator.
B. Temporary, outdoor promotional events and sales; provided, that:
1. Promotional Events:
a. Such activity is directed towards the general public and includes grand openings, carnivals, craft shows, flea markets, mechanical and animal
rides and displays of materials that are typically not sold or serviced on the site.
b. The event shall not exceed the period specified in the administrative permit and in no case shall exceed three (3) consecutive calendar days per
event.
c. There shall be no more than two (2) promotional events per calendar year per property.
2. Outdoor Sales:
a. Such activity is directed towards the general public and includes warehouse sales, sidewalk sales, inventory reduction or liquidation sales,
distressed merchandise sales, seasonal merchandise sales, and licensed transient merchant and transient product merchant sales.
b. The following specific standards shall apply to all proposed temporary outdoor sales activities allowed by this subsection and by the business
licensing provisions of this Code in addition to other applicable Building and Safety Code requirements as determined by the Zoning Administrator:
(1) The maximum total time for temporary outdoor sales activities shall be the period specified in the administrative permit and, in no case, shall
exceed sixty (60) days per calendar year per property.
(2) There shall be no more sales activities than those specified in the administrative permit and, in no case, shall there be more than ten (10) sales
activities per year per property.
(3) Sales activities may be conducted within a required yard, provided the area is paved and the activity does not interfere with parking, traffic
circulation or emergency vehicle access. Temporary sales on unpaved landscaped areas is prohibited.
c. General standards apply as follows:
(1) The event shall be clearly accessory to or promoting the permitted or conditional use approved for the site. Only merchandise which is normally
manufactured, sold, or stocked by the occupant on the subject premises on a regular or seasonal basis shall be sold and/or promoted.
(2) Tents, stands, and other similar temporary structures may be utilized, provided they are clearly identified on the submitted plan; and provided,
that it is determined by the Zoning Administrator that they will not impair the parking capacity, emergency access, or the safe and efficient
movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic on or off the site.
(3) The submitted plan shall clearly demonstrate that adequate off street parking for the proposed event can and will be provided for the duration of
the event. Determination of compliance with this requirement shall be made by the Zoning Administrator who shall consider the nature of the
event and the applicable parking requirements of this title. Consideration shall be given to the parking needs and requirements of other
occupants in the case of multi-tenant buildings. Parking on public rights-of-way and streets is prohibited; except, that parking on local streets
may be allowed on Saturday and Sunday only; provided, that the petitioner arranges for traffic control by authorized enforcement officers, as
approved in writing by the Zoning Administrator, at the petitioner's expense.
(4) Signage related to the event shall be in compliance with the temporary sign standards of this title and shall be allowed for the duration of the
event. Special signage for purposes of traffic direction and control may be authorized by the Zoning Administrator. The erection and removal of
such signage shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
(5) The approved permit shall be displayed on the premises for the duration of the event. (Prior Code § 20-77-4)
11-77-5: ACCESSORY USES:
The following are permitted accessory uses in a B-3 District:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 413/497
A. Commercial or business buildings and structures for a use accessory to the principal use but such use shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the gross
floor space of the principal use.
B. Off street loading as regulated by chapter 22 of this title.
C. Off street parking as regulated by chapter 21 of this title.
D. Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs three and one-half meters (3.5 m) or less in diameter, short wave radio
dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers, Federal licensed amateur radio stations
and television receivers, as regulated by chapter 33 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-77-5; amd. 2018 Code)
11-77-6: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following are conditional uses in a B-3 District subject to the procedures set forth in and regulated by chapter 4 of this title:
A. Commercial drive-through, mechanical and/or self-service car washes; provided, that:
1. The architectural appearance and functional plan of the building and site shall not be so dissimilar to the existing buildings or areas as to cause
impairment in property values or constitute a blighting influence.
2. Magazining or stacking space is constructed to accommodate an appropriate number of vehicles and shall be subject to the approval of the City
Council.
3. At the boundaries of a residential district, a strip of not less than five feet (5') shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with chapter 19 of this
title.
4. Each light standard island and all islands in the parking lot are landscaped or covered.
5. Parking or car magazine storage space shall be screened from view of abutting residential districts in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
6. The entire area other than occupied by the building or planting shall be surfaced with blacktop or concrete which will control dust and drainage which
is subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
7. The entire area shall have a drainage system which is subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
8. All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source is not visible from the public right-of-way or from an abutting residence and shall be
in compliance with chapter 16 of this title.
9. Vehicular access points shall be limited, shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement and shall be subject to the approval of the
City Engineer.
10. All signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in compliance with the provisions of chapter 37 of this title.
11. Provisions are made to control and reduce noise in accordance with chapter 16 of this title.
B. Convenience food restaurants; provided, that:
1. The architectural appearance and functional plan of the building and site shall not be so dissimilar to the existing buildings or area so as to constitute
a blighting influence within a reasonable distance of the lot.
2. At the boundaries of a residential district, a strip of not less than five feet (5') shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with chapter 19 of this
title.
3. Each light standard island and all islands in the parking lot are landscaped or covered.
4. Parking areas shall be screened from view of abutting residential districts in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
5. Parking areas and driveways shall be curbed with continuous curbs not less than six inches (6") high above the parking lot or driveway grade.
6. Vehicular access points shall be limited, shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movements, shall comply with chapter 21 of this title
and shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
7. All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source is not visible from the public right-of-way or from an abutting residence and shall be
in compliance with chapter 16 of this title.
8. The entire area shall have a drainage system which is subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
9. The entire area other than occupied by buildings or structures or plantings, shall be surfaced with blacktop or concrete which is subject to the
approval of the City Engineer.
10. All signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in compliance with the provisions of chapter 37 of this title.
C. Daycare facilities as regulated by chapter 30 of this title.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 414/497
D. Essential services involving transmission pipelines and transmission or substation lines in excess of thirty three (33) kilovolts and up to one hundred
(100) kilovolts.
E. Governmental and public utility buildings and structures, other than City of Otsego.
F. Micro-distilleries with tasting rooms.
G. Minor automobile repair, provided, that:
1. The hours of operation shall be limited to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. unless extended by the City Council.
2. All repair activities shall be conducted within the principal building with overhead doors to the service area(s) closed at all times, except when moving
vehicles in and out.
3. The emission of odor by a use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota regulation APC
7011, as amended.
4. All flammable materials, including liquids and rags, shall conform with the applicable provisions of the Minnesota State Fire Code.
5. All outside storage is prohibited. Storage of damaged vehicles, vehicles being repaired and vehicle parts and accessory equipment must be
completely inside a principal or accessory building.
H. Motor fuel station.
1. Secondary Uses: Secondary uses occurring within the same property as the motor fuel station shall be allowed as provided for within this zoning
district.
2. Hours: Hours of operation shall be limited to the hours between five o'clock (5:00) A.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight unless extended by the
City Council.
3. Architectural Standards:
a. All elevations of the principal and accessory structures, including the canopy columns, are to have essentially the same or a coordinated
harmonious finish treatment that shall comply with subsection 11-17-4D1a of this title.
b. Contrasting colors not defined as earth tones may be used on the exterior of principal and accessory buildings subject to the following:
(1) Ten percent (10%) of the building facade may contain contrasting colors.
(2) The canopy may have contrasting color bands or accent lines not to exceed a cumulative width of twelve inches (12").
4. Canopy: A protective canopy structure may be located over the pump island(s), as an accessory structure, subject to the following performance
standards:
a. The edge of the canopy shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from front and side lot lines; provided, that adequate visibility is
maintained both on site and off site.
b. The canopy shall not exceed eighteen feet (18') in height and must provide fourteen feet (14') of clearance underneath the structure.
5. Landscaping: A minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of the lot, parcel, or tract of land used exclusively for the motor fuel facility shall remain as a
landscaped area including turf grass, trees, shrubbery, plantings, or fencing, subject to the following performance standards:
a. At the boundaries of the lot, the following landscape area shall be required in compliance with section 11-19-3 of this title:
(1) An area not less than fifteen feet (15') wide abutting public rights-of-way.
(2) An area not less than five feet (5') wide along all side and rear lot lines.
(3) A buffer yard of not less than twenty feet (20') wide where the use abuts residentially zoned property.
6. Fuel Pumps: Fuel pumps shall be installed and located in accordance with the following performance standards:
a. All fuel pumps shall be set back a minimum of thirty feet (30') from any property line.
b. Fuel pumps shall be elevated on islands six inches (6") above the drive aisle surface.
c. There shall be a minimum setback of twenty four feet (24') between the curb face of the pump islands.
7. Access And Circulation:
a. Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement and shall comply with chapter 21 of this title.
b. The site design shall accommodate adequate turning radius and vertical clearance for a semitrailer truck.
8. Off Street Parking:
a. Off street parking stalls shall be provided as required by chapter 21 of this title. The number of required parking spaces shall be calculated solely
based upon the use and the square footage of the principal building.
b. The number of parking stalls designed to accommodate Class 4 or larger vehicles shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the total number
of off street parking stalls provided within the property.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 415/497
c. Parking spaces shall be screened from abutting residential zoned properties in compliance with section 11-19-3 of this title.
9. Pedestrians: An internal site pedestrian circulation system shall be defined and appropriate provisions made to protect such areas from
encroachments by parked or moving vehicles, subject to the following performance standards:
a. There shall be a pedestrian sidewalk a minimum of five feet (5') wide and clear of any obstacle or impediment along the front width of the principal
building. The pedestrian sidewalk may be reduced to a minimum of three feet (3') wide and clear of any obstacle or impediment when segregated
from parking or drive aisles by a physical barrier that prevents vehicles from overhanging the pedestrian sidewalk.
10. Outside Sales And Service: Outside sales and service shall be allowed as an accessory use; provided, that:
a. Areas Indicated: Areas for outdoor sales and services shall be clearly indicated on the site plan and reviewed at the time of application for a
conditional use permit. No outdoor sales or services shall be allowed outside of those areas so designated on the approved site plan without
approval of an amended conditional use permit.
b. Location: Outdoor sales and services shall be located upon a concrete or asphalt surface and shall not encroach into any required principal
building setback, required parking stall, drive aisle, or pedestrian sidewalk required by this chapter, or otherwise impede vehicle and pedestrian
circulation.
c. Outdoor Sales:
(1) The area devoted to outdoor sales shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the gross floor area of the principal building or two hundred (200)
square feet, whichever is less.
(2) The height of sales displays shall not obstruct any window or otherwise impair a clear view of the pump islands from the cashier station within
the building and shall comply with the following:
(A) Displays located between fuel pumps under the canopy shall not exceed three feet (3') in height measured from the grade of the adjacent
drive aisle to the top of the display.
(B) All other outdoor displays shall not exceed five feet (5') in height measured from grade to the top of the display.
(3) Propane sales limited to twenty (20) pound capacity tanks may be allowed provided the propane tanks are secured in a locker and meet all
Building and Fire Codes.
(4) Freezers for ice products may be located at the front of the building, or located in a side or rear yard and screened from view from adjacent
properties or public rights-of-way by materials consistent with the principal building.
d. Outdoor Services: Compressed air service, or vacuum machines, and/or electric charging stations shall not be located in a yard abutting
residentially zoned property.
11. Exterior Lighting: A comprehensive lighting plan shall be submitted demonstrating compliance with section 11-16-6 of this title and the following
performance standards:
a. Canopy lighting shall only be permitted under the canopy structure, and consist of recessed canisters with no portion of the light source or fixture
extending below the bottom face of the canopy.
b. Total canopy illumination below the canopy may not exceed one hundred fifteen (115) foot-candles at ground level.
c. The canopy fascia shall not be illuminated except for signs allowed in accordance with this section.
12. Signs:
a. A comprehensive sign plan shall be submitted demonstrating compliance with chapter 37 of this title.
b. Signs may be allowed on a canopy in lieu of any signs mounted on the principal structure elevation facing the yard in which the canopy is located;
provided, that the area of the canopy mounted sign(s) does not exceed more than twenty percent (20%) of the area of the canopy elevation.
13. Noise:
a. Noise control shall be required to comply with section 11-16-10 of this title.
b. A public address system shall not be audible at any property line.
c. Play of music or advertisement from a public address system is prohibited.
14. Litter Control:
a. Exterior trash receptacles shall be provided at convenient locations to facilitate litter control.
b. The operation shall be responsible for litter control on a daily basis within the property.
c. Trash and recycling containers other than receptacles intended for patron use shall be screened within an enclosure as required by section 11-18-
4 of this title.
15. Stormwater Management And Drainage: The entire site other than taken up by a building, structure, or plantings shall be surfaced with asphalt,
concrete, cobblestone, or paving brick subject to the following performance standards:
a. All plans for stormwater management and drainage shall comply with section 11-16-5 of this title, subject to review and approval of the City
Engineer.
b. Drainage from all fueling areas shall be directed to an oil/grit separator that complies with the following minimum design standards:
(1) A minimum of four hundred (400) cubic feet of permanent pool storage capacity per acre of drainage area.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 416/497
(2) A minimum pool depth of four feet (4').
(3) A minimum oil containment capacity of eight hundred (800) gallons.
(4) Minimum maintenance/inspection of two (2) times per year and/or after measurable spill events as defined by the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency.
(5) Any measurable spill event shall be reported to the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
I. Personal wireless service towers and antennas not located on a public structure, as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
J. Veterinary clinics and animal kennels; provided, that:
1. All areas in which animals are confined are located indoors and are properly soundproofed from adjacent properties.
2. Animal carcasses are properly disposed of in a manner not utilizing on site garbage facilities or incineration and the carcasses are properly
refrigerated during periods prior to disposal.
3. An animal kennel is permitted as a use accessory to the veterinary clinic; provided, that:
a. An indoor exercise area shall be provided to accommodate the periodic exercising of animals boarded at the kennel. No outdoor exercising of
animals shall be permitted.
b. A ventilation system shall be designed so that no odors or organisms will spread between wards or to the outside air and will be capable of
completely exchanging internal air at a rate of at least twice per hour. Air temperature must be maintained between sixty degrees Fahrenheit
(60°F) and seventy five degrees Fahrenheit (75°F).
c. A room separate from the kennel area shall be provided of sufficient size to adequately separate animals that are sick or injured from healthy
animals.
d. Indoor animal kennel floors and walls shall be made of nonporous materials or sealed concrete to make it nonporous.
e. Animal wastes shall be flushed down an existing sanitary sewer system or enclosed in a container of sufficient construction to eliminate odors and
organisms and shall be properly disposed of at least once per day.
f. All State Health Department and Minnesota Pollution Control Agency requirements for such facilities are met. (Prior Code § 20-77-6; amd. Ord.
2017-14, 11-13-2017; 2018 Code)
11-77-7: LOT REQUIREMENTS AND SETBACKS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in a B-3 District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this
title:
A. Lot Area: One acre.
B. Lot Width: Two hundred feet (200').
C. Setbacks:
1. Front yard:
a. Setbacks from centerline: Sixty five feet (65').
b. Setbacks from right-of-way lines: Thirty feet (30').
Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets or highways which bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall
project beyond the front yard line of either street.
2. Side yards: Ten feet (10') unless abutting a residential district, then thirty five feet (35').
3. Rear yard: Twenty feet (20') unless abutting a residential district, then thirty five feet (35'). (Prior Code § 20-77-7)
11-77-8: MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT:
A. Principal building: Thirty five feet (35').
B. Accessory building: Per subsection 11-18-2F of this title. (Prior Code § 20-77-8)
Chapter 78
B-4 BUSINESS OFFICE DISTRICT
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 417/497
11-78-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the B-4 Business Office District is to provide for the establishment of business offices, wholesale showrooms, and related uses in an
environment which provides a high level of amenities, including landscaping, preservation of natural features, architectural controls, pedestrian trails, and
other features. (Prior Code § 20-78-1)
11-78-2: PERMITTED USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted uses in a B-4 District:
A. Adult education, trade, vocational and other public or private postsecondary education schools.
B. Commercial printing establishments.
C. Conference centers.
D. Data centers.
E. Essential services other than transmission pipelines and transmission or substation lines in excess of thirty three (33) kilovolts and up to one hundred
(100) kilovolts.
F. Fitness centers and health clubs.
G. Governmental and public utility buildings and structures, City of Otsego only.
H. Indoor commercial recreation.
I. Laboratories, research and development facilities.
J. Micro-distilleries with or without tasting rooms.
K. Offices and medical offices.
L. Parks, trails, play fields, playgrounds, and directly related buildings and structures, City of Otsego only.
M. Personal wireless service antennas located on a public structure, as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
N. Radio and television stations.
O. Small breweries with or without taprooms.
P. Wholesale showrooms. (Prior Code § 20-78-2; amd. Ord. 2017-14, 11-13-2017)
11-78-3: INTERIM USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are interim uses in the B-4 District and are governed by chapter 5 of this title:
A. Farms, farmsteads, and farming. (Prior Code § 20-78-3)
11-78-4: USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT:
Subject to applicable provisions of this chapter, performance standards established by this title, and processing requirements of section 11-8-2 of this title,
the following are uses allowed in a B-4 District by administrative permit as may be issued by the Zoning Administrator:
A. Indoor limited retail sales accessory to allowed uses; provided, that:
1. Location:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 418/497
a. All sales are conducted in a clearly defined area of the principal building reserved exclusively for retail sales. Said sales area must be physically
segregated from other principal activities in the building.
b. The retail sales area must be located on the ground floor of the principal building.
2. Sales Area: The retail sales activity shall not occupy more than fifteen percent (15%) of the gross floor area of the building.
3. Access: The building where such use is located shall be limited to one having direct access to a collector or arterial level street without the necessity
of using residential streets.
4. Hours: Hours of operation are limited to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
5. Parking: Adequate parking is provided for the retail sales activity in compliance with chapter 21 of this title.
6. Compliance With Certain Provisions: The provisions of subsection 11-8-2D of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
B. Temporary outdoor promotional events and sales; provided, that:
1. Promotional Events:
a. Such activity is directed towards the general public and includes grand openings, carnivals, craft shows, flea markets, mechanical and animal
rides and displays of materials that are typically not sold or serviced on the site.
b. The event shall not exceed the period specified in the administrative permit and in no case shall exceed three (3) consecutive calendar days per
event.
c. There shall be no more than two (2) promotional events per calendar year per property.
2. Outdoor Sales:
a. Such activity is directed towards the general public and includes warehouse sales, sidewalk sales, inventory reduction or liquidation sales,
distressed merchandise sales, seasonal merchandise sales, and licensed transient merchant and transient product merchant sales.
b. The following specific standards shall apply to all proposed temporary outdoor sales activities allowed by this subsection and by the business
licensing provisions of this Code in addition to other applicable Building and Safety Code requirements as determined by the Zoning Administrator:
(1) The maximum total time for temporary outdoor sales activities shall be the period specified in the administrative permit and, in no case, shall
exceed sixty (60) days per calendar year per property.
(2) There shall be no more sales activities than those specified in the administrative permit and, in no case, shall there be more than ten (10) sales
activities per year per property.
(3) Sales activities may be conducted within a required yard provided the area is paved and the activity does not interfere with parking, traffic
circulation or emergency vehicle access. Temporary sales on unpaved landscaped areas is prohibited.
c. General standards apply as follows:
(1) The event shall be clearly accessory to or promoting the permitted or conditional use approved for the site. Only merchandise which is normally
manufactured, sold, or stocked by the occupant on the subject premises on a regular or seasonal basis shall be sold and/or promoted.
(2) Tents, stands, and other similar temporary structures may be utilized, provided they are clearly identified on the submitted plan and provided
that it is determined by the Zoning Administrator that they will not impair the parking capacity, emergency access, or the safe and efficient
movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic on or off the site.
(3) The submitted plan shall clearly demonstrate that adequate off street parking for the proposed event can and will be provided for the duration of
the event. Determination of compliance with this requirement shall be made by the Zoning Administrator who shall consider the nature of the
event and the applicable parking requirements of this title. Consideration shall be given to the parking needs and requirements of other
occupants in the case of multi-tenant buildings. Parking on public rights-of-way and streets is prohibited; except, that parking on local streets
may be allowed on Saturday and Sunday only; provided, that the petitioner arranges for traffic control by authorized enforcement officers, as
approved in writing by the Zoning Administrator, at the petitioner's expense.
(4) Signage related to the event shall be in compliance with the temporary sign standards of this title and shall be allowed for the duration of the
event. Special signage for purposes of traffic direction and control may be authorized by the Zoning Administrator; the erection and removal of
such signage shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
(5) The approved permit shall be displayed on the premises for the duration of the event. (Prior Code § 20-78-4; amd. 2018 Code)
11-78-5: ACCESSORY USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted accessory uses in a B-4 District:
A. Commercial or business buildings and structures for a use accessory to the principal use but such use shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the gross
floor space of the principal use.
B. Off street loading as regulated by chapter 22 of this title.
C. Off street parking as regulated by chapter 21 of this title.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 419/497
D. Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs three and one-half meters (3.5 m) or less in diameter, short wave radio
dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers, Federal licensed amateur radio stations
and television receivers, as regulated by chapter 33 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-78-5; amd. 2018 Code)
11-78-6: CONDITIONAL USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are conditional uses in a B-4 District subject to the procedures set forth in and regulated by
chapter 4 of this title:
A. Assembly, manufacturing, compounding, machining, packaging, treatment or indoor storage of products and materials; provided, that:
1. The proposed use complies with the performance standards outlined in chapter 16 of this title.
2. No outside storage is associated with the use.
B. Breweries with or without taprooms.
C. Daycare facilities as regulated by chapter 30 of this title.
D. Distilleries with or without tasting rooms.
E. Essential services involving transmission pipelines and transmission or substation lines in excess of thirty three (33) kilovolts and up to one hundred
(100) kilovolts.
F. Governmental and public utility buildings and structures, other than City of Otsego.
G. Minor automobile repair, provided, that:
1. The hours of operation shall be limited to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. unless extended by the City Council.
2. All repair activities shall be conducted within the principal building with overhead doors to the service area(s) closed at all times, except when moving
vehicles in and out.
3. The emission of odor by a use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota regulation APC
7011, as amended.
4. All flammable materials, including liquids and rags, shall conform with the applicable provisions of the Minnesota State Fire Code.
5. All outside storage is prohibited. Storage of damaged vehicles, vehicles being repaired and vehicle parts and accessory equipment must be
completely inside a principal or accessory building.
H. Motor fuel station.
1. Secondary Uses: Secondary uses occurring within the same property as the motor fuel station shall be allowed as provided for within this zoning
district.
2. Hours: Hours of operation shall be limited to the hours between five o'clock (5:00) A.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight unless extended by the
City Council.
3. Architectural Standards:
a. All elevations of the principal and accessory structures, including the canopy columns, are to have essentially the same or a coordinated
harmonious finish treatment that shall comply with subsection 11-17-4D1a of this title.
b. Contrasting colors not defined as earth tones may be used on the exterior of principal and accessory buildings subject to the following:
(1) Ten percent (10%) of the building facade may contain contrasting colors.
(2) The canopy may have contrasting color bands or accent lines not to exceed a cumulative width of twelve inches (12").
4. Canopy: A protective canopy structure may be located over the pump island(s), as an accessory structure, subject to the following performance
standards:
a. The edge of the canopy shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from front and side lot lines; provided, that adequate visibility is
maintained both on site and off site.
b. The canopy shall not exceed eighteen feet (18') in height and must provide fourteen feet (14') of clearance underneath the structure.
5. Landscaping: A minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of the lot, parcel, or tract of land used exclusively for the motor fuel facility shall remain as a
landscaped area including turf grass, trees, shrubbery, plantings, or fencing, subject to the following performance standards:
a. At the boundaries of the lot, the following landscape area shall be required in compliance with section 11-19-3 of this title:
(1) An area not less than fifteen feet (15') wide abutting public rights-of-way.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 420/497
(2) An area not less than five feet (5') wide along all side and rear lot lines.
(3) A buffer yard of not less than twenty feet (20') wide where the use abuts residentially zoned property.
6. Fuel Pumps: Fuel pumps shall be installed and located in accordance with the following performance standards:
a. All fuel pumps shall be set back a minimum of thirty feet (30') from any property line.
b. Fuel pumps shall be elevated on islands six inches (6") above the drive aisle surface.
c. There shall be a minimum setback of twenty four feet (24') between the curb face of the pump islands.
7. Access And Circulation:
a. Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement and shall comply with chapter 21 of this title.
b. The site design shall accommodate adequate turning radius and vertical clearance for a semitrailer truck.
8. Off Street Parking:
a. Off street parking stalls shall be provided as required by chapter 21 of this title. The number of required parking spaces shall be calculated solely
based upon the use and the square footage of the principal building.
b. The number of parking stalls designed to accommodate Class 4 or larger vehicles shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the total number
of off street parking stalls provided within the property.
c. Parking spaces shall be screened from abutting residential zoned properties in compliance with section 11-19-3 of this title.
9. Pedestrians: An internal site pedestrian circulation system shall be defined and appropriate provisions made to protect such areas from
encroachments by parked or moving vehicles, subject to the following performance standards:
a. There shall be a pedestrian sidewalk a minimum of five feet (5') wide and clear of any obstacle or impediment along the front width of the principal
building. The pedestrian sidewalk may be reduced to a minimum of three feet (3') wide and clear of any obstacle or impediment when segregated
from parking or drive aisles by a physical barrier that prevents vehicles from overhanging the pedestrian sidewalk.
10. Outside Sales And Service: Outside sales and service shall be allowed as an accessory use; provided, that:
a. Areas Indicated: Areas for outdoor sales and services shall be clearly indicated on the site plan and reviewed at the time of application for a
conditional use permit. No outdoor sales or services shall be allowed outside of those areas so designated on the approved site plan without
approval of an amended conditional use permit.
b. Location: Outdoor sales and services shall be located upon a concrete or asphalt surface and shall not encroach into any required principal
building setback, required parking stall, drive aisle, or pedestrian sidewalk required by this chapter, or otherwise impede vehicle and pedestrian
circulation.
c. Outdoor Sales:
(1) The area devoted to outdoor sales shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the gross floor area of the principal building or two hundred (200)
square feet, whichever is less.
(2) The height of sales displays shall not obstruct any window or otherwise impair a clear view of the pump islands from the cashier station within
the building and shall comply with the following:
(A) Displays located between fuel pumps under the canopy shall not exceed three feet (3') in height measured from the grade of the adjacent
drive aisle to the top of the display.
(B) All other outdoor displays shall not exceed five feet (5') in height measured from grade to the top of the display.
(3) Propane sales limited to twenty (20) pound capacity tanks may be allowed provided the propane tanks are secured in a locker and meet all
Building and Fire Codes.
(4) Freezers for ice products may be located at the front of the building, or located in a side or rear yard and screened from view from adjacent
properties or public rights-of-way by materials consistent with the principal building.
d. Outdoor Services: Compressed air service, or vacuum machines, and/or electric charging stations shall not be located in a yard abutting
residentially zoned property.
11. Exterior Lighting: A comprehensive lighting plan shall be submitted demonstrating compliance with section 11-16-6 of this title and the following
performance standards:
a. Canopy lighting shall only be permitted under the canopy structure, and consist of recessed canisters with no portion of the light source or fixture
extending below the bottom face of the canopy.
b. Total canopy illumination below the canopy may not exceed one hundred fifteen (115) foot-candles at ground level.
c. The canopy fascia shall not be illuminated except for signs allowed in accordance with this section.
12. Signs:
a. A comprehensive sign plan shall be submitted demonstrating compliance with chapter 37 of this title.
b. Signs may be allowed on a canopy in lieu of any signs mounted on the principal structure elevation facing the yard in which the canopy is located;
provided, that the area of the canopy mounted sign(s) does not exceed more than twenty percent (20%) of the area of the canopy elevation.
13. Noise:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 421/497
a. Noise control shall be required to comply with section 11-16-10 of this title.
b. A public address system shall not be audible at any property line.
c. Play of music or advertisement from a public address system is prohibited.
14. Litter Control:
a. Exterior trash receptacles shall be provided at convenient locations to facilitate litter control.
b. The operation shall be responsible for litter control on a daily basis within the property.
c. Trash and recycling containers other than receptacles intended for patron use shall be screened within an enclosure as required by section 11-18-
4 of this title.
15. Stormwater Management And Drainage: The entire site other than taken up by a building, structure, or plantings shall be surfaced with asphalt,
concrete, cobblestone, or paving brick subject to the following performance standards:
a. All plans for stormwater management and drainage shall comply with section 11-16-5 of this title, subject to review and approval of the City
Engineer.
b. Drainage from all fueling areas shall be directed to an oil/grit separator that complies with the following minimum design standards:
(1) A minimum of four hundred (400) cubic feet of permanent pool storage capacity per acre of drainage area.
(2) A minimum pool depth of four feet (4').
(3) A minimum oil containment capacity of eight hundred (800) gallons.
(4) Minimum maintenance/inspection of two (2) times per year and/or after measurable spill events as defined by the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency.
(5) Any measurable spill event shall be reported to the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
I. Personal wireless service towers and antennas not located on a public structure, as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
J. Warehousing, including self-storage facilities. (Prior Code § 20-78-6; amd. Ord. 2017-14, 11-13-2017; 2018 Code)
11-78-7: LOT REQUIREMENTS AND SETBACKS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in a B-4 District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this
title:
A. Lot Area: Two (2) acres.
B. Lot Width: Two hundred feet (200'). (Prior Code § 20-78-7)
C. Setbacks:
1. Front yard:
a. Setbacks from centerline: Sixty five feet (65').
b. Setbacks from right-of-way lines: Thirty feet (30').
Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets or highways which bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall
project beyond the front yard line of either street.
2. Side yards: There shall be a side yard on each side of any building having a width of not less than twenty feet (20'); except, that no building shall be
located within fifty feet (50') of any side lot line abutting a lot in any residential district.
3. Rear yard: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty feet (20'); except, that no buildings shall be located within fifty feet (50')
of any residential district. (Prior Code § 20-78-7)
11-78-8: MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE:
A. Building and structure: Thirty percent (30%). (Prior Code § 20-78-8; amd. 2018 Code)
B. Impervious surfaces: Seventy percent (70%). (Prior Code § 20-78-8)
11-78-9: MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT:
A. Principal building: Four (4) stories or forty eight feet (48').
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 422/497
B. Accessory building: Per subsection 11-18-2F of this title. (Prior Code § 20-78-9)
Chapter 79
RESERVED
Chapter 80
RESERVED
Chapter 81
RESERVED
Chapter 82
RESERVED
Chapter 83
RESERVED
Chapter 84
RESERVED
Chapter 85
I-1 LIMITED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
11-85-1: INTENT:
The intent of the I-1 Limited Industrial District is to provide for the establishment of light industrial activities, characterized by low impact manufacturing and
warehousing uses, which have adequate and convenient access to major streets and provide effective controls for "nuisance" and pollution characteristics.
It is further the intent of this district to encourage industrial development in a compact and orderly manner consistent with the general locations shown in
the Comprehensive Plan adjacent to the TH 101 corridor within the East Sewer District defined by the Comprehensive Plan where urban services are
provided. (Prior Code § 20-85-1; amd. 2018 Code)
11-85-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following are permitted uses in an I-1 District:
A. Adult education, trade, vocational and other public or private postsecondary education schools.
B. Breweries and small breweries.
C. Building materials sales.
D. Commercial printing establishments.
E. Compounding, assembly, packaging, treatment, or storage of products and materials.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 423/497
F. Data centers.
G. Distilleries and micro-distilleries.
H. Distribution centers.
I. Essential services other than transmission pipelines and transmission or substation lines in excess of thirty three (33) kilovolts and up to one hundred
(100) kilovolts.
J. Governmental and public utility buildings and structures, City of Otsego only.
K. Laboratories, research and development facilities.
L. Manufacturing, machining and assembly.
M. Offices.
N. Parks, trails, play fields, playgrounds, and directly related buildings and structures, City of Otsego only.
O. Transportation terminals.
P. Warehousing, including self-storage facilities.
Q. Wholesale business. (Prior Code § 20-85-2; amd. 2018 Code)
11-85-3: INTERIM USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are interim uses in an I-1 District and are governed by chapter 5 of this title:
A. Accessory, enclosed retail, rental, or service activity other than that allowed as a permitted use or conditional use within this article; provided, that:
1. Such use is allowed as a permitted use in a business district.
2. Such use does not constitute more than fifty percent (50%) of the gross floor area of the principal building.
3. Adequate off street parking and off street loading in compliance with the requirements of chapters 21 and 22 of this title is provided.
4. All signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in compliance with the provisions of chapter 37 of this title.
5. The interim use permit shall terminate upon a change of occupancy or other date as determined by the City Council in accordance with section 11-5-
4 of this title.
B. Farms, farmsteads, and farming.
C. Open and outdoor storage as an accessory use provided that:
1. The area of the subject site devoted to outdoor storage shall be limited to thirty percent (30%) of the gross area of the lot.
2. The storage area is landscaped, fenced, and screened from view of neighboring uses and abutting R Districts.
3. Storage is landscaped and screened from view from the public right-of-way.
4. Storage area shall be surfaced with asphalt or concrete.
5. All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source shall not be visible from the public right-of-way or from neighboring residences.
6. The storage area does not take up parking space or loading space as required for conformity to this title.
7. The interim use permit shall terminate upon a change of occupancy or other date as determined by the City Council in accordance with section 11-5-
4 of this title.
D. Open or outdoor service, sale and rental (excluding automobile or truck sales) as an accessory use; provided, that:
1. The area of the subject site devoted to outdoor storage shall be limited to thirty percent (30%) of the gross area of the lot.
2. Outside service areas are fenced and screened from view of the public right-of-way, neighboring residential uses, or an abutting residential district in
compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 424/497
3. All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source shall not be visible from the public right-of-way or from neighboring residences and
shall be in compliance with chapter 16 of this title.
4. The use does not take up parking space as required for conformity to this title.
5. Sales area is surfaced with asphalt or concrete to control dust.
6. The interim use permit shall terminate upon a change of occupancy or other date as determined by the City Council in accordance with section 11-5-
4 of this title.
E. Physical recreation or training facilities (indoor); provided, that:
1. Hours of operation shall be subject to review and approval of the City Council.
2. Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic, shall comply with chapter 21 of this title and shall be subject to review
and approval of the City Engineer.
3. Adequate off street parking and off street loading stalls are provided in compliance with chapters 21 and 22 of this title.
4. All signs and information and visual communications devices shall be in compliance with chapter 37 of this title.
5. Occupancy shall be subject to and satisfy all applicable requirements of the Building Code, subject to review and approval of the building official.
6. The interim use permit shall terminate upon a change of occupancy or other date as determined by the City Council in accordance with section 11-5-
4 of this title.
F. Temporary structures as a principal use associated with a permitted or conditional use allowed within this district; provided, that:
1. The interim use shall terminate twelve (12) months from its date of issuance, within thirty (30) days after a certificate of occupancy has been issued
by the building official for a permanent structure or the temporary structure(s) is removed from the site, whichever occurs first, unless a different
schedule is approved as part of the permit.
2. The property owner enters into a development contract with the City for the construction of permanent structures and site facilities to occur by the
termination date of the interim use permit and provide a performance security as provided by section 11-5-4 of this title.
3. Temporary structures shall be subject to and satisfy all applicable requirements of the Minnesota State Building Code.
4. The entire site, other than taken up by buildings, structures or plantings, shall be surfaced with a material to control dust, subject to review and
approval of the Zoning Administrator.
5. Adequate provisions for water and sewer service for the temporary structure are made, subject to review and approval of the City Engineer.
6. The temporary structure shall be screened and landscaped from view of adjacent residential uses in accordance with chapter 19 of this title.
7. Vehicular access points shall be limited, shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement, and shall be subject to approval of the City
Engineer.
8. Adequate off street parking and loading facilities are provided with approval of the City Engineer.
9. Adequate provisions for site drainage are made, subject to review and approval of the City Engineer.
10. All signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in conformance with chapter 37 of this title.
11. All refuse shall be stored within containers that are to be screened and enclosed within a fence or similar structure. (Prior Code § 20-85-3)
11-85-4: USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT:
Subject to applicable provisions of this chapter, performance standards established by this title, and processing requirements of section 11-8-2 of this title,
the following are uses allowed in an I-1 District by administrative permit as may be issued by the Zoning Administrator:
A. Temporary outdoor promotional events and sales; provided, that:
1. Promotional Events:
a. Such activity is directed towards the general public and includes grand openings, carnivals, craft shows, flea markets, mechanical and animal
rides and displays of materials that are typically not sold or serviced on the site.
b. The event shall not exceed the period specified in the administrative permit and in no case shall exceed three (3) consecutive calendar days per
event.
c. There shall be no more than two (2) promotional events per calendar year per property.
2. Outdoor Sales:
a. Such activity is directed towards the general public and include warehouse sales, sidewalk sales, inventory reduction or liquidation sales,
distressed merchandise sales, seasonal merchandise sales, and licensed transient merchant and transient product merchant sales.
b. The following specific standards shall apply to all proposed temporary outdoor sales activities allowed by this subsection and by the business
licensing provisions of this Code in addition to other applicable Building and Safety Code requirements as determined by the Zoning Administrator:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 425/497
(1) The maximum total time for temporary outdoor sales activities shall be the period specified in the administrative permit and, in no case, shall
exceed sixty (60) days per calendar year per property.
(2) There shall be no more sales activities than those specified in the administrative permit and, in no case, shall there be more than ten (10) sales
activities per year per property.
(3) Sales activities may be conducted within a required yard provided the area is paved and the activity does not interfere with parking, traffic
circulation or emergency vehicle access. Temporary sales on unpaved landscaped areas is prohibited.
c. General standards apply as follows:
(1) The event shall be clearly accessory to or promoting the permitted or conditional use approved for the site. Only merchandise which is normally
manufactured, sold, or stocked by the occupant on the subject premises on a regular or seasonal basis shall be sold and/or promoted.
(2) Tents, stands, and other similar temporary structures may be utilized, provided they are clearly identified on the submitted plan and provided
that it is determined by the Zoning Administrator that they will not impair the parking capacity, emergency access, or the safe and efficient
movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic on or off the site.
(3) The submitted plan shall clearly demonstrate that adequate off street parking for the proposed event can and will be provided for the duration of
the event. Determination of compliance with this requirement shall be made by the Zoning Administrator who shall consider the nature of the
event and the applicable parking requirements of this title. Consideration shall be given to the parking needs and requirements of other
occupants in the case of multi-tenant buildings. Parking on public rights-of-way and streets is prohibited; except, that parking on local streets
may be allowed on Saturday and Sunday only; provided, that the petitioner arranges for traffic control by authorized enforcement officers, as
approved in writing by the Zoning Administrator, at the petitioner's expense.
(4) Signage related to the event shall be in compliance with the temporary sign standards of this title and shall be allowed for the duration of the
event. Special signage for purposes of traffic direction and control may be authorized by the Zoning Administrator; the erection and removal of
such signage shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
(5) The approved permit shall be displayed on the premises for the duration of the event. (Prior Code § 20-85-4)
11-85-5: ACCESSORY USES:
The following are permitted accessory uses in an I-1 District:
A. Commercial or business buildings and structures for a use accessory to the principal use but such use shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the gross
floor space of the principal use.
B. Off street loading as regulated by chapter 22 of this title.
C. Off street parking as regulated by chapter 21 of this title.
D. Semitractor trailer parking and land/sea container storage as provided for by subsection 11-18-3B of this title.
E. Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs three and one-half meters (3.5 m) or less in diameter, short wave radio
dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers, Federal licensed amateur radio stations
and television receivers, as regulated by chapter 33 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-85-5; amd. 2018 Code; Ord. 2019-04, 2-11-2019)
11-85-6: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following are conditional uses in an I-1 District subject to the procedures set forth in and regulated by chapter 4 of this title:
A. Animal kennels; provided, that:
1. An exercise area at least one hundred (100) square feet in size shall be provided to accommodate the periodic exercising of animals boarded at the
kennel.
2. If an outdoor exercise area is provided, it shall be at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet in size and shall be restricted to the exercising of one
animal, on leash, under the control of a handler, in the pet exercise area, at a time.
3. Outdoor exercise areas shall be fenced, not less than six feet (6') in height with an additional at least two foot (2') security arm with an internal
orientation set at a thirty degree (30°) angle, and shall be of sufficient strength to retain kenneled animals. Said fence shall be located in a side or
rear yard and shall provide a complete visual screen from surrounding properties in compliance with chapter 19 of this title. Said fence shall be set
back at least one hundred feet (100') from any side or rear property line.
4. Outdoor exercise areas must be cleaned at least once per day to prevent the accumulation of animal wastes and the spread of disease.
5. A ventilation system shall be designed so that no odors or organisms will spread between wards or to the outside air and will be capable of
completely exchanging internal air at a rate of at least twice per hour. Air temperature must be maintained between sixty degrees Fahrenheit (60°F)
and seventy five degrees Fahrenheit (75°F).
6. A room separate from the kennel area shall be provided of sufficient size to adequately separate animals that are sick or injured from healthy
animals.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 426/497
7. Indoor animal kennel floors and walls shall be made of nonporous materials or sealed concrete to make it nonporous.
8. Animal wastes shall be flushed down an existing sanitary sewer system or enclosed in a container of sufficient construction to eliminate odors and
organisms and shall be properly disposed of at least once a day.
9. All State Health Department and Minnesota Pollution Control Agency requirements for such facilities are met.
B. Automobile repair, major and minor; provided, that:
1. The use shall be set back a minimum of fifty feet (50') from any abutting residentially zoned properties.
2. Hours of operation shall be limited to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. unless extended by the City Council.
3. All repair activities shall be conducted within the principal building with overhead doors to the service area(s) closed at all times, except when moving
vehicles in and out.
4. The emission of odor by a use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota regulation APC
7011, as amended.
5. All flammable materials, including liquids and rags, shall conform with the applicable provisions of the Minnesota State Fire Code.
6. All painting must be conducted in an approved paint booth. All paint booths and all other activities of the operation shall thoroughly control the
emission of fumes, dust or other particulate matter so that the use shall be in compliance with Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota
regulation APC 1-15, as amended.
7. All outside storage is prohibited; storage of damaged vehicles, vehicles being repaired and vehicle parts and accessory equipment must be
completely inside a principal or accessory building.
C. Commercial and public radio and television transmitting antennas, and public utility microwave antennas, as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
D. Commercial, private and public satellite dish transmitting or receiving antennas in excess of three and one-half meters (3.5 m) in diameters, as
regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
E. Essential services involving transmission pipelines and transmission or substation lines in excess of thirty three (33) kilovolts and up to one hundred
(100) kilovolts.
F. Governmental and public utility buildings and structures, other than City of Otsego.
G. Motor fuel station.
1. Secondary Uses: Secondary uses occurring within the same property as the motor fuel station shall be allowed as provided for within this zoning
district.
2. Hours: Hours of operation shall be limited to the hours between five o'clock (5:00) A.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight unless extended by the
City Council.
3. Architectural Standards:
a. All elevations of the principal and accessory structures, including the canopy columns, are to have essentially the same or a coordinated
harmonious finish treatment that shall comply with subsection 11-17-4D1a of this title.
b. Contrasting colors not defined as earth tones may be used on the exterior of principal and accessory buildings subject to the following:
(1) Ten percent (10%) of the building facade may contain contrasting colors.
(2) The canopy may have contrasting color bands or accent lines not to exceed a cumulative width of twelve inches (12").
4. Canopy: A protective canopy structure may be located over the pump island(s), as an accessory structure, subject to the following performance
standards:
a. The edge of the canopy shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from front and side lot lines; provided, that adequate visibility is
maintained both on site and off site.
b. The canopy shall not exceed eighteen feet (18') in height and must provide fourteen feet (14') of clearance underneath the structure.
5. Landscaping: A minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of the lot, parcel, or tract of land used exclusively for the motor fuel facility shall remain as a
landscaped area including turf grass, trees, shrubbery, plantings, or fencing, subject to the following performance standards:
a. At the boundaries of the lot, the following landscape area shall be required in compliance with section 11-19-3 of this title:
(1) An area not less than fifteen feet (15') wide abutting public rights-of-way.
(2) An area not less than five feet (5') wide along all side and rear lot lines.
(3) A buffer yard of not less than twenty feet (20') wide where the use abuts residentially zoned property.
6. Fuel Pumps: Fuel pumps shall be installed and located in accordance with the following performance standards:
a. All fuel pumps shall be set back a minimum of thirty feet (30') from any property line.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 427/497
b. Fuel pumps shall be elevated on islands six inches (6") above the drive aisle surface.
c. There shall be a minimum setback of twenty four feet (24') between the curb face of the pump islands.
7. Access And Circulation:
a. Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement and shall comply with chapter 21 of this title.
b. The site design shall accommodate adequate turning radius and vertical clearance for a semitrailer truck.
8. Off Street Parking:
a. Off street parking stalls shall be provided as required by chapter 21 of this title. The number of required parking spaces shall be calculated solely
based upon the use and the square footage of the principal building.
b. The number of parking stalls designed to accommodate Class 4 or larger vehicles shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the total number
of off street parking stalls provided within the property.
c. Parking spaces shall be screened from abutting residential zoned properties in compliance with section 11-19-3 of this title.
9. Pedestrians: An internal site pedestrian circulation system shall be defined and appropriate provisions made to protect such areas from
encroachments by parked or moving vehicles, subject to the following performance standards:
a. There shall be a pedestrian sidewalk a minimum of five feet (5') wide and clear of any obstacle or impediment along the front width of the principal
building. The pedestrian sidewalk may be reduced to a minimum of three feet (3') wide and clear of any obstacle or impediment when segregated
from parking or drive aisles by a physical barrier that prevents vehicles from overhanging the pedestrian sidewalk.
10. Outside Sales And Service: Outside sales and service shall be allowed as an accessory use; provided, that:
a. Areas Indicated: Areas for outdoor sales and services shall be clearly indicated on the site plan and reviewed at the time of application for a
conditional use permit. No outdoor sales or services shall be allowed outside of those areas so designated on the approved site plan without
approval of an amended conditional use permit.
b. Location: Outdoor sales and services shall be located upon a concrete or asphalt surface and shall not encroach into any required principal
building setback, required parking stall, drive aisle, or pedestrian sidewalk required by this chapter, or otherwise impede vehicle and pedestrian
circulation.
c. Outdoor Sales:
(1) The area devoted to outdoor sales shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the gross floor area of the principal building or two hundred (200)
square feet, whichever is less.
(2) The height of sales displays shall not obstruct any window or otherwise impair a clear view of the pump islands from the cashier station within
the building and shall comply with the following:
(A) Displays located between fuel pumps under the canopy shall not exceed three feet (3') in height measured from the grade of the adjacent
drive aisle to the top of the display.
(B) All other outdoor displays shall not exceed five feet (5') in height measured from grade to the top of the display.
(3) Propane sales limited to twenty (20) pound capacity tanks may be allowed provided the propane tanks are secured in a locker and meet all
Building and Fire Codes.
(4) Freezers for ice products may be located at the front of the building, or located in a side or rear yard and screened from view from adjacent
properties or public rights-of-way by materials consistent with the principal building.
d. Outdoor Services: Compressed air service, or vacuum machines, and/or electric charging stations shall not be located in a yard abutting
residentially zoned property.
11. Exterior Lighting: A comprehensive lighting plan shall be submitted demonstrating compliance with section 11-16-6 of this title and the following
performance standards:
a. Canopy lighting shall only be permitted under the canopy structure, and consist of recessed canisters with no portion of the light source or fixture
extending below the bottom face of the canopy.
b. Total canopy illumination below the canopy may not exceed one hundred fifteen (115) foot-candles at ground level.
c. The canopy fascia shall not be illuminated except for signs allowed in accordance with this section.
12. Signs:
a. A comprehensive sign plan shall be submitted demonstrating compliance with chapter 37 of this title.
b. Signs may be allowed on a canopy in lieu of any signs mounted on the principal structure elevation facing the yard in which the canopy is located;
provided, that the area of the canopy mounted sign(s) does not exceed more than twenty percent (20%) of the area of the canopy elevation.
13. Noise:
a. Noise control shall be required to comply with section 11-16-10 of this title.
b. A public address system shall not be audible at any property line.
c. Play of music or advertisement from a public address system is prohibited.
14. Litter Control:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 428/497
a. Exterior trash receptacles shall be provided at convenient locations to facilitate litter control.
b. The operation shall be responsible for litter control on a daily basis within the property.
c. Trash and recycling containers other than receptacles intended for patron use shall be screened within an enclosure as required by section 11-18-
4 of this title.
15. Stormwater Management And Drainage: The entire site other than taken up by a building, structure, or plantings shall be surfaced with asphalt,
concrete, cobblestone, or paving brick subject to the following performance standards:
a. All plans for stormwater management and drainage shall comply with section 11-16-5 of this title, subject to review and approval of the City
Engineer.
b. Drainage from all fueling areas shall be directed to an oil/grit separator that complies with the following minimum design standards:
(1) A minimum of four hundred (400) cubic feet of permanent pool storage capacity per acre of drainage area.
(2) A minimum pool depth of four feet (4').
(3) A minimum oil containment capacity of eight hundred (800) gallons.
(4) Minimum maintenance/inspection of two (2) times per year and/or after measurable spill events as defined by the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency.
(5) Any measurable spill event shall be reported to the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
H. Servicing of motor freight vehicles and heavy construction equipment; directly related accessory materials and parts sales for such repair and servicing
(not including new or used vehicle sales); and accessory materials and parts warehousing which is related to and dependent upon such uses;
provided, that:
1. All servicing of vehicles and equipment shall occur entirely within the principal structure.
2. To the extent required by State law and regulations, painting shall be conducted in an approved paint booth, which thoroughly controls the emission
of fumes, dust, or other particulate matter.
3. Storage and use of all flammable materials, including liquids and rags, shall conform with applicable provisions of the Minnesota State Fire Code.
4. Parking, driveway, and circulation standards and requirements shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Engineer and shall be based
upon the specific needs of the operation and shall accommodate large vehicle equipment and semitrailer/tractor trucks.
5. The storage of damaged vehicles and vehicle parts and accessory equipment must be completely inside a principal or accessory building.
I. Taprooms accessory to a brewery or small brewery.
J. Tasting rooms accessory to a distillery or micro-distillery. (Prior Code § 20-85-6; amd. Ord. 2017-14, 11-13-2017; 2018 Code)
11-85-7: LOT REQUIREMENTS AND SETBACKS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an I-1 District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this
title:
A. Lot Area: One acre.
B. Lot Width: Two hundred feet (200').
C. Setbacks:
1. Front yard:
a. Setbacks from centerline: Sixty five feet (65').
b. Setbacks from right-of-way lines: Thirty feet (30').
Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets or highways which bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall
project beyond the front yard line of either street.
2. Side yards:
a. Corner lot: Thirty feet (30').
b. Interior lot: Ten feet (10').
3. Rear yard: Twenty feet (20'). (Prior Code § 20-85-7)
11-85-8: MAXIMUM SITE COVERAGE:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 429/497
A. Building and structure: Fifty percent (50%).
B. Impervious surfaces: Eighty five percent (85%). (Prior Code § 20-85-8)
11-85-9: MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT:
Forty eight feet (48'). (Prior Code § 20-85-9)
Chapter 86
I-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
11-86-1: INTENT:
It is the intent of the I-2 General Industrial District to provide areas suitable for the location of general industrial activities which have adequate and
convenient access to major streets and provide effective controls for "nuisance" and pollution characteristics. It is further the intent of this district to
encourage industrial development in a compact and orderly manner consistent with the general locations shown in the Comprehensive Plan other than
adjacent to the TH 101 corridor within the East Sewer District providing a compatible relationship with other land uses, where a full complement of urban
services are provided. (Prior Code § 20-86-1)
11-86-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following are permitted uses in an I-2 District:
A. Adult education, trade, vocational and other public or private postsecondary education schools.
B. Breweries and small breweries.
C. Building materials sales.
D. Commercial printing establishments.
E. Compounding, assembly, packaging, treatment, or storage of products and materials.
F. Data centers.
G. Distilleries and micro-distilleries.
H. Distribution centers.
I. Essential services other than transmission pipelines and transmission or substation lines in excess of thirty three (33) kilovolts and up to one hundred
(100) kilovolts.
J. Governmental and public utility buildings and structures, City of Otsego only.
K. Laboratories, research and development facilities.
L. Manufacturing, machining and assembly.
M. Offices.
N. Transportation terminals.
O. Warehousing, including self-storage facilities.
P. Wholesale business. (Prior Code § 20-86-2; amd. Ord. 2017-14, 11-13-2017)
11-86-3: INTERIM USES:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 430/497
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are interim uses in an I-2 District and are governed by chapter 5 of this title:
A. Accessory, enclosed retail, rental, or service activity other than that allowed as a permitted use or conditional use within this chapter; provided, that:
1. Such use is allowed as a permitted use in a business district.
2. Such use does not constitute more than fifty percent (50%) of the gross floor area of the principal building.
3. Adequate off street parking and off street loading in compliance with the requirements of chapters 21 and 22 of this title is provided.
4. All signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in compliance with the provisions of chapter 37 of this title.
5. The interim use permit shall terminate upon a change of occupancy or other date as determined by the City Council in accordance with section 11-5-
4 of this title.
B. Farms, farmsteads, and farming.
C. Open and outdoor storage as a principal or an accessory use; provided, that:
1. The storage area is landscaped, fenced, and screened from view of neighboring uses and abutting residential districts.
2. Storage is landscaped and screened from view from the public right-of-way.
3. The storage area is blacktopped or concrete surfaced.
4. All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source shall not be visible from the public right-of-way or from neighboring residences.
5. The storage area does not take up parking space or loading space as required for conformity to this title.
6. The interim use permit shall terminate upon a change of occupancy or other date as determined by the City Council in accordance with section 11-5-
4 of this title.
D. Open or outdoor service, sale and rental (excluding automobile or truck sales) as a principal or an accessory use; provided, that:
1. Outside services, sales and equipment rental connected with the principal use is limited to fifty percent (50%) of the gross floor area of the principal
use.
2. Outside sales areas are fenced and screened from view of neighboring residential uses or an abutting residential district in compliance with chapter
19 of this title.
3. All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source shall not be visible from the public right-of-way or from neighboring residences and
shall be in compliance with chapter 16 of this title.
4. The use does not take up parking space as required for conformity to this title.
5. Sales area is hard surfaced to control dust.
6. The interim use permit shall terminate upon a change of occupancy or other date as determined by the City Council in accordance with section 11-5-
4 of this title.
E. Physical recreation or training facilities (indoor); provided, that:
1. Hours of operation shall be subject to review and approval of the City Council.
2. Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic, shall comply with chapter 21 of this title and shall be subject to review
and approval of the City Engineer.
3. Adequate off street parking and off street loading stalls are provided in compliance with chapters 21 and 22 of this title.
4. All signs and information and visual communications devices shall be in compliance with chapter 37 of this title.
5. Occupancy shall be subject to and satisfy all applicable requirements of the Building Code, subject to review and approval of the building official.
6. The interim use permit shall terminate upon a change of occupancy or other date as determined by the City Council in accordance with section 11-5-
4 of this title.
F. Temporary structures as a principal use associated with a permitted or conditional use allowed within this district; provided, that:
1. The interim use shall terminate twelve (12) months from its date of issuance, within thirty (30) days after a certificate of occupancy has been issued
by the building official for a permanent structure or the temporary structure(s) is removed from the site, whichever occurs first, unless a different
schedule is approved as part of the permit.
2. The property owner enters into a development contract with the City for the construction of permanent structures and site facilities to occur by the
termination date of the interim use permit and provide a performance security as provided by chapter 5 of this title.
3. Temporary structures shall be subject to and satisfy all applicable requirements of the Minnesota State Building Code.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 431/497
4. The entire site other than taken up by buildings, structures or plantings shall be surfaced with a material to control dust, subject to review and
approval of the Zoning Administrator.
5. Adequate provisions for water and sewer service for the temporary structure are made, subject to review and approval of the City Engineer.
6. The temporary structure shall be screened and landscaped from view of adjacent residential uses in accordance with chapter 19 of this title.
7. Vehicular access points shall be limited, shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement, and shall be subject to approval of the City
Engineer.
8. Adequate off street parking and loading facilities are provided with approval of the City Engineer.
9. Adequate provisions for site drainage are made, subject to review and approval of the City Engineer.
10. All signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in conformance with chapter 37 of this title.
11. All refuse shall be stored within containers that are to be screened and enclosed within a fence or similar structure. (Prior Code § 20-86-3)
11-86-4: USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT:
Subject to applicable provisions of this chapter, performance standards established by this title, and processing requirements of section 11-8-2 of this title,
the following are uses allowed in an I-2 District by administrative permit as may be issued by the Zoning Administrator:
A. Temporary outdoor promotional events and sales; provided, that:
1. Promotional Events:
a. Such activity is directed towards the general public and includes grand openings, carnivals, craft shows, flea markets, mechanical and animal
rides and displays of materials that are typically not sold or serviced on the site.
b. The event shall not exceed the period specified in the administrative permit and in no case shall exceed three (3) consecutive calendar days per
event.
c. There shall be no more than two (2) promotional events per calendar year per property.
2. Outdoor Sales:
a. Such activity is directed towards the general public and includes warehouse sales, sidewalk sales, inventory reduction or liquidation sales,
distressed merchandise sales, seasonal merchandise sales, and licensed transient merchant and transient product merchant sales.
b. The following specific standards shall apply to all proposed temporary outdoor sales activities allowed by this subsection and by the business
licensing provisions of this Code in addition to other applicable Building and Safety Code requirements as determined by the Zoning Administrator:
(1) The maximum total time for temporary outdoor sales activities shall be the period specified in the administrative permit and, in no case, shall
exceed sixty (60) days per calendar year per property.
(2) There shall be no more sales activities than those specified in the administrative permit and, in no case shall there be more than ten (10) sales
activities per year per property.
(3) Sales activities may be conducted within a required yard provided the area is paved and the activity does not interfere with parking, traffic
circulation or emergency vehicle access. Temporary sales on unpaved landscaped areas is prohibited.
c. General standards apply as follows:
(1) The event shall be clearly accessory to or promoting the permitted or conditional use approved for the site. Only merchandise which is normally
manufactured, sold, or stocked by the occupant on the subject premises on a regular or seasonal basis shall be sold and/or promoted.
(2) Tents, stands, and other similar temporary structures may be utilized, provided they are clearly identified on the submitted plan and provided
that it is determined by the Zoning Administrator that they will not impair the parking capacity, emergency access, or the safe and efficient
movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic on or off the site.
(3) The submitted plan shall clearly demonstrate that adequate off street parking for the proposed event can and will be provided for the duration of
the event. Determination of compliance with this requirement shall be made by the Zoning Administrator who shall consider the nature of the
event and the applicable parking requirements of this title. Consideration shall be given to the parking needs and requirements of other
occupants in the case of multi-tenant buildings. Parking on public rights-of-way and streets is prohibited; except, that parking on local streets
may be allowed on Saturday and Sunday only; provided, that the petitioner arranges for traffic control by authorized enforcement officers, as
approved in writing by the Zoning Administrator, at the petitioner's expense.
(4) Signage related to the event shall be in compliance with the temporary sign standards of this title and shall be allowed for the duration of the
event. Special signage for purposes of traffic direction and control may be authorized by the Zoning Administrator; the erection and removal of
such signage shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
(5) The approved permit shall be displayed on the premises for the duration of the event. (Prior Code § 20-86-4)
11-86-5: ACCESSORY USES:
The following are permitted accessory uses in an I-2 District:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 432/497
A. Commercial or business buildings and structures for a use accessory to the principal use but such use shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the gross
floor space of the principal use.
B. Off street loading as regulated by chapter 22 of this title.
C. Off street parking as regulated by chapter 21 of this title.
D. Semitractor trailer parking and land/sea container storage as provided for by subsection 11-18-3B of this title.
E. Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs three and one-half meters (3.5 m) or less in diameter, short wave radio
dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers, Federal licensed amateur radio stations
and television receivers, as regulated by chapter 33 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-86-5; amd. 2018 Code; Ord. 2019-04, 2-11-2019)
11-86-6: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following are conditional uses in an I-2 District subject to the procedures set forth in and regulated by chapter 4 of this title:
A. Animal kennels; provided, that:
1. An exercise area at least one hundred (100) square feet in size shall be provided to accommodate the periodic exercising of animals boarded at the
kennel.
2. If an outdoor exercise area is provided, it shall be at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet in size and shall be restricted to the exercising of one
animal, on leash, under the control of a handler, in the pet exercise area, at a time.
3. Outdoor exercise areas shall be fenced, not less than six feet (6') in height with an additional at least two foot (2') security arm with an internal
orientation set at a thirty degree (30°) angle, and shall be of sufficient strength to retain kenneled animals. Said fence shall be located in a side or
rear yard and shall provide a complete visual screen from surrounding properties in compliance with chapter 19 of this title. Said fence shall be set
back at least one hundred feet (100') from any side or rear property line.
4. Outdoor exercise areas must be cleaned at least once per day to prevent the accumulation of animal wastes and the spread of disease.
5. A ventilation system shall be designed so that no odors or organisms will spread between wards or to the outside air and will be capable of
completely exchanging internal air at a rate of at least twice per hour. Air temperature must be maintained between sixty degrees Fahrenheit (60°F)
and seventy five degrees Fahrenheit (75°F).
6. A room separate from the kennel area shall be provided of sufficient size to adequately separate animals that are sick or injured from healthy
animals.
7. Indoor animal kennel floors and walls shall be made of nonporous materials or sealed concrete to make it nonporous.
8. Animal wastes shall be flushed down an existing sanitary sewer system or enclosed in a container of sufficient construction to eliminate odors and
organisms and shall be properly disposed of at least once a day.
9. All State Health Department and Minnesota Pollution Control Agency requirements for such facilities are met.
B. Automobile repair, major and minor; provided, that:
1. The use shall be set back a minimum of fifty feet (50') from any abutting residentially zoned properties.
2. Hours of operation shall be limited to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. unless extended by the City Council.
3. All repair activities shall be conducted within the principal building with overhead doors to the service area(s) closed at all times, except when moving
vehicles in and out.
4. The emission of odor by a use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota regulation APC
7011, as amended.
5. All flammable materials, including liquids and rags, shall conform with the applicable provisions of the Minnesota State Fire Code.
6. All painting must be conducted in an approved paint booth. All paint booths and all other activities of the operation shall thoroughly control the
emission of fumes, dust or other particulate matter so that the use shall be in compliance with Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota
regulation APC 1-15, as amended.
7. All outside storage is prohibited; storage of damaged vehicles, vehicles being repaired and vehicle parts and accessory equipment must be
completely inside a principal or accessory building.
C. Commercial and public radio and television transmitting antennas, and public utility microwave antennas, as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
D. Commercial, private and public satellite dish transmitting or receiving antennas in excess of three and one-half meters (3.5 m) in diameter, as regulated
by chapter 33 of this title.
E. Commercial semitractor or semitrailer construction or agricultural implement sales, leasing and rental as a principal use; provided, that:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 433/497
1. The architectural appearance and functional plan of the building and site shall not be so dissimilar to the existing buildings or area as to cause
impairment in property values or constitute a blighting influence within a reasonable distance of the lot.
2. The lot has frontage, if not direct access, to an improved collector or arterial street designated by the Comprehensive Plan.
3. The area of the site used for outdoor display shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total lot area.
4. All semitractors, semitrailers, construction or agricultural implements on the premises are to be in operational condition and not considered to be
refuse.
5. The entire site, other than that taken up by a building, structure or plantings, shall be surfaced with bituminous or concrete to control dust and
drainage, which is subject to review and approval of the City Engineer.
6. A drainage system subject to approval of the City Engineer shall be installed.
7. At the boundaries of a residential use or district, a landscaping strip not less than twenty five feet (25') wide shall be provided to screen outdoor
display areas in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
8. Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement, shall comply with chapter 21 of this title and shall be
subject to review and approval of the City Engineer.
9. The display area does not take up parking space or loading space as required by chapters 21 and 22 of this title.
10. All lighting shall be hooded with a ninety degree (90°) cutoff and so directed that the light source not be visible from the public right-of-way or
adjacent residential uses or districts.
11. All signs, information, or visual communication devices shall be minimized and shall be in compliance with the applicable provisions of chapter 37 of
this title.
12. Outdoor storage of refuse shall be within containers enclosed and screened from view in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
13. Service of semitractors, semitrailers, and construction or agricultural implements shall be permitted only in accordance with the applicable
provisions for truck service established by this title.
14. Sales, rental or leasing activities allowed under this entry shall be limited to those specifically identified. Sales, rental or leasing of products other
than those specifically identified by this entry shall be subject to the applicable provisions of this title.
15. All conditions pertaining to a specific site are subject to change when the City Council, upon investigation in relation to a formal request, finds that
the general welfare and public betterment can be served as well or better by modifying the conditions.
F. Commercial truck service as a principal or accessory use, provided:
1. Regardless of whether the dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor fuels and/or oil is incidental to the conduct of the use or business, the
standards and requirements imposed by this title for motor fuel stations shall apply. These standards and requirements are, however, in addition to
other requirements which are imposed for other uses of the property.
2. The architectural appearance and functional plan of the building and site shall not be so dissimilar to the existing buildings or area as to constitute a
blighting influence within a reasonable distance of the lot.
3. The entire site, other than that taken up by a building, structure or plantings, shall be surfaced with blacktop or concrete to control dust and drainage
which is subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
4. A drainage system subject to the approval of the City Engineer shall be installed.
5. The lighting shall be accomplished in such a way as to have no direct source of light visible from adjacent land in residential use or from the public
right-of-way and shall be in compliance with chapter 16 of this title.
6. Wherever fuel pumps are to be installed, pump islands shall be installed.
7. At the boundaries of a residential district, a strip of not less than five feet (5') shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with chapter 19 of this
title.
8. Each light standard island and all islands in the parking lot shall be landscaped or covered.
9. Parking or truck magazine storage space shall be screened from view of abutting residential districts in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
10. Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement, shall comply with chapter 21 of this title and shall be
subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
11. All signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be minimized and shall be in compliance with the provisions of chapter 37 of
this title.
12. Provisions are made to control and reduce noise in accordance with chapter 16 of this title.
13. No outside storage, sales, service or rental shall be permitted, unless otherwise approved in accordance with applicable provisions of this title.
14. Sale of products other than those specifically mentioned in this entry shall be subject to a conditional use permit.
G. Commercial truck washing as a principal or accessory use, provided:
1. The architectural appearance and functional plan of the building and site shall not be so dissimilar to the existing buildings or areas as to cause
impairment in property values or constitute a blighting influence.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 434/497
2. Magazine or stacking space is constructed to accommodate an appropriate number of trucks and shall be subject to approval by the City Council.
3. Magazine or stacking space shall not interfere with on site circulation patterns or required on site parking or loading areas.
4. At the boundaries of a residential district, a buffer strip of not less than five feet (5') in width shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with
chapter 19 of this title.
5. Each light standard island and all islands in the parking lot are landscaped or covered.
6. Parking or truck magazine storage space shall be screened from view of abutting residential districts in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
7. The entire area, other than occupied by the building or plantings, shall be surfaced with bituminous material or concrete which will control dust and
drainage which is subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
8. The entire area shall have a drainage system which is subject to the approval of the City.
9. All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source is not visible from the public right-of-way or from an abutting residential use and shall
be in compliance with chapter 16 of this title.
10. Vehicular access points shall be limited, shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement and shall be subject to the approval of the
City Engineer.
11. All signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in compliance with chapter 37 of this title.
12. All refuse shall be stored in containers. Said containers are to be screened and enclosed by a fence or similar structure.
13. Hours of operation shall be limited as necessary to minimize the effect of nuisance factors such as traffic noise and glare upon any existing
neighboring residential uses.
H. Convenience gasoline sales with grocery and/or food operations; provided, that:
1. Convenience/deli food is of the take out type only.
2. Outside sales and service shall be allowed on a limited basis; provided, that:
a. Site Plan: Areas for outdoor sales and services shall be clearly indicated on the site plan and reviewed at the time of application for a conditional
use permit. No outdoor sales or services shall be allowed outside of those areas so designated on the approved site plan without approval of an
amended conditional use permit.
b. Location: Outdoor sales and services shall be located adjacent to the principal building upon a concrete or asphalt surface behind a raised six inch
(6") curb, on the raised pump islands or otherwise segregated from vehicle circulation under the canopy and shall not encroach into any required
principal building setback, required parking stall, drive aisle, or minimum five foot (5') wide pedestrian sidewalk adjacent to the principal building
where head-in parking is provided or otherwise impede vehicle and pedestrian circulation, except as provided by subsection H2d of this section.
c. Outdoor Sales:
(1) Area: The area devoted to outdoor sales shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the gross floor area of the principal building or two hundred
(200) square feet, whichever is less.
(2) Height: The height of sales displays not abutting the principal building or located between the fuel pumps under the canopy shall not exceed
three feet (3') as measured from the grade of the adjacent drive aisle to the top of the display. All other outdoor sales displays shall not exceed
five feet (5') in height measured from grade to the top of the display.
(3) Required Parking: The outdoor sales area shall be included in the calculations for parking spaces required for the use by chapter 21 of this title.
d. Outdoor Services: Outdoor services shall be limited to the following uses:
(1) Public phones may encroach into a required yard as long as they do not interrupt on site traffic circulation, do not occupy required parking
stalls, and are not located in a yard abutting residentially zoned property.
(2) Propane sales limited to twenty (20) pound capacity tanks may be located outside provided the propane tanks are secured in a locker and meet
all Minnesota State Building Code and Fire Code.
(3) A compressed air service or automobile vacuum area may be located on site provided it meets all principal building setbacks and does not
interrupt on site traffic circulation and does not occupy required parking stalls.
(4) Freezers for ice products may only be located at the front of the building subject to the area and location requirements of subsections H2b and
H2c of this section, or shall be located in a side or rear yard and fully screened from view from adjacent properties as the public right-of-way with
materials consistent with the principal building.
3. The hours of operation shall be limited to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight unless extended by the City Council.
4. Motor fuel activities shall be installed in accordance with State and City standards. Additionally, adequate space shall be provided to access gas
pumps and allow maneuverability around the pumps. Underground fuel storage tanks are to be positioned to allow adequate access by motor fuel
transports and unloading operations that do not conflict with circulation, access and other activities on the site. Fuel pumps shall be installed on
pump islands.
5. A protective canopy located over a pump island may be an accessory structure on the property and may be located twenty feet (20') or more from
the front lot line, provided adequate visibility both on and off site is maintained.
6. The architectural appearance and functional plan of the building and site shall not be so dissimilar to the existing buildings or area as to cause a
blighting influence within a reasonable distance of the lot. All sides of the principal and accessory structures are to have essentially the same or a
coordinated, harmonious finish treatment.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 435/497
7. The entire site, other than that taken up by a building, structure or plantings, shall be surfaced with blacktop or concrete to control dust and drainage
which is subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
8. At the boundaries of the lot, a strip of not less than five feet (5') shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
9. Each light standard base shall be landscaped.
10. Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement, and shall be subject to the approval of the City.
11. An internal site pedestrian circulation system shall be defined and appropriate provisions made to protect such areas from encroachments by
parked cars or moving vehicles.
12. An enclosed screened area is to be provided for rubbish and dumpsters.
I. Essential services involving transmission pipelines and transmission or substation lines in excess of thirty three (33) kilovolts and up to one hundred
(100) kilovolts.
J. Governmental and public utility buildings and structures, other than the City of Otsego.
K. Motor fuel station.
1. Secondary Uses: Secondary uses occurring within the same property as the motor fuel station shall be allowed as provided for within this zoning
district.
2. Hours: Hours of operation shall be limited to the hours between five o'clock (5:00) A.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight unless extended by the
City Council.
3. Architectural Standards:
a. All elevations of the principal and accessory structures, including the canopy columns, are to have essentially the same or a coordinated
harmonious finish treatment that shall comply with subsection 11-17-4D1a of this title.
b. Contrasting colors not defined as earth tones may be used on the exterior of principal and accessory buildings subject to the following:
(1) Ten percent (10%) of the building facade may contain contrasting colors.
(2) The canopy may have contrasting color bands or accent lines not to exceed a cumulative width of twelve inches (12").
4. Canopy: A protective canopy structure may be located over the pump island(s), as an accessory structure, subject to the following performance
standards:
a. The edge of the canopy shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from front and side lot lines; provided, that adequate visibility is
maintained both on site and off site.
b. The canopy shall not exceed eighteen feet (18') in height and must provide fourteen feet (14') of clearance underneath the structure.
5. Landscaping: A minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of the lot, parcel, or tract of land used exclusively for the motor fuel facility shall remain as a
landscaped area including turf grass, trees, shrubbery, plantings, or fencing, subject to the following performance standards:
a. At the boundaries of the lot, the following landscape area shall be required in compliance with section 11-19-3 of this title:
(1) An area not less than fifteen feet (15') wide abutting public rights-of-way.
(2) An area not less than five feet (5') wide along all side and rear lot lines.
(3) A buffer yard of not less than twenty feet (20') wide where the use abuts residentially zoned property.
6. Fuel Pumps: Fuel pumps shall be installed and located in accordance with the following performance standards:
a. All fuel pumps shall be set back a minimum of thirty feet (30') from any property line.
b. Fuel pumps shall be elevated on islands six inches (6") above the drive aisle surface.
c. There shall be a minimum setback of twenty four feet (24') between the curb face of the pump islands.
7. Access And Circulation:
a. Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement and shall comply with chapter 21 of this title.
b. The site design shall accommodate adequate turning radius and vertical clearance for a semitrailer truck.
8. Off Street Parking:
a. Off street parking stalls shall be provided as required by chapter 21 of this title. The number of required parking spaces shall be calculated solely
based upon the use and the square footage of the principal building.
b. The number of parking stalls designed to accommodate Class 4 or larger vehicles shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the total number
of off street parking stalls provided within the property.
c. Parking spaces shall be screened from abutting residential zoned properties in compliance with section 11-19-3 of this title.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 436/497
9. Pedestrians: An internal site pedestrian circulation system shall be defined and appropriate provisions made to protect such areas from
encroachments by parked or moving vehicles, subject to the following performance standards:
a. There shall be a pedestrian sidewalk a minimum of five feet (5') wide and clear of any obstacle or impediment along the front width of the principal
building. The pedestrian sidewalk may be reduced to a minimum of three feet (3') wide and clear of any obstacle or impediment when segregated
from parking or drive aisles by a physical barrier that prevents vehicles from overhanging the pedestrian sidewalk.
10. Outside Sales And Service: Outside sales and service shall be allowed as an accessory use; provided, that:
a. Areas Indicated: Areas for outdoor sales and services shall be clearly indicated on the site plan and reviewed at the time of application for a
conditional use permit. No outdoor sales or services shall be allowed outside of those areas so designated on the approved site plan without
approval of an amended conditional use permit.
b. Location: Outdoor sales and services shall be located upon a concrete or asphalt surface and shall not encroach into any required principal
building setback, required parking stall, drive aisle, or pedestrian sidewalk required by this chapter, or otherwise impede vehicle and pedestrian
circulation.
c. Outdoor Sales:
(1) The area devoted to outdoor sales shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the gross floor area of the principal building or two hundred (200)
square feet, whichever is less.
(2) The height of sales displays shall not obstruct any window or otherwise impair a clear view of the pump islands from the cashier station within
the building and shall comply with the following:
(A) Displays located between fuel pumps under the canopy shall not exceed three feet (3') in height measured from the grade of the adjacent
drive aisle to the top of the display.
(B) All other outdoor displays shall not exceed five feet (5') in height measured from grade to the top of the display.
(3) Propane sales limited to twenty (20) pound capacity tanks may be allowed provided the propane tanks are secured in a locker and meet all
Building and Fire Codes.
(4) Freezers for ice products may be located at the front of the building, or located in a side or rear yard and screened from view from adjacent
properties or public rights-of-way by materials consistent with the principal building.
d. Outdoor Services: Compressed air service, or vacuum machines, and/or electric charging stations shall not be located in a yard abutting
residentially zoned property.
11. Exterior Lighting: A comprehensive lighting plan shall be submitted demonstrating compliance with section 11-16-6 of this title and the following
performance standards:
a. Canopy lighting shall only be permitted under the canopy structure, and consist of recessed canisters with no portion of the light source or fixture
extending below the bottom face of the canopy.
b. Total canopy illumination below the canopy may not exceed one hundred fifteen (115) foot-candles at ground level.
c. The canopy fascia shall not be illuminated except for signs allowed in accordance with this section.
12. Signs:
a. A comprehensive sign plan shall be submitted demonstrating compliance with chapter 37 of this title.
b. Signs may be allowed on a canopy in lieu of any signs mounted on the principal structure elevation facing the yard in which the canopy is located;
provided, that the area of the canopy mounted sign(s) does not exceed more than twenty percent (20%) of the area of the canopy elevation.
13. Noise:
a. Noise control shall be required to comply with section 11-16-10 of this title.
b. A public address system shall not be audible at any property line.
c. Play of music or advertisement from a public address system is prohibited.
14. Litter Control:
a. Exterior trash receptacles shall be provided at convenient locations to facilitate litter control.
b. The operation shall be responsible for litter control on a daily basis within the property.
c. Trash and recycling containers other than receptacles intended for patron use shall be screened within an enclosure as required by section 11-18-
4 of this title.
15. Stormwater Management And Drainage: The entire site other than taken up by a building, structure, or plantings shall be surfaced with asphalt,
concrete, cobblestone, or paving brick subject to the following performance standards:
a. All plans for stormwater management and drainage shall comply with section 11-16-5 of this title, subject to review and approval of the City
Engineer.
b. Drainage from all fueling areas shall be directed to an oil/grit separator that complies with the following minimum design standards:
(1) A minimum of four hundred (400) cubic feet of permanent pool storage capacity per acre of drainage area.
(2) A minimum pool depth of four feet (4').
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 437/497
(3) A minimum oil containment capacity of eight hundred (800) gallons.
(4) Minimum maintenance/inspection of two (2) times per year and/or after measurable spill events as defined by the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency.
(5) Any measurable spill event shall be reported to the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
L. Storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products which could decompose by demolition; crude oil; bulk fuel, gasoline or other liquid storage;
provided, that:
1. A drainage system subject to the approval of the City Engineer shall be installed.
2. The lighting shall be accomplished in such a way as to have no direct source of light visible from adjacent land in residential use or from the public
right-of-way and shall be in compliance with chapter 16 of this title.
3. At the boundaries of a residential district, a strip of not less than twenty five feet (25') shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with chapter
19 of this title.
4. Each light standard base shall be landscaped.
5. Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement, shall comply with chapter 21 of this title and shall be
subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
6. All signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be minimized and shall be in compliance with the applicable provisions of chapter
37 of this title.
7. Provisions are made to control and minimize noise, air and water pollution.
M. Taprooms accessory to a brewery or small brewery.
N. Tasting rooms accessory to a distillery or micro-distillery.
O. Truck stop.
1. Location:
a. The property shall abut an arterial right-of-way.
b. The property shall not abut any properties guided by the Comprehensive Plan or zoned for residential uses.
2. Secondary Uses: Secondary uses occurring within the same property as the truck stop shall be allowed as provided for within this zoning district,
and including:
a. Convenience food, which may include drive through facilities, and restaurant uses as a secondary use within the principal building.
b. Convenience grocery and retail sales within the principal building.
3. Hours: Hours of operation shall be limited to the hours between five o'clock (5:00) A.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight unless extended by the
City Council.
4. Architectural Standards:
a. All elevations of the principal and accessory structures, including the canopy columns, are to have essentially the same or a coordinated
harmonious finish treatment that shall comply with subsection 11-17-4D1a of this title.
b. Contrasting colors not defined as earth tones may be used on the exterior of principal and accessory buildings subject to the following:
(1) Ten percent (10%) of the building facade may contain contrasting colors.
(2) The canopy may have contrasting color bands or accent lines not to exceed a cumulative width of twelve inches (12").
5. Canopy: A protective canopy structure may be located over the pump island(s), as an accessory structure, subject to the following performance
standards:
a. The edge of the canopy shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from front and side lot lines, provided that adequate visibility is
maintained both on site and off site.
b. The canopy shall not exceed eighteen feet (18') in height and must provide fourteen feet (14') of clearance underneath the structure.
6. Landscaping: A minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of the lot, parcel, or tract of land used exclusively for the truck stop shall remain as a
landscaped area including turf grass, trees, shrubbery, plantings, or fencing, subject to the following performance standards:
a. At the boundaries of the lot, the following landscape area shall be required in compliance with section 11-19-3 of this title:
(1) An area not less than fifteen feet (15') wide abutting public rights-of-way.
(2) An area not less than five feet (5') wide along all side and rear lot lines.
7. Fuel Pumps: Fuel pumps shall be installed and located in accordance with the following performance standards:
a. All fuel pumps shall be set back a minimum of thirty feet (30') from any property line.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 438/497
b. Fuel pumps shall be elevated on islands six inches (6") above the drive aisle surface.
c. There shall be a minimum setback of twenty four feet (24') between the curb face of the pump islands.
8. Access And Circulation:
a. Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement and shall comply with chapter 21 of this title.
b. Access to the property shall be from an arterial or collector street.
c. The site design shall accommodate adequate turning radius and vertical clearance for a semitrailer truck.
d. Vehicle access, circulation, fuel islands, and off street parking areas for passenger vehicles and semitrailer truck traffic shall be separated.
9. Off Street Parking:
a. Off street parking stalls shall be provided as required by chapter 21 of this title. The number of required parking spaces shall be calculated solely
based upon the use and the square footage of the principal building.
b. Parking spaces shall be screened from abutting residential zoned properties in compliance with section 11-19-3 of this title.
10. Pedestrians: An internal site pedestrian circulation system shall be defined and appropriate provisions made to protect such areas from
encroachments by parked or moving vehicles, subject to the following performance standards:
a. There shall be pedestrian sidewalk a minimum of five feet (5') wide and clear of any obstacle or impediment along the front width of the principal
building. The pedestrian sidewalk may be reduced to a minimum of three feet (3') wide and clear of any obstacle or impediment when segregated
from parking or drive aisles by a physical barrier that prevents vehicles from overhanging the pedestrian sidewalk.
11. Outside Sales And Service: Outside sales and service shall be allowed as an accessory use; provided, that:
a. Areas Indicated: Areas for outdoor sales and services shall be clearly indicated on the site plan and reviewed at the time of application for a
conditional use permit. No outdoor sales or services shall be allowed outside of those areas so designated on the approved site plan without
approval of an amended conditional use permit.
b. Location: Outdoor sales and services shall be located upon a concrete or asphalt surface and shall not encroach into any required principal
building setback, required parking stall, drive aisle, or pedestrian sidewalk required by this chapter, or otherwise impede vehicle and pedestrian
circulation.
c. Outdoor Sales:
(1) The area devoted to outdoor sales shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the gross floor area of the principal building or two hundred (200)
square feet, whichever is less.
(2) The height of sales displays shall not obstruct any window or otherwise impair a clear view of the pump islands from the cashier station within
the building and shall comply with the following:
(A) Displays located between fuel pumps under the canopy shall not exceed three feet (3') in height measured from the grade of the adjacent
drive aisle to the top of the display.
(B) All other outdoor displays shall not exceed five feet (5') in height measured from grade to the top of the display.
(3) Propane sales limited to twenty (20) pound capacity tanks may be allowed provided the propane tanks are secured in a locker and meet all
Building and Fire Codes.
(4) Freezers for ice products may be located at the front of the building, or located in a side or rear yard and screened from view from adjacent
properties or public rights-of-way by materials consistent with the principal building.
d. Outdoor Services: Compressed air service, or vacuum machines, and/or electric charging stations shall not be located in a front yard.
12. Exterior Lighting: A comprehensive lighting plan shall be submitted demonstrating compliance with section 11-16-6 of this title and the following
performance standards:
a. Canopy lighting shall only be permitted under the canopy structure, and consist of recessed canisters with no portion of the light source or fixture
extending below the bottom face of the canopy.
b. Total canopy illumination below the canopy may not exceed one hundred fifteen (115) foot-candles at ground level.
c. The canopy fascia shall not be illuminated except for signs allowed in accordance with this section.
13. Signs:
a. A comprehensive sign plan shall be submitted demonstrating compliance with chapter 37 of this title.
b. Signs may be allowed on a canopy in lieu of any signs mounted on the principal structure elevation facing the yard in which the canopy is located;
provided, that the area of the canopy mounted sign(s) does not exceed more than twenty percent (20%) of the area of the canopy elevation.
14. Noise:
a. Noise control shall be required to comply with section 11-16-10 of this title.
b. A public address system shall not be audible at any property line.
c. Play of music or advertisement from a public address system is prohibited.
15. Litter Control:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 439/497
a. Exterior trash receptacles shall be provided at convenient locations to facilitate litter control.
b. The operation shall be responsible for litter control on a daily basis within the property.
c. Trash and recycling containers other than receptacles intended for patron use shall be screened within an enclosure as required by section 11-18-
4 of this title.
16. Stormwater Management And Drainage: The entire site other than taken up by a building, structure, or plantings shall be surfaced with asphalt,
concrete, cobblestone, or paving brick subject to the following performance standards:
a. All plans for stormwater management and drainage shall comply with section 11-16-5 of this title, subject to review and approval of the City
Engineer.
b. Drainage from all fueling areas shall be directed to an oil/grit separator that complies with the following minimum design standards:
(1) A minimum of four hundred (400) cubic feet of permanent pool storage capacity per acre of drainage area.
(2) A minimum pool depth of four feet (4').
(3) A minimum oil containment capacity of eight hundred (800) gallons.
(4) A minimum maintenance/inspection of two (2) times per year and/or after measurable spill events as defined by the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency.
(5) Any measurable spill event shall be reported to the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. (Prior Code § 20-86-6; amd. Ord. 2017-14, 11-13-
2017; 2018 Code)
11-86-7: LOT REQUIREMENTS AND SETBACKS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an I-2 District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this
title:
A. Lot Area: Two (2) acres.
B. Lot Width: Two hundred feet (200').
C. Setbacks:
1. Front yard:
a. Setbacks from centerline: Sixty five feet (65').
b. Setbacks from right-of-way lines: Thirty feet (30').
Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets or highways which bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall
project beyond the front yard line of either street.
2. Side yard: Twenty feet (20').
3. Rear yard: Twenty five feet (25').
4. Where railroad loading facilities exist or are to be provided, the rear and side yards may be modified through a conditional use permit. (Prior Code
§ 20-86-7)
11-86-8: MAXIMUM SITE COVERAGE BY BUILDINGS:
Fifty percent (50%) of the total lot area. (Prior Code § 20-86-9)
11-86-9: MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT:
Forty eight feet (48'). (Prior Code § 20-86-10)
Chapter 87
I-3 SPECIAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
11-87-1: INTENT:
It is the intent of the I-3 Special Industrial District to provide an opportunity for the eventual relocation of existing home extended businesses within the
community and locations for small businesses in a well planned manner by minimizing required capital investments for development sites. The designation
of the I-3 District shall be expressly limited to those areas identified by the Comprehensive Plan. (Prior Code § 20-87-1)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 440/497
11-87-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following are permitted uses in an I-3 District:
A. Breweries and small breweries.
B. Contractor operations.
C. Distilleries and micro-distilleries.
D. Machine shops.
E. Offices related to the above.
F. Manufacturing or assembly of a wide variety of products that produces no exterior noise, glare, fumes, obnoxious products, byproducts or wastes, or
creates other objectionable impact on the environment, including the generation of large volumes of traffic. Examples of such uses are:
1. Fabrication or assembly of small products such as optical, electronic, pharmaceutical, medical supplies and equipment.
2. Printing and publishing.
G. Personal wireless service towers and antennas, including necessary equipment buildings, as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
H. Warehousing of nonexplosive material or equipment. (Prior Code § 20-87-2; amd. Ord. 2017-14, 11-13-2017)
11-87-3: INTERIM USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are interim uses in the I-3 District and are governed by chapter 5 of this title:
A. Accessory, enclosed retail, rental, or service activity other than that allowed as a permitted use or conditional use within this chapter; provided, that:
1. Such use is allowed as a permitted use in a business district.
2. Such use does not constitute more than fifty percent (50%) of the gross floor area of the principal building.
3. Adequate off street parking and off street loading in compliance with the requirements of chapters 21 and 22 of this title is provided.
4. All signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in compliance with the provisions of chapter 37 of this title.
5. The interim use permit shall terminate upon a change of occupancy or other date as determined by the City Council in accordance with section 11-5-
4 of this title.
B. Farms, farmsteads, and farming.
C. Open and outdoor storage as a principal or an accessory use; provided, that:
1. The outside storage areas are fenced and completely screened from view of the public right-of-way, neighboring residential uses, or an abutting
residential district in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
2. Storage area is surfaced to control dust and drainage as approved by the City Engineer.
3. All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source shall not be visible from the public right-of-way or from neighboring residences.
4. The storage area does not take up parking space or loading space as required for conformity to this title.
5. The interim use permit shall terminate upon a change of occupancy or other date as determined by the City Council in accordance with section 11-5-
4 of this title.
D. Open or outdoor service, sale and rental as a principal or an accessory use; provided, that:
1. Outside service areas are fenced and completely screened from view of the public right-of-way, neighboring residential uses, or an abutting
residential district in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
2. All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source shall not be visible from the public right-of-way or from neighboring residences and
shall be in compliance with chapter 16 of this title.
3. The use does not take up parking space as required for conformity to this title.
4. The sales area is surfaced to control dust and drainage as approved by the City Engineer.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 441/497
5. The interim use permit shall terminate upon a change of occupancy or other date as determined by the City Council in accordance with section 11-5-
4 of this title.
E. Physical recreation or training facilities; provided, that:
1. Hours of operation shall be subject to review and approval of the City Council.
2. Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic, shall comply with chapter 21 of this title and shall be subject to review
and approval of the City Engineer.
3. Adequate off street parking and off street loading stalls are provided in compliance with chapters 21 and 22 of this title.
4. All signs and information and visual communications devices shall be in compliance with chapter 37 of this title.
5. The interim use permit shall terminate upon a change of occupancy or other date as determined by the City Council in accordance with section 11-5-
4 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-87-3)
11-87-4: USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT:
Subject to applicable provisions of this chapter, performance standards established by this title, and processing requirements of section 11-8-2 of this title,
the following are uses allowed in an I-3 District by administrative permit as may be issued by the Zoning Administrator:
A. Other uses of the same general character as those listed as a permitted use in this district.
B. Temporary outdoor promotional events and sales subject to the same provisions as required in subsection 11-75-4B of this title. (Prior Code § 20-87-4)
11-87-5: ACCESSORY USES:
The following are permitted accessory uses in an I-3 District:
A. Commercial or business buildings and structures for a use accessory to the principal use but such use shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the gross
floor space of the principal use.
B. Off street loading as regulated by chapter 22 of this title.
C. Off street parking as regulated by chapter 21 of this title.
D. Semitractor trailer parking and land/sea container storage as provided for by subsection 11-18-3B of this title.
E. Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs three and one-half meters (3.5 m) or less in diameter, short wave radio
dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers, Federal licensed amateur radio stations
and television receivers, as regulated by chapter 33 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-87-5; amd. 2018 Code; Ord. 2019-04, 2-11-2019)
11-87-6: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following are conditional uses in an I-3 District. (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by chapter 4 of
this title.)
A. Automobile repair, major and minor; provided, that:
1. The use shall be set back a minimum of fifty feet (50') from any abutting residentially zoned properties.
2. Hours of operation shall be limited to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. unless extended by the City Council.
3. All repair activities shall be conducted within the principal building with overhead doors to the service area(s) closed at all times, except when moving
vehicles in and out.
4. The emission of odor by a use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota regulation APC
7011, as amended.
5. All flammable materials, including liquids and rags, shall conform with the applicable provisions of the Minnesota State Fire Code.
6. All painting must be conducted in an approved paint booth. All paint booths and all other activities of the operation shall thoroughly control the
emission of fumes, dust or other particulate matter so that the use shall be in compliance with Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota
regulation APC 1-15, as amended.
7. All outside storage is prohibited; storage of damaged vehicles, vehicles being repaired and vehicle parts and accessory equipment must be
completely inside a principal or accessory building.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 442/497
B. Commercial and public radio and television transmitting antennas, and public utility microwave antennas, as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
C. Commercial, private and public satellite dish transmitting or receiving antennas in excess of three and one-half meters (3.5 m) in diameter, as regulated
by chapter 33 of this title.
D. Motor fuel station.
1. Secondary Uses: Secondary uses occurring within the same property as the motor fuel station shall be allowed as provided for within this zoning
district.
2. Hours: Hours of operation shall be limited to the hours between five o'clock (5:00) A.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight unless extended by the
City Council.
3. Architectural Standards:
a. All elevations of the principal and accessory structures, including the canopy columns, are to have essentially the same or a coordinated
harmonious finish treatment that shall comply with subsection 11-17-4D1a of this title.
b. Contrasting colors not defined as earth tones may be used on the exterior of principal and accessory buildings subject to the following:
(1) Ten percent (10%) of the building facade may contain contrasting colors.
(2) The canopy may have contrasting color bands or accent lines not to exceed a cumulative width of twelve inches (12").
4. Canopy: A protective canopy structure may be located over the pump island(s), as an accessory structure, subject to the following performance
standards:
a. The edge of the canopy shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from front and side lot lines; provided, that adequate visibility is
maintained both on site and off site.
b. The canopy shall not exceed eighteen feet (18') in height and must provide fourteen feet (14') of clearance underneath the structure.
5. Landscaping: A minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of the lot, parcel, or tract of land used exclusively for the motor fuel facility shall remain as a
landscaped area including turf grass, trees, shrubbery, plantings, or fencing, subject to the following performance standards:
a. At the boundaries of the lot, the following landscape area shall be required in compliance with section 11-19-3 of this title:
(1) An area not less than fifteen feet (15') wide abutting public rights-of-way.
(2) An area not less than five feet (5') wide along all side and rear lot lines.
(3) A buffer yard of not less than twenty feet (20') wide where the use abuts residentially zoned property.
6. Fuel Pumps: Fuel pumps shall be installed and located in accordance with the following performance standards:
a. All fuel pumps shall be set back a minimum of thirty feet (30') from any property line.
b. Fuel pumps shall be elevated on islands six inches (6") above the drive aisle surface.
c. There shall be a minimum setback of twenty four feet (24') between the curb face of the pump islands.
7. Access And Circulation:
a. Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement and shall comply with chapter 21 of this title.
b. The site design shall accommodate adequate turning radius and vertical clearance for a semitrailer truck.
8. Off Street Parking:
a. Off street parking stalls shall be provided as required by chapter 21 of this title. The number of required parking spaces shall be calculated solely
based upon the use and the square footage of the principal building.
b. The number of parking stalls designed to accommodate Class 4 or larger vehicles shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the total number
of off street parking stalls provided within the property.
c. Parking spaces shall be screened from abutting residential zoned properties in compliance with section 11-19-3 of this title.
9. Pedestrians: An internal site pedestrian circulation system shall be defined and appropriate provisions made to protect such areas from
encroachments by parked or moving vehicles, subject to the following performance standards:
a. There shall be a pedestrian sidewalk a minimum of five feet (5') wide and clear of any obstacle or impediment along the front width of the principal
building. The pedestrian sidewalk may be reduced to a minimum of three feet (3') wide and clear of any obstacle or impediment when segregated
from parking or drive aisles by a physical barrier that prevents vehicles from overhanging the pedestrian sidewalk.
10. Outside Sales And Service: Outside sales and service shall be allowed as an accessory use; provided, that:
a. Areas Indicated: Areas for outdoor sales and services shall be clearly indicated on the site plan and reviewed at the time of application for a
conditional use permit. No outdoor sales or services shall be allowed outside of those areas so designated on the approved site plan without
approval of an amended conditional use permit.
b. Location: Outdoor sales and services shall be located upon a concrete or asphalt surface and shall not encroach into any required principal
building setback, required parking stall, drive aisle, or pedestrian sidewalk required by this chapter, or otherwise impede vehicle and pedestrian
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 443/497
circulation.
c. Outdoor Sales:
(1) The area devoted to outdoor sales shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the gross floor area of the principal building or two hundred (200)
square feet, whichever is less.
(2) The height of sales displays shall not obstruct any window or otherwise impair a clear view of the pump islands from the cashier station within
the building and shall comply with the following:
(A) Displays located between fuel pumps under the canopy shall not exceed three feet (3') in height measured from the grade of the adjacent
drive aisle to the top of the display.
(B) All other outdoor displays shall not exceed five feet (5') in height measured from grade to the top of the display.
(3) Propane sales limited to twenty (20) pound capacity tanks may be allowed provided the propane tanks are secured in a locker and meet all
Building and Fire Codes.
(4) Freezers for ice products may be located at the front of the building, or located in a side or rear yard and screened from view from adjacent
properties or public rights-of-way by materials consistent with the principal building.
d. Outdoor Services: Compressed air service, or vacuum machines, and/or electric charging stations shall not be located in a yard abutting
residentially zoned property.
11. Exterior Lighting: A comprehensive lighting plan shall be submitted demonstrating compliance with section 11-16-6 of this title and the following
performance standards:
a. Canopy lighting shall only be permitted under the canopy structure, and consist of recessed canisters with no portion of the light source or fixture
extending below the bottom face of the canopy.
b. Total canopy illumination below the canopy may not exceed one hundred fifteen (115) foot-candles at ground level.
c. The canopy fascia shall not be illuminated except for signs allowed in accordance with this section.
12. Signs:
a. A comprehensive sign plan shall be submitted demonstrating compliance with chapter 37 of this title.
b. Signs may be allowed on a canopy in lieu of any signs mounted on the principal structure elevation facing the yard in which the canopy is located;
provided, that the area of the canopy mounted sign(s) does not exceed more than twenty percent (20%) of the area of the canopy elevation.
13. Noise:
a. Noise control shall be required to comply with section 11-16-10 of this title.
b. A public address system shall not be audible at any property line.
c. Play of music or advertisement from a public address system is prohibited.
14. Litter Control:
a. Exterior trash receptacles shall be provided at convenient locations to facilitate litter control.
b. The operation shall be responsible for litter control on a daily basis within the property.
c. Trash and recycling containers other than receptacles intended for patron use shall be screened within an enclosure as required by section 11-18-
4 of this title.
15. Stormwater Management And Drainage: The entire site other than taken up by a building, structure, or plantings shall be surfaced with asphalt,
concrete, cobblestone, or paving brick subject to the following performance standards:
a. All plans for stormwater management and drainage shall comply with section 11-16-5 of this title, subject to review and approval of the City
Engineer.
b. Drainage from all fueling areas shall be directed to an oil/grit separator that complies with the following minimum design standards:
(1) A minimum of four hundred (400) cubic feet of permanent pool storage capacity per acre of drainage area.
(2) A minimum pool depth of four feet (4').
(3) A minimum oil containment capacity of eight hundred (800) gallons.
(4) Minimum maintenance/inspection of two (2) times per year and/or after measurable spill events as defined by the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency.
(5) Any measurable spill event shall be reported to the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
E. Planned unit development, as regulated by chapter 36 of this title.
F. Taprooms accessory to a brewery or small brewery.
G. Tasting rooms accessory to a distillery or micro-distillery. (Prior Code § 20-87-6; amd. Ord. 2017-14, 11-13-2017)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 444/497
11-87-7: LOT REQUIREMENTS AND SETBACKS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an I-3 District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this
title:
A. Lot Area: One acre.
B. Lot Width: Two hundred feet (200').
C. Setbacks:
1. Front yard:
a. Setbacks from centerline: Sixty five feet (65').
b. Setbacks from right-of-way lines: Thirty feet (30').
Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets or highways which bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall
project beyond the front yard line of either street.
2. Side yards:
a. Corner lot: Thirty five feet (35').
b. Interior lot: Ten feet (10').
3. Rear yard: Twenty feet (20'). (Prior Code § 20-87-7)
11-87-8: MAXIMUM SITE COVERAGE:
A. Building and structure: Thirty percent (30%).
B. Hard surface including buildings and parking/driveway areas: Eighty five percent (85%). (Prior Code § 20-87-8)
11-87-9: MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT:
Thirty five feet (35'). (Prior Code § 20-87-9)
Chapter 88
RESERVED
Chapter 89
RESERVED
Chapter 90
INS INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT
11-90-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The INS District is intended to provide a specific zoning district for facilities devoted to serving the public. It is unique in that the primary objective of uses
within this district is the provision of services, frequently on a nonprofit basis, rather than the sale of goods or services. It is intended that uses within such
a district will be compatible with adjoining development, and they normally will be located on an arterial street or thoroughfare. (Prior Code § 20-90-1)
11-90-2: PERMITTED USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted uses in an INS District:
A. Personal wireless service towers and antennas, including necessary equipment buildings, as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 445/497
B. Preschool, elementary, junior or senior high schools having a regular course of study accredited by the State of Minnesota.
C. Publicly owned civic or cultural buildings, such as libraries, City offices, auditoriums, public administration buildings and historical developments.
D. Religious institutions, such as churches, chapels, temples and synagogues. (Prior Code § 20-90-2)
11-90-3: INTERIM USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are interim uses in the INS District and are governed by chapter 5 of this title:
A. Farms, farmsteads, and farming.
B. Temporary classroom structures for a public school, provided that:
1. The interim use permit shall terminate one year from the date of approval, unless a longer period is approved by the City Council.
2. The temporary structure shall be subject to all principal building setbacks and shall not occupy or disrupt on site parking, loading, or vehicle or
pedestrian circulation or outdoor recreation areas.
3. Off street parking stalls shall be provided for the temporary structure as required by chapter 21 of this title.
4. Any exterior lighting shall comply with section 11-16-6 of this title.
5. The structure shall meet all requirements of the Minnesota State Building Code.
6. Provisions for water and sewer service for the temporary structure shall be subject to review and approval of the building official. (Prior Code § 20-
90-3)
11-90-4: USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT:
Subject to applicable provisions of this chapter, performance standards established by this title, and processing requirements of section 11-8-2 of this title,
the following are uses allowed in an INS District by administrative permit as may be issued by the Zoning Administrator:
A. Other uses of the same general character as those listed as a permitted use in this district.
B. Temporary outdoor promotional events and sales subject to the same provisions as required in subsection 11-75-4B of this title. (Prior Code § 20-90-4)
11-90-5: ACCESSORY USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted accessory uses in an INS District:
A. Accessory uses customarily incidental to the uses permitted in sections 11-90-2, 11-90-3, 11-90-4, and 11-90-6 of this chapter.
B. Off street parking and loading areas.
C. Parks, playgrounds or athletic fields.
D. Semitractor trailer parking and land/sea container storage as provided for by subsection 11-18-3B of this title; City of Otsego facilities only.
E. Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs three and one-half meters (3.5 m) or less in diameter, short wave radio
dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers, Federal licensed amateur radio stations
and television receivers, as regulated by chapter 33 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-90-5; amd. 2018 Code; Ord. 2019-04, 2-11-2019)
11-90-6: CONDITIONAL USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are conditional uses in an INS District. (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures
set forth in and regulated by chapter 4 of this title.)
A. Automobile parking lots as a principal use; provided, that:
1. The use and design is in conformance with chapter 21 of this title.
2. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 446/497
B. Cemeteries or memorial gardens; provided, that:
1. The site is landscaped in accordance with chapter 19 of this title.
2. The use is available to the public.
3. The land area of the property containing such use or activity meets the minimum established for the district.
4. The use meets the minimum setback requirements for principal structures.
5. The site accesses on a collector or arterial street.
6. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
C. Colleges, seminaries and other institutions of higher education; provided, that:
1. Adequate parking is provided in conformance with chapter 21 of this title.
2. Provisions are made to buffer and screen any surrounding residential uses.
3. The site is served by an arterial or collector street of sufficient capacity to accommodate traffic which will be generated.
4. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
D. Commercial and public radio and television transmitting antennas, and public utility microwave antennas, as regulated by chapter 33 of this title.
E. Community centers; provided, that:
1. Adequate screening from abutting and adjoining residential uses and landscaping is provided.
2. Adequate off street parking and access is provided and that such parking is adequately screened and landscaped from adjoining and abutting
residential uses.
3. Adequate off street loading and service entrances are provided and regulated where applicable by chapter 22 of this title.
4. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
F. Daycare nursery facilities as regulated by chapter 30 of this title.
G. Governmental and public regulated utility buildings, street garages and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the
community; provided, that:
1. Compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained and required setbacks and side yard requirements are met.
2. Outdoor storage of equipment and materials as an accessory use is allowed subject to the following requirements:
a. The storage area is landscaped, fenced and screened from view of the public right-of-way and abutting R Districts.
b. The storage area is surfaced with a material suitable to control dust and drainage.
3. Adequate screening from neighboring uses and landscaping is provided in compliance with chapter 19 of this title.
4. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
H. Hospitals and residential care facilities including extended care facilities for persons with disabilities, rest homes and care for the aged, ill and infirmed;
provided, that:
1. Interior side yards are screened.
2. Only the rear yard shall be used for play or recreational areas. Said area shall be fenced and controlled and screened in compliance with chapter 19
of this title.
3. The site shall be served by an arterial or collector street of sufficient capacity to accommodate traffic which will be generated.
4. All signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in compliance with chapter 37 of this title.
5. All State laws and statutes governing such use are strictly adhered to, and all required operating permits are secured.
6. Adequate off street parking is provided in compliance with chapter 21 of this title.
7. Off street loading space in compliance with chapter 22 of this title is provided.
8. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
I. Living quarters which are provided as an accessory use to a principal use in section 11-90-2 of this chapter or to a conditional use in this chapter;
provided, that:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 447/497
1. The use shall not be used as commercial rental property.
2. A maximum of one such dwelling shall be allowed.
3. There shall be a demonstrated and documented need for such a facility.
4. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
J. Other uses of the same general character as those listed in section 11-90-2 of this chapter and this section.
K. Planned unit development as regulated by chapter 36 of this title.
L. Public or semipublic recreational facilities; provided, that:
1. The site is landscaped.
2. The use is available to the "public".
3. The land area of the property containing such use or activity meets the minimum established for the district.
4. The use meets the minimum setback requirements for principal structures.
5. The site accesses on a minor arterial.
6. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
M. The lot area requirement for permitted uses may be reduced; provided, that:
1. Compatibility with surrounding existing and potential uses is maintained.
2. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
N. Wastewater treatment facilities permitted by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency or successor agency; provided, that:
1. The facility shall be operated in accordance with all statutes, rules, and ordinances, and maintain valid permits for operation and discharge as
regulated by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
2. Structures and components of the facility engaged in the treatment, processing or storage of wastewater or sludge materials shall be set back a
minimum of seventy five feet (75') from all property lines and public rights-of-way.
3. The facility shall have direct access from the lot to an improved public street with adequate capacity to accommodate the type and volume of traffic
generated, subject to approval of the City Engineer.
4. Off street parking stalls shall be provided in accordance with chapter 21 of this title.
5. Outdoor storage of vehicles or equipment as an accessory use is allowed; provided, that the storage area is surfaced with a material suitable to
prevent erosion and control drainage.
6. The facility shall be screened from view of surrounding properties and public rights-of-way in accordance with section 11-19-3 of this title.
7. Access to the facility shall be secured by a minimum eight foot (8') lockable gate and fence with an anticlimbing design subject to section 11-19-4 of
this title. (Prior Code § 20-90-6; amd. Ord. 2017-05, 4-24-2017)
11-90-7: LOT REQUIREMENTS AND SETBACKS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an INS District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this
title:
A. Lot Area; Minimum Site Area:
1. Five (5) acres unless otherwise specified or reduced by conditional use permit.
2. Religious institutions: Three (3) acres.
3. Elementary schools: Fifteen (15) acres.
4. Junior high schools: Thirty (30) acres.
5. Senior high schools: Fifty (50) acres.
6. Hospitals: Ten (10) acres.
7. Community centers: Three (3) acres. (Prior Code § 20-90-7)
8. Wastewater treatment facilities: Fifteen (15) acres. (Ord. 2017-05, 4-24-2017)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 448/497
B. Setbacks:
1. Schools, hospitals and public works facilities:
a. Front yard:
(1) Setbacks from centerline: Sixty five feet (65').
(2) Setbacks from right-of-way lines: Thirty feet (30').
Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets or highways which bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall
project beyond the front yard line of either street.
b. Side yards: One hundred feet (100').
c. Rear yard: One hundred feet (100').
2. All other institutional uses:
a. Front yard: Same as subsection B1a of this section.
b. Side yards: Fifty feet (50').
c. Rear yard: Fifty feet (50'). (Prior Code § 20-90-7)
11-90-8: HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS:
The following height requirements shall be observed in the INS District: All principal structures and their accessory buildings shall be limited to a maximum
height of three (3) stories or forty feet (40'). (Prior Code § 20-90-8; amd. 2018 Code)
Chapter 91
PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
11-91-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the PUD Planned Unit Development District is to provide for the integration and coordination of land parcels as well as the combination of
varying types of residential, commercial and industrial uses. (Prior Code § 20-91-1)
11-91-2: APPLICATION OF OTHER PROVISIONS:
All permitted, permitted accessory, or conditional uses contained inchapters 51 through 90 of this title shall be treated as potentially permitted uses within a
PUD District. (Prior Code § 20-91-2)
11-91-3: PROCEDURE:
Whether requested as a rezoning or initially established by City action alone, a PUD Planned Unit Development District shall be established and governed
subject to the amendment and procedure requirements as outlined in chapter 3 of this title, plus the procedures, conditions and standards imposed by
chapter 36 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-91-3)
Chapter 92
S SHORELAND MANAGEMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT
11-92-1: INTENT:
The intent of this chapter is to reduce the effects of overcrowding, to prevent pollution of waters of the community, to provide ample space on lots for
sanitary facilities, to minimize flood damages, to maintain property values, and to maintain natural characteristics of shorelands and adjacent water areas
by controlling lot sizes, placement of structures on lots, and alteration of shoreland areas. (Prior Code § 20-92-1)
11-92-2: STATUTE AUTHORITY:
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authorization and policies contained in Minnesota Statutes chapters 103A, B, E, F, G, and I, Minnesota
Regulations, and the planning and zoning enabling legislation in Minnesota Statutes chapter 462. (Prior Code § 20-92-2)
11-92-3: SHORELAND DISTRICTS:
The shorelands within the City are hereby designated as shoreland districts, and the requirements set forth in this chapter shall govern development and
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 449/497
other activities within these districts. The classification of the shoreland areas shall govern the use, alteration and development of these areas according to
said classification per Minnesota Statutes sections 103F.201, 103F.205, 103F.211, 103F.215, and 103F.221, and Minnesota Regulations NR 82-84. (Prior
Code § 20-92-3)
11-92-4: DISTRICT APPLICATION:
The Shoreland District shall be applied to and superimposed as an overlay upon all zoning districts as contained herein as existing or amended by this title
and the Official Zoning Map. The regulations and requirements imposed by the Shoreland District shall be in addition to those established for districts
which jointly apply. Under the joint application of districts, the more restrictive requirements shall apply. (Prior Code § 20-92-4)
11-92-5: BOUNDARIES:
The boundaries of the Shoreland Overlay District are established within the following distances from the ordinary high water mark of the surface water
depending on the size of the surface water as indicated on the Otsego Zoning Map:
Surface Water
Distance
(Feet)1
Greater than 10 acres 1,0002
Rivers and streams (draining an area greater than 2 square miles)3 3002
Notes:
1. The practical distance may be less whenever the waters involved are bounded by topographical divides which extend landward from the waters for
lesser distances and prevent flowage toward the surface water.
2. The distance requirement shall be increased to the limit of the floodplain when the floodplain is greater than 300 feet.
3. Does not include wild, scenic, and recreational rivers.
(Prior Code § 20-92-5)
11-92-6: SHORELAND CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM:
The surface waters affected by this title and which require controlled development of their shoreland (Shoreland District) shall be shown on the map
designated as the Official "Zoning Map of the City of Otsego" which is properly approved and made a part of this title and filed with the Zoning
Administrator. Surface waters generally greater than ten (10) acres and given an identification number by the State of Minnesota are defined and listed as
follows:
A. Lakes Classification System:
1. Natural Environmental Lakes:
a. Natural environmental lakes are generally small, often shallow lakes with limited capacities for assimilating the impacts of development and
recreational use. They often have adjacent lands with substantial constraints for development such as high water tables, exposed bedrocks, and
unsuitable soils.
b. These lakes, particularly in rural areas, usually do not have much existing development or recreational use.
Natural Environment Lake
Protected Waters
Inventory ID #
Rice 86-2p
Unnamed 86-3w
Unnamed 86-4w
Unnamed 86-6w
Unnamed 86-8p
Mud 86-26p
Unnamed 86-330w
Unnamed 86-332w
Unnamed 86-351w
Unnamed 86-395w
Unnamed 86-418w
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 450/497
2. Recreational Development Lakes: Recreational development lakes are generally medium sized lakes of varying depths and shapes with a variety of
land form, soil, and groundwater situations on the lands around them. They often are characterized by moderate levels of recreational use and
existing development. Development consists mainly of seasonal and year-round residences and recreationally oriented commercial uses. Many of
these have capacities for accommodating additional development and use.
Recreational
Development Lake
Protected Waters
Inventory ID #
Unnamed 86-5w
Unnamed 86-7w
Unnamed 86-302p
Unnamed 86-331w
B. Rivers And Streams Classification System:
1. Agricultural Rivers: Agricultural river segments are located in well roaded, intensively cultivated areas of the western and southern regions of the
State. Cultivated crops are the predominant land use, with some pasture and occasional feedlots, small municipalities, and small forested areas.
Residential development is not common, but some year-round residential use is occurring within commuting distances of major cities. Some
intensive recreational use occurs on these river segments in particular areas, but overall recreational use of these waters and adjacent lands is low.
Although potential exists for additional development and recreation, water quality constraints and competing land uses, particularly agriculture, will
inhibit expansions.
Agricultural River Legal Description
Crow Sec 36, T121, R23
2. Tributary Rivers: Tributary river segments consists of watercourses mapped in the protected waters inventory that have not been assigned one of the
river classes. These segments have a wide variety of existing land and recreational use characteristics. The segments have considerable potential
for additional development and recreational use, particularly those located near roads and within cities.
Tributary River Legal Description
Unnamed (Otsego Creek) Mud Lake to Sec 17, T121, R23
Unnamed Sec 27, T121, R24 to Sec 18, T121, R23
3. Wild, Scenic And Recreational Rivers: Provisions for regulation of wild, scenic, and recreational rivers are found in chapter 95 of this title.
Wild, Scenic And Recreational River Legal Description
Mississippi North boundary of City
(Prior Code § 11-92-6)
11-92-7: LAND USE DISTRICT DESCRIPTIONS:
A. Criteria For Designation: The land use districts in subsection B of this section and the delineation of a land use district's boundaries on the Official
Zoning Map shall be consistent with the goals, policies, and objectives of the City Comprehensive Land Use Plan and the following criteria,
considerations, and objectives:
1. General Considerations And Criteria For All Land Uses:
a. Preservation of natural areas.
b. Present ownership and development of shoreland areas.
c. Shoreland soil types and their engineering capabilities.
d. Topographic characteristics.
e. Vegetative cover.
f. In-water physical characteristics, values, and constraints.
g. Recreational use of the surface water.
h. Road and service center accessibility.
i. Socioeconomic development needs and plans as they involve water and related land resources.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 451/497
j. The land requirements of industry which, by its nature, requires location in shoreland areas.
k. The necessity to preserve and restore certain areas having significant historical or ecological value.
2. Factors And Criteria For Planned Unit Developments:
a. Existing recreational use of the surface waters and likely increases in use associated with planned unit developments.
b. Physical and aesthetic impacts of increased density.
c. Suitability of lands for the planned unit development approach.
d. Level of current development in the area.
e. Amounts and types of ownership of undeveloped lands.
B. Allowable Land Uses: The land uses allowable for the Shoreland Overlay District shall follow the permitted, interim, accessory, and conditional use
designations as defined and outlined in the base zoning districts, as amended, referred to as the Otsego zoning regulations and shall be properly
delineated on the Official Zoning Map for the shorelands of Otsego. The land uses shall be further subject to the provisions of section 11-92-8 of this
chapter. These land use districts are in conformance with the criteria specified in Minnesota Regulations part 6120.3200, subparagraph 3. (Prior Code
§ 20-92-7)
11-92-8: AGRICULTURE/RESIDENTIAL STANDARDS FOR LAKES:
A. Lot And Setback Standards For Lakes: Subject to the other more restrictive limitations which may be imposed by this title, the following minimum
requirements for lakes shall be observed in agricultural and residential zoning districts established in chapter 50 of this title which are overlaid by the
Shoreland District:
Natural Environment Recreational Development
Area Width Area Width
Lot area and width:
Unsewered riparian lots:
Single 80,000 200 40,000 150
Duplex 120,000 300 80,000 225
Triplex 160,000 400 120,000 300
Quad 200,000 500 160,000 375
Nonriparian lots:
Single 80,000 200 40,000 150
Duplex 160,000 400 80,000 265
Triplex 240,000 600 120,000 375
Quad 320,000 800 160,000 490
Sewered riparian lots:
Single 40,000 125 20,000 75
Duplex 70,000 225 35,000 135
Triplex 100,000 325 50,000 190
Quad 130,000 425 65,000 255
Nonriparian lots:
Single 20,000 125 15,000 75
Duplex 35,000 220 26,000 135
Triplex 52,000 315 38,000 190
Quad 65,000 410 49,000 245
Setbacks from ordinary high water mark1:
Structures:
Unsewered 150 100
Sewered 150 75
Sewage treatment system 150 75
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 452/497
Side yard setbacks for property abutting a lake 20 20
Building height2 35 feet 35 feet
Maximum impervious surface to area ratio 25 percent 25 percent
Notes:
1. Setback requirements from the ordinary high water mark shall not apply to piers and docks. Where development exists on both sides of a proposed
building site, building setbacks may be altered to more closely conform to adjacent building setbacks, provided the proposed building site is not located in
a shore impact zone or in a bluff impact zone.
2. Agricultural use related buildings, silos, and towers shall be exempt from the building height requirements. Building heights of over 35 feet that are not
an exempt agricultural use may be allowed through approval of a conditional use permit as regulated under chapter 4 of this title and section 11-92-15 of
this chapter.
(Prior Code § 20-92-8)
11-92-9: COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL STANDARDS FOR LAKES:
A. Lot And Setback Standards For Lakes: Subject to other more restrictive limitations which may be imposed by this title, the following minimum
requirements for lakes shall be observed in the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, I-1, I-2, I-3 and INS Zoning Districts which are overlaid by the Shoreland District:
(Prior Code § 20-92-9; amd. 2018 Code)
Natural Environment Recreational Development
Lot width:
Unsewered:
Riparian lots 200 150
Nonriparian lots 200 150
Sewered:
Riparian lots 125 100
Nonriparian lots 125 100
Setback from ordinary high water mark:1
Commercial/industrial 150 100
Impervious surface parking 75 50
Side yard setback for property abutting lake 20 20
Building height2 35 feet 35 feet
Maximum impervious surface to lot area ratio 25 percent 25 percent
Notes:
1. Setback requirements from the ordinary high water mark shall not apply to piers and docks. Where development exists on both sides of a proposed
building site, building setbacks may be altered to more closely conform to adjacent building setbacks, provided the proposed building site is not located in
a shore impact zone or in a bluff impact zone.
2. Agricultural use related buildings, silos, and towers shall be exempt from the building height requirements. Building heights of over 35 feet that are not
an exempt agricultural use may be allowed through approval of a conditional use permit as regulated under chapter 4 of this title and section 11-92-15 of
this chapter.
(Prior Code § 20-92-9)
11-92-10: AGRICULTURE, RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL STANDARDS FOR RIVERS/STREAMS:
A. Lot And Setback Standards For Rivers: Subject to other more restrictive limitations which may be imposed by this title, the following minor requirements
for rivers shall be observed in all zoning districts which are overlaid by the Shoreland District:
Agriculture Tributary
Lot width:
Unsewered:
Single 150 100
Duplex 225 150
Triplex 300 200
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 453/497
Quad 375 250
Sewered:
Single 150 75
Duplex 225 115
Triplex 300 150
Quad 375 190
Setback from ordinary high water mark:1
Structures:
Unsewered 100 100
Sewered 50 50
Sewage treatment system 75 75
Side yard setbacks for property abutting a river or stream 20 20
Building height2 35 feet 35 feet
Maximum impervious surface area ratio 25 percent 25 percent
Notes:
1. Setback requirements from the ordinary high water mark shall not apply to piers and docks. Where development exists on both sides of a proposed
building site, building setbacks may be altered to more closely conform to adjacent building setbacks, provided the proposed building site is not located in
a shore impact zone or in a bluff impact zone.
2. Agricultural use related buildings, silos, and towers shall be exempt from the building height requirements. Building heights of over 35 feet that are not
an exempt agricultural use may be allowed through approval of a conditional use permit as regulated under chapter 4 of this title and section 11-92-15 of
this chapter.
(Prior Code § 20-92-10)
11-92-11: ADDITIONAL SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
A. Certain Residential Subdivisions: Residential subdivisions with dwelling unit densities exceeding those in the tables in sections 11-92-8, 11-92-9 and 11-
92-10 of this chapter can only be allowed if designed and approved as residential planned unit developments under section 11-92-17 of this chapter.
Only land above the ordinary high water level of public waters shall be used to meet lot area standards, and lot width standards shall be met at both the
ordinary high water level and at the building line. The sewer lot area dimensions shall only be used if publicly owned or controlled sewer system service
is available to the property.
B. Duplex, Triplex And Quadraminium Subdivisions: Subdivisions of duplexes, triplexes, and quadraminiums on natural environment lakes shall also meet
the following standards:
1. Each building shall be set back at least two hundred feet (200') from the ordinary high water level;
2. Each building must have common sewage treatment and water systems in one location and serve all dwelling units in the building;
3. Watercraft docking facilities for each lot shall be centralized in one location and serve all dwelling units in the building; and
4. No more than twenty five percent (25%) of a lake's shoreland shall be in duplex, triplex, or quad developments.
C. Prohibited Lots: Lots intended as controlled private access to public waters or as recreational areas for use by other than those residents residing on
the lot in question are expressly prohibited.
D. Placement, Design And Height Of Structures:
1. Placement Of Structures On Lots: When more than one setback is applied to a site, structures and facilities shall be located to meet all setbacks.
Where structures exist on the adjoining lots on both sides of a proposed building site, structure setbacks may be altered without a variance to
conform to the adjoining setbacks from the ordinary high water level, provided the proposed building site is not located in a shore impact zone or in a
bluff impact zone. Subject to other more restrictive limitations as may be imposed by this title, structures shall be located as follows:
a. Additional Structure Setbacks: The following additional structure setbacks apply, regardless of the classification of the water body.
Setback From
Setback
(In Feet)
Top of bluff 30
Unplatted cemetery 50
Right-of-way line of Federal, State, or County highway 30
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 454/497
Right-of-way line of City road, public street, or other roads or streets not classified Subject to individual district requirements
b. Bluff Impact Zones: Structures and accessory facilities, except stairways and landings, shall not be placed within bluff impact zones.
c. Uses Without Water Oriented Needs: Uses without water oriented needs shall be located on lots or parcels without public waters frontage, or, if
located on lots or parcels with public waters frontage, shall either be set back double the normal ordinary high water level setback or be
substantially screened from view from the water by vegetation or topography, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.
2. Design Criteria For Structures:
a. High Water Elevations: Structures shall be placed in accordance with any floodplain regulations applicable to the site. Where these controls do not
exist, the elevation to which the lowest floor, including basement, is placed or floodproofed shall be determined as follows:
(1) For lakes, by placing the lowest floor at a level at least three feet (3') above the highest known water level, or three feet (3') above the ordinary
high water level, whichever is higher. (Prior Code § 20-92-11)
(2) For rivers and streams, by placing the lowest floor at least three feet (3') above the flood of record, if data is available. If data is not available,
by placing the lowest floor at least three feet (3') above the ordinary high water level, or by conducting a technical evaluation to determine effects
of proposed construction upon flood stages and flood lows and to establish a flood protection elevation. Under all three (3) approaches,
technical evaluations shall be done by a qualified engineer or hydrologist consistent with Minnesota Rules parts 6120.5000 to 6120.6200
governing the management of floodplain areas. If more than one approach is used, the highest flood protection elevation determined shall be
used for placing structures and other facilities. (Prior Code § 20-92-11; amd. 2018 Code)
(3) Water oriented accessory structures may have the lowest floor placed lower than the elevation determined if the structure is constructed of
flood resistant materials to the elevation, electrical and mechanical equipment is placed above the elevation and, if long duration flooding is
anticipated, the structure is built to withstand ice action and wind driven waves and debris.
b. Water Oriented Accessory Structures: Subject to other more restrictive limitations which may be imposed by this title, each lot may have one water
oriented accessory structure not meeting the normal structure setback in sections 11-92-8, 11-92-9 and 11-92-10 of this chapter if the water
oriented accessory structure complies with the following provisions:
(1) The structure or facility shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height, exclusive of safety rails, and cannot occupy an area greater than two hundred
fifty (250) square feet. Detached decks shall not exceed eight feet (8') above grade at any point;
(2) The setback of the structure or facility from the ordinary high water level shall be at least ten feet (10');
(3) The structure or facility shall be treated to reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography,
increased setbacks or color, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions;
(4) The roof may be used as a deck with safety rails, but shall not be enclosed or used as a storage area;
(5) The structure or facility shall not be designed or used for human habitation and must not contain water supply or sewage treatment facilities;
and
(6) As an alternative for general development and recreational development water bodies, water oriented accessory structures used solely for
watercraft storage, and including storage of related boating and water oriented supporting equipment, may occupy an area up to four hundred
(400) square feet, provided the maximum width of the structure is twenty feet (20') as measured parallel to the configuration of the shoreline.
c. Stairways, Lifts And Landings: Stairways and lifts are the preferred alternative to major topographic alterations for achieving access up and down
bluffs and steep slopes to shore areas. Subject to other more restrictive limitations which may be imposed by this title, stairways and lifts shall
meet the following design requirements:
(1) Stairways and lifts shall not exceed four feet (4') in width on residential lots. Wider stairways may be used for commercial properties and public
open space recreational properties;
(2) Landings for stairways and lifts on residential lots shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in area. Landings larger than thirty two (32)
square feet may be used for commercial properties and public open space recreational properties;
(3) Canopies or roofs shall not be allowed on stairways, lifts, or landings;
(4) Stairways, lifts, and landings may be either constructed above the ground on posts or pilings, or placed into the ground, provided they are
designed and built in a manner that ensures control of soil erosion;
(5) Stairways, lifts, and landings shall be located in the most visually inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from the surface of the public water,
assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, whenever practical; and (Prior Code § 20-92-11)
(6) Facilities such as ramps, lifts, or mobility paths for persons with physical disabilities are also allowed for achieving access to shore areas;
provided, that there shall be compliance with the dimensional and performance standards of subsections D2c(1) to D2c(5) of this section in
addition to the requirements of Minnesota Regulations chapter 1340. (Prior Code § 20-92-11; amd. 2018 Code)
d. Significant Historic/Archeological Sites: No structure may be placed on a significant historic and/or archeological site in a manner that affects the
values of the site unless adequate information about the site has been removed and documented in a public repository.
e. Steep Slopes: The Zoning Administrator shall evaluate possible soil erosion impacts and development visibility from public waters before issuing a
permit for construction of sewage treatment systems, roads, driveways, structures, or other improvements on steep slopes. When determined
necessary, conditions shall be attached to issued permits to prevent erosion and to preserve existing vegetation screening of structures, vehicles,
and other facilities as viewed from the surface of public waters, assuming summer, leaf-on vegetation.
E. Shoreland Alterations: Alterations of vegetation and topography shall be regulated to prevent erosion into public waters, fix nutrients, preserve
shoreland aesthetics, preserve historic value, prevent bank slumping, and protect fish and wildlife habitat.
1. Vegetation Alterations:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 455/497
a. Vegetation alteration necessary for the construction of structures and sewage treatment systems and the construction of roads and parking areas
regulated by subsection F of this section shall be exempt from the vegetation alteration standards that follow.
b. Removal or alteration of vegetation, except for agricultural and forest management uses as regulated in subsection H of this section may be
allowed subject to the following standards:
(1) Intensive vegetation clearing within the shore and bluff impact zones and on steep slopes shall not be allowed. Intensive vegetation clearing for
forest land conversion to another use outside of these areas is allowable as a conditional use if an erosion control and sedimentation plan may
be developed and approved by the Soil and Water Conservation District in which the property is located.
(2) In shore and bluff impact zones and on steep slopes, limited clearing of trees and shrubs and cutting, pruning, and trimming of trees may be
allowed to provide a view to the water from the principal dwelling site and to accommodate the placement of stairways and landings, picnic
areas, access paths, livestock watering areas, beach and watercraft access areas, and permitted water oriented accessory structures or
facilities; provided, that:
(A) The screening of structures, vehicles, or other facilities as viewed from the water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, shall not be
substantially reduced;
(B) Along rivers, existing shading of water surfaces shall be preserved; and
(C) The above provisions shall not be applicable to the removal of trees, limbs, or branches that are dead, diseased, or pose safety hazards.
2. Topographical Alterations/Grading And Filling:
a. Subject to other more restrictive limitations which may be imposed by this title, grading and filling and excavations necessary for the construction
of structures, sewage treatment systems, and driveways under validly issued construction permits for these facilities do not require the issuance of
a separate grading and filling permit. However, the grading and filling standards in this section shall be incorporated into the issuance of permits for
construction of structures, sewage treatment systems, and driveways.
b. Public roads and parking areas as regulated by subsection F of this section.
c. Notwithstanding subsections E2a and E2b of this section, a grading and filling permit shall be required for:
(1) The movement of more than ten (10) cubic yards of material on steep slopes or within shore or bluff impact zones; and
(2) The movement of more than fifty (50) cubic yards of material outside of steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones.
d. The following considerations and conditions shall be adhered to during the issuance of construction permits, grading and filling permits, conditional
use permits, variances and subdivision approvals:
(1) Grading or filling in any type 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, or 8 wetland shall be evaluated to determine how extensively the proposed activity would affect the
following functional qualities of the wetland:
(A) Sediment and pollution trapping and retention;
(B) Storage of surface runoff to prevent or reduce flood damage;
(C) Fish and wildlife habitat;
(D) Recreational use;
(E) Shoreline or bank stabilization; and
(F) Noteworthiness, including special qualities such as historic significance, critical habitat for endangered plants and animals, or others.
This evaluation shall also include a determination of whether the wetland alteration being proposed requires permits, reviews, or approvals by
other local, State, or Federal agencies such as a watershed district, the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, or the United States Army
Corps of Engineers. The applicant shall be so advised.
(2) Alterations shall be designed and conducted in a manner that ensures only the smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for the shortest time
possible;
(3) Mulches or similar materials shall be used, where necessary, for temporary bare soil coverage, and permanent vegetation cover shall be
established as soon as possible;
(4) Methods to minimize soil erosion and to trap sediments before they reach any surface water feature shall be used;
(5) Altered areas shall be stabilized to acceptable erosion control standards consistent with the field office technical guides of the local Soil and
Water Conservation Districts and the United States Soil Conservation Service;
(6) Fill or excavated material shall not be placed in a manner that creates an unstable slope;
(7) Plans to place fill or excavated material on steep slopes shall be reviewed by the City Engineer for continued slope stability and shall not create
finished slopes of thirty percent (30%) or greater;
(8) Fill or excavated material shall not be placed in bluff impact zones;
(9) Any alterations below the ordinary high water level of public waters must first be authorized by the Commissioner of the Department of Natural
Resources under Minnesota Statutes section 103G.245.
(10) Alterations of topography shall only be allowed if they are accessory to permitted or conditional uses and do not adversely affect adjacent or
nearby properties; and
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 456/497
(11) Placement of natural rock riprap, including associated grading of the shoreline and placement of a filter blanket, may be permitted if the
finished slope does not exceed three feet (3') horizontal to one foot (1') vertical, the landward extent of the riprap is within ten feet (10') of the
ordinary high water level, and the height of the riprap above the ordinary high water level does not exceed three feet (3').
e. Excavations where the intended purpose is connection to a public water, such boat slips, canals, lagoons, and harbors shall be controlled by local
shoreland controls. Permission for excavations may be given only after the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources has approved
the proposed connection to public waters.
F. Placement And Design Of Roads, Driveways And Parking Areas: Subject to other more restrictive limitations which may be imposed by this title, the
following standards shall apply in regard to roadway, driveway, and parking area placement and design within the Shoreland Overlay District of Otsego:
1. Public and private roads and parking areas shall be designed to take advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve maximum
screening from view from public waters. Documentation shall be provided by a qualified individual that all roads and parking areas are designed and
constructed to minimize and control erosion to public waters consistent with the field office technical guides of the local Soil and Water Conservation
District, or other applicable technical materials.
2. Roads, driveways, and parking areas shall meet structure setbacks and shall not be placed within bluff and shore impact zones when other
reasonable and feasible placement alternatives exist. If no alternatives exist, they may be placed within these areas and shall be designed to
minimize adverse impacts.
3. Public and private watercraft access ramps, approach roads, and access related parking areas may be placed within shore impact zones, provided
the vegetative screening and erosion control conditions of this subsection are met. For private facilities, the grading and filling provisions of
subsection E of this section shall be met.
G. Stormwater Management: Subject to other more restrictive limitations which may be imposed by this title or other provisions of this Code, the following
general and specific standards shall apply in regard to stormwater management within the Shoreland District of Otsego:
1. General Standards:
a. When possible, existing natural drainageways, wetlands, and vegetated soil surfaces shall be used to convey, store, filter, and retain stormwater
runoff before discharge to public waters.
b. Development shall be planned and conducted in a manner that shall minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities, erosion potential,
and reduce and delay runoff volumes. Disturbed areas shall be stabilized and protected as soon as possible and facilities or methods used to
retain sediment on the site.
c. When development density, topographic features, and soil and vegetation conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle stormwater runoff
using natural features and vegetation, various types of constructed facilities such as diversions, settling basins, skimming devices, dikes,
waterways, and ponds may be used. Preference shall be given to designs using surface drainage, vegetation, and infiltration rather than buried
pipes and manmade materials and facilities.
2. Specific Standards:
a. Impervious surface coverage of lots shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the lot area.
b. When constructed facilities are used for stormwater management, documentation shall be provided by a qualified individual that they are designed
and installed consistent with the field office technical guide of the local Soil and Water Conservation Districts.
c. New constructed stormwater outfalls to public waters shall provide for filtering or settling of suspended solids and skimming of surface debris
before discharge.
H. Special Provisions For Commercial, Industrial, Public/Semipublic, Agricultural, Forestry And Extractive Uses And Mining Of Metallic Minerals And Peat:
1. Standards For Commercial, Industrial, Public And Semipublic Uses:
a. Surface water oriented commercial uses and industrial, public, or semipublic uses with similar needs to have access to and use of public waters
may be located on parcels or lots with frontage on public waters. Subject to other more restrictive limitations which may be imposed by this title,
those uses with water oriented needs shall meet the following standards:
(1) In addition to meeting impervious coverage limits, setbacks, and other zoning standards in this title, the uses shall be designed to incorporate
topographic and vegetative screening of parking areas and structures;
(2) Uses that require short term watercraft mooring for patrons shall centralize these facilities and design them to avoid obstructions of navigation
and to be the minimum size necessary to meet the need; and
(3) Uses that depend on patrons arriving by watercraft may use signs and lighting to convey needed information to the public, subject to the
following general standards:
(A) No advertising signs or supporting facilities for signs may be placed in or upon public waters. Signs conveying information or safety
messages may be placed in or on public waters by a public authority or under a permit issued by the Zoning Administrator;
(B) Signs may be placed, when necessary, within the shore impact zone if they are designed and sized to be the minimum necessary to convey
needed information. They shall only convey the location and name of the establishment and the general types of goods or services available.
The signs shall not contain other detailed information such as product brands and prices, shall not be located higher than ten feet (10') above
the ground, and shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in size. If illuminated by artificial lights, the lights shall be shielded or directed to
prevent illumination out across public waters; and
(C) Other outside lighting may be located within the shore impact zone or over public waters if it is used primarily to illuminate potential safety
hazards and is shielded or otherwise directed to prevent direct illumination out across public waters. This does not preclude use of navigational
lights.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 457/497
b. Uses without water oriented needs shall be located on lots or parcels without public waters frontage, or, if located on lots or parcels with public
waters frontage, shall either be set back double the normal ordinary high water level setback or be substantially screened from view from the water
by vegetation or topography, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.
2. Agriculture Use Standards:
a. General cultivation farming, grazing, nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting may be permitted uses if steep
slopes and shore and bluff impact zones are maintained in permanent vegetation or operated under an approved conservation plan (resource
management systems) consistent with the field office technical guides of the local Soil and Water Conservation Districts or the United States Soil
Conservation Service, as provided by a qualified individual or agency.
b. The shore impact zone for parcels with permitted agricultural land uses is equal to a line parallel to and fifty feet (50') from the ordinary high water
level.
c. Animal feedlots shall meet the requirements of this title, as well as the following standards:
(1) New feedlots shall not be located in the shoreland of watercourses or in bluff impact zones and shall meet a minimum setback of three hundred
feet (300') from the ordinary high water level of all public waters basins; and
(2) Modifications or expansions to existing feedlots that are located within three hundred feet (300') of the ordinary high water level or within a bluff
impact zone may be allowed if they do not further encroach into the existing ordinary high water level setback or encroach on bluff impact zones.
3. Forest Management Standard: The harvesting of timber and associated reforestation shall be conducted consistent with the provisions of the
Minnesota Nonpoint Source Pollution Assessment-Forestry and the provisions of Water Quality in Forest Management "Best Management Practices
in Minnesota".
4. Extractive Use Standards:
a. Site Development And Restoration Plan: An extractive use site development and restoration plan shall be developed, approved, and followed over
the course of operation of the site. The plan shall address dust, noise, possible pollutant discharges, hours and duration of operation, and
anticipated vegetation and topographic alterations. It must also identify actions to be taken during operation to mitigate adverse environmental
impacts, particularly erosion, and shall clearly explain how the site will be rehabilitated after extractive activities end.
b. Setbacks For Processing Machinery: Processing machinery shall be located consistent with setback standards for structures from ordinary high
water levels of public waters and from bluffs.
5. Mining Of Metallic Minerals And Peat: Mining of metallic minerals and peat, as defined in Minnesota Statutes sections 93.44 to 93.51, shall be a
permitted use provided the provisions of Minnesota Statutes sections 93.44 to 93.51 are satisfied.
I. Water Supply And Sewage Treatment:
1. Water Supply:
a. Any public or private supply of water for domestic purposes shall meet or exceed standards for water quality of the Minnesota Department of
Health and the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
b. Private wells shall be located, constructed, maintained, and sealed in accordance with, or in a more thorough manner than, the Water Well
Construction Code of the Minnesota Department of Health.
2. Sewage Treatment: Any premises used for human occupancy shall be provided with an adequate method of sewage treatment, as follows:
a. Publicly owned sewer systems shall be used where available.
b. All private sewage treatment systems shall meet or exceed the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency's standards for individual sewage treatment
systems contained in the document titled "Individual Sewage Treatment Systems Standards, Chapter 7080", a copy of which is hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this title.
c. On site sewage treatment systems shall be set back from the ordinary high water level in accordance with the setbacks contained in this chapter.
d. All proposed sites for individual sewage treatment systems shall be evaluated in accordance with the criteria in this subsection. If the
determination of a site's suitability cannot be made with publicly available, existing information, it shall then be the responsibility of the applicant to
provide sufficient soil borings and percolation tests from on site field investigations.
Evaluation criteria:
(1) Depth to the highest known or calculated groundwater table or bedrock.
(2) Soil conditions, properties, and permeability.
(3) Slope.
(4) The existence of lowlands, local surface depressions, and rock outcrops.
e. Nonconforming sewage treatment systems shall be regulated and upgraded in accordance with subsection 11-92-12C of this chapter. (Prior Code
§ 20-92-11)
11-92-12: NONCONFORMITIES:
All legally established nonconformities as of the effective date hereof may continue, but they shall be managed according to applicable State Statutes and
chapter 15 of this title for the subjects of alterations and additions, repair after damage, discontinuance of use, and intensification of use; except, that the
following standards shall also apply to shoreland areas:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 458/497
A. Construction And Nonconforming Lots Of Record:
1. Lots of record in the Office of the Wright County Recorder on the date of enactment of local shoreland controls that do not meet the requirements of
this chapter may be allowed as building sites without variances from lot size requirements, provided the use is permitted in the zoning district, the lot
has been in separate ownership from abutting lands at all times since it became substandard, was created compliant with official controls in effect at
the time, and sewage treatment and setback requirements of this title are met.
2. A variance from setback requirements shall be obtained before any use, sewage treatment system, or building permit is issued for a lot. In evaluating
the variance, the Board of Adjustment shall consider sewage treatment and water supply capabilities or constraints of the lot and shall deny the
variance if adequate facilities cannot be provided.
3. If, in a group of two (2) or more contiguous lots under the same ownership, any individual lot does not meet the requirements of this chapter, the lot
shall not be considered as a separate parcel of land for the purposes of sale or development. The lot shall be combined with one or more contiguous
lots so they equal one or more parcels of land, each meeting the requirements of this title to the extent possible.
B. Additions/Expansions To Nonconforming Structures:
1. All additions or expansions to the outside dimensions of an existing nonconforming structure shall meet the setback, height, and other requirements
of this title. Any deviation from these requirements may be authorized only by a variance pursuant to chapter 6 of this title.
2. Deck additions may be allowed without a variance to a structure not meeting the required setback from the ordinary high water level if all of the
following criteria and standards are met:
a. The structure existed on the date the structure setbacks were established;
b. A thorough evaluation of the property and structure reveals no reasonable location for a deck meeting or exceeding the existing ordinary high
water level setback of the structure;
c. The deck encroachment toward the ordinary high water level does not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the existing setback of the structure from
the ordinary high water level or does not encroach closer than thirty feet (30'), whichever is more restrictive; and
d. The deck is constructed primarily of wood, and is not roofed or screened.
C. Nonconforming Sewage Treatment Systems:
1. A sewage treatment system not meeting the requirements of this chapter shall be upgraded, at a minimum, at any time a permit or variance of any
type is required for any improvement on, or use of, the property. For the purposes of this subsection, a sewage treatment system shall not be
considered nonconforming if the only deficiency is the sewage treatment system's improper setback from the ordinary high water level. (Prior Code
§ 20-92-12)
2. The City Council shall, by formal resolution, notify the Commissioner of Natural Resources of its program to identify nonconforming sewage
treatment systems. The City shall require upgrading or replacement of any nonconforming system identified by this program within a reasonable
period of time which shall not exceed two (2) years. Sewage systems installed according to all applicable local shoreland management standards
adopted under Minnesota Statutes section 103F.201, in effect at the time of installation, may be considered as conforming unless they are
determined to be failing; except, that systems using cesspools, leaching pits, seepage pits, or other deep disposal methods, or systems with less soil
treatment area separation above groundwater than required by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency's chapter 7080 and City septic system
ordinance for design of nonsite sewage treatment systems, shall be considered nonconforming. (Prior Code § 20-92-12; amd. 2018 Code)
11-92-13: ADMINISTRATION:
A. Permits Required:
1. A shoreland permit shall be required for the construction of buildings or building additions (and including such related activities as construction decks
and signs), the installation and/or alteration of sewage treatment systems, and those grading and filling activities not exempted by subsection 11-92-
11E2 of this chapter. Application for a permit shall be made to the City Zoning Administrator on the forms provided. The application shall include the
necessary information so that the site's suitability for the intended use can be determined and that a compliant sewage treatment system will be
provided.
2. A shoreland permit authorizing an addition to an existing structure shall stipulate that an identified nonconforming sewage treatment system, as
defined by subsection 11-92-12C of this chapter shall be reconstructed or replaced in accordance with the provisions of this title.
B. Certificate Of Zoning Compliance: The Zoning Administrator shall issue a certificate of zoning compliance for each activity requiring a permit as
specified in this section. This certificate shall specify that the use of land conforms to the requirements of this title. Any use, arrangement, or
construction at variance with that authorized by permit shall be deemed a violation of this title and shall be punishable as provided in chapter 10 of this
title. (Prior Code § 20-92-13)
11-92-14: VARIANCES:
A. Provisions: Variances shall only be granted in accordance with Minnesota Statutes chapter 462, as applicable and with chapter 6 of this title. A variance
may not circumvent the general purposes and intent of this title. No variance may be granted that would allow any use that is prohibited in the zoning
district in which the subject property is located. Conditions may be imposed in the granting of a variance to ensure compliance and to protect adjacent
properties and the public interest. In considering a variance request, the Board of Adjustment shall also consider whether the property owner has
reasonable use of the land without the variance, whether the property is used seasonally or year-round, whether the variance is being requested solely
on the basis of economic considerations, and the characteristics of development on adjacent properties.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 459/497
B. Board Of Adjustment: The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide requests for variances in accordance with the rules that it has adopted for the
conduct of business. When a variance is approved after the Department of Natural Resources has formally recommended denial in the hearing record,
the notification of the approved variance required in section 11-92-18 of this chapter shall also include the Board of Adjustment's summary of the public
record/testimony and the findings of facts and conclusions which supported the issuance of the variance.
C. Sewage Treatment Systems: For existing developments, the application for variance shall clearly demonstrate whether a conforming sewage treatment
system is present for the intended use of the property. The variance, if issued, shall require reconstruction of a nonconforming sewage treatment
system. (Prior Code § 20-92-14)
11-92-15: CONDITIONAL USES:
Conditional uses allowable within shoreland areas shall be subject to the review and approval procedures, and criteria and conditions for review of
conditional uses as found in chapter 4 of this title. The following additional evaluation criteria and conditions shall apply within shoreland areas:
A. Evaluation Criteria: A thorough evaluation of the water body and the topographic, vegetation, and soils conditions on the site shall be made to ensure:
1. The prevention of soil erosion or other possible pollution of public waters, both during and after construction;
2. The visibility of structures and other facilities as viewed from public waters is limited;
3. The site is adequate for water supply and on site sewage treatment; and
4. The types, uses, and numbers of watercraft that the project will generate are compatible in relation to the suitability of public waters to safely
accommodate these watercraft.
B. Conditions Attached To Conditional Use Permits: The City, upon consideration of the criteria listed above and the purposes of this title, shall attach such
conditions to the issuance of the conditional use permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this title. Such conditions may include, but are
not limited to, the following:
1. Increased setbacks from the ordinary high water level;
2. Limitations on the natural vegetation to be removed or the requirement that additional vegetation be planted; and
3. Special provisions for the location, design, and use of structures, sewage treatment systems, watercraft launching and docking areas, and vehicle
parking areas. (Prior Code § 20-92-15)
11-92-16: SUBDIVISION AND PLATTING PROVISIONS:
A. Land Suitability: Each lot created through subdivision, including planned unit developments authorized under section 11-92-17 of this chapter, shall be
suitable in its natural state for the proposed use with minimal alteration. Suitability analysis by the City Council shall consider items specified in title 10
of this Code. (Prior Code § 20-92-16; amd. 2018 Code)
B. Consistency With Other Controls: Subdivisions must conform to title 10 of this Code. A subdivision shall not be approved where a later variance from
one or more standards in official controls would be needed to use the lots for their intended purpose. In areas not served by publicly owned sewer and
water systems, a subdivision shall not be approved unless domestic water supply is available and a sewage treatment system consistent with
subsection 11-92-11I of this chapter can be provided for every lot. Each lot shall meet the minimum lot size and dimensional requirements of this title,
including at least a minimum contiguous lawn area, that is free of limiting factors sufficient for the construction of two (2) standard soil treatment
systems. Lots that would require use of holding tanks shall not be approved.
C. Information Requirements: Sufficient information shall be submitted by the applicant for the community to make a determination of land suitability. The
information shall include those items specified in section 11-9-6 of this title and at minimum the following: (Prior Code § 20-92-16)
1. The surface water features required in Minnesota Statutes section 505.021, subdivision 8, to be shown on plats, obtained from United States
Geological Survey quadrangle topographic maps or more accurate sources; (Prior Code § 20-92-16; amd. 2018 Code)
2. Information regarding adequacy of domestic water supply; extent of anticipated vegetation and topographic alterations; near shore aquatic
conditions, including depths, types of bottom sediments, and aquatic vegetation; and proposed methods for controlling stormwater runoff and
erosion, both during and after construction activities;
3. Location of 100-year floodplain areas and floodway districts from existing adopted maps or data; and
4. A line or contour representing the ordinary high water level, the "toe" and the "top" of bluffs, and the minimum building setback distances from the
top of the bluff and the lake or stream.
D. Dedications: When a land or easement dedication is a condition of subdivision approval, the approval shall provide easements over natural drainage or
ponding areas for management of stormwater and significant wetlands.
E. Platting: All subdivisions that create five (5) or more lots or parcels that are two and one-half (21/2) acres or less in size shall be processed as a plat in
accordance with Minnesota Statutes chapter 505 and title 10 of this Code. No permit for construction of buildings or sewage treatment systems shall be
issued for lots created after these official controls are enacted unless the lot is approved as part of a formal subdivision.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 460/497
F. Controlled Access Or Recreational Lots: Lots intended as controlled accesses to public waters or for recreational use areas for use by nonriparian lots
within a subdivision shall meet or exceed the sizing criteria in sections 11-92-8, 11-92-9 and 11-92-10 of this chapter. (Prior Code § 20-92-16)
11-92-17: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS (PUDs):
A. Types Of PUDs Permissible: Planned unit developments (PUDs) may be allowed for new projects on undeveloped land, redevelopment of previously
built sites, or conversions of existing buildings and land. Planned unit developments may be allowed as a district as specified in chapter 91 of this title
or as conditional use permit in conformance with chapter 36 of this title. The land use districts in which they are an allowable use are identified in the
land use district descriptions in section 11-92-7 of this chapter and the official zoning map.
B. Processing PUDs: Planned unit developments shall be processed as a conditional use and in conformance with chapter 36 of this title, or as a district in
conformance with chapter 91 of this title; except, that an expansion to an existing commercial PUD involving six (6) or less new dwelling units or sites
since the effective date hereof are permissible as a permitted use, provided the total project density does not exceed the allowable densities calculated
in the project density evaluation procedures in subsection E of this section. Approval shall not occur until the environmental review process (EAW/EIS)
is complete.
C. Application For PUD: The applicant for a PUD shall submit the documents specified in section 11-36-3 of this title prior to final action being taken on the
application request.
D. Site "Suitable Area" Evaluations: Proposed new or expansions to existing planned unit developments shall be evaluated using the following procedures
and standards to determine the suitable area for the dwelling unit/dwelling site density evaluation in subsection E of this section.
1. The project parcel shall be divided into tiers by locating one or more lines approximately parallel to a line that identifies the ordinary high water level
at the following intervals, proceeding landward:
Shoreland Tier Dimensions
Unsewered
(Feet)
Sewered
(Feet)
Recreational development lakes 267 267
Natural environment lakes 400 320
All river classes 300 300
2. The suitable area within each tier is next calculated by excluding from the tier area all wetlands, bluffs, or land below the ordinary high water level of
public waters. This suitable area and the proposed project shall then be subject to either the residential or commercial planned unit development
density evaluation steps to arrive at an allowable number of dwelling units or sites.
E. Residential And Commercial PUD Density Evaluation: The procedures for determining the "base" density of a PUD and a density increase multipliers
are as follows. Allowable densities may be transferred from any tier to any other tier further from the water body, but shall not be transferred to any
other tier closer. (Prior Code § 20-92-17)
1. Residential PUD "Base" Density Evaluation: The suitable area within each tier is divided by the single residential lot size standard for lakes or, for
rivers, the single residential lot width standard times the tier depth, unless the City Council has specified an alternative minimum lot size for rivers
which shall then be used to yield a base density of dwelling units or sites for each tier. Proposed locations and numbers of dwelling units or sites for
the residential planned unit developments shall then be compared with the tier, density, and suitability analysis herein and the design criteria in
subsection D of this section. (Prior Code § 20-92-17; amd. 2018 Code)
2. Commercial PUD "Base" Density Evaluation:
a. The density evaluation as follows pertains to those commercial planned unit developments that provide transient service oriented operations such
as hotel/motel accommodations, resorts, recreational vehicles, and camping parks and other like service activities: Determine the average inside
living area size of dwelling units or sites within each tier, including both existing and proposed units and sites. Computation of inside living area
sizes shall not include decks, patios, stoops, steps, garages or porches and basements, unless they are habitable space.
b. Select the appropriate floor area ratio from the following table:
COMMERCIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
FLOOR AREA RATIOS1
PUBLIC WATERS CLASSES
Average Unit
Floor Area1
(Sq. Ft.)
Sewered
General
Development
Lakes;
First Tier On
Unsewered
General
Development
Lakes; Urban,
Second And Additional Tiers On Unsewered General Development Lakes;
Recreational Lake; Transition And Forested River Segments
Natural
Environment
Lakes And
Remove
River
Segments
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 461/497
Agricultural,
Tributary River
Segments
200 0.040 0.020 0.010
300 0.048 0.024 0.012
400 0.056 0.028 0.014
500 0.065 0.032 0.016
600 0.072 0.038 0.019
700 0.082 0.042 0.021
800 0.092 0.046 0.023
900 0.099 0.050 0.025
1,000 0.108 0.054 0.027
1,100 0.116 0.058 0.029
1,200 0.125 0.064 0.032
1,300 0.133 0.068 0.034
1,400 0.142 0.072 0.036
1,500 0.150 0.075 0.038
Note:
1. For average unit floor areas less than shown, use the floor area ratios listed for 200 square feet. For areas greater than shown, use the ratios
listed for 1,500 square feet. For recreational camping areas, use the ratios listed at 400 square feet. Manufactured home sites in recreational
camping areas shall use a ratio equal to the size of the manufactured home, or if unknown, the ratio listed for 1,000 square feet.
c. Multiply the suitable area within each tier by the floor area ratio to yield total floor area for each tier allowed to be used for dwelling units or sites.
d. Divide the total floor area by tier computed in subsection E2c of this section by the average inside living area size determined in subsection E2a of
this section. This yields a base number of dwelling units and sites for each tier.
e. Proposed locations and numbers of dwelling units or sites for the commercial planned unit development are then compared with the tier, density,
design criteria and suitability analysis.
3. Density Increase Multipliers:
a. Increases to the dwelling unit or dwelling site base densities previously determined are allowable if the dimensional standards in this subsection
are met or exceeded and the design criteria in subsection F of this section are satisfied. The allowable density increases in subsection E3b of this
section may only be allowed if structure setbacks from the ordinary high water level are increased to at least fifty percent (50%) greater than the
minimum setback, or the impact on the water body is reduced an equivalent amount through vegetative management, topography, or additional
means acceptable to the City Council and the setback is at least twenty five percent (25%) greater than the minimum setback.
b. Allowable dwelling unit or dwelling site density increases for residential or commercial planned unit developments:
Density Evaluation Tiers
Maximum Density
Increase Within Each Tier
(Percent)
First 50
Second 100
Third 200
Fourth 200
Fifth 200
F. Maintenance And Design Criteria:
1. Maintenance And Administration Requirements:
a. Maintenance Of Open Spaces: Before final approval of a planned unit development, adequate provisions shall be developed for preservation and
maintenance in perpetuity of open spaces and for the continued existence and functioning of the development.
b. Open Space Preservation: Deed restrictions, covenants, permanent easements, public dedication and acceptance, or other equally effective and
permanent means shall be provided to ensure long term preservation and maintenance of open space. The instruments must include all of the
following protection:
(1) Commercial uses prohibited (for residential PUDs);
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 462/497
(2) Vegetation and topographic alterations other than routine maintenance prohibited;
(3) Construction of additional buildings or storage of vehicles and other materials prohibited; and
(4) Uncontrolled beaching of watercraft prohibited.
c. Development Organization And Functioning: Unless an equally effective alternative community framework is established, when applicable, all
residential planned unit developments shall use an owners' association with the following features:
(1) Membership shall be mandatory for each dwelling unit or site purchaser and any successive purchasers;
(2) Each member shall pay a pro rata share of the association's expenses, and unpaid assessments can become liens on units or sites;
(3) Assessments shall be adjustable to accommodate changing conditions; and
(4) The association shall be responsible for insurance, taxes, and maintenance of all commonly owned property and facilities.
2. Open Space Requirements: Planned unit developments shall contain open space meeting all of the following criteria:
a. At least fifty percent (50%) of the total project area shall be preserved as open space;
b. Dwelling units or sites, road rights-of-way, or land covered by road surfaces, parking areas, or structures, except water oriented accessory
structures or facilities, are developed areas and shall not be included in the computation of minimum open space;
c. Open space shall include areas with physical characteristics unsuitable for development in their natural state, and areas containing significant
historic sites or unplatted cemeteries;
d. Open space may include outdoor recreational facilities for use by owners of dwelling units or sites, by guests staying in commercial dwelling units
or sites, and by the general public;
e. Open space may include subsurface sewage treatment systems if the use of the space is restricted to avoid adverse impacts on the systems;
f. Open space shall not include commercial facilities or uses, but may contain water oriented accessory structures or facilities;
g. The appearance of open space areas, including topography, vegetation, and allowable uses, shall be preserved by use of restrictive deed
covenants, permanent easements, public dedication and acceptance, or other equally effective and permanent means; and
h. The shore impact zone, based on normal structure setbacks, must be included as open space. For residential PUDs, at least fifty percent (50%) of
the shore impact zone area of existing developments or at least seventy percent (70%) of the shore impact zone area of new developments shall
be preserved in its natural existing state. For commercial PUDs, at least fifty percent (50%) of the shore impact zone shall be preserved in its
natural state.
3. Erosion Control And Stormwater Management: Erosion control and stormwater management plans shall be developed, and the PUD shall:
a. Be designed, and the construction managed, to minimize the likelihood of serious erosion occurring either during or after construction. This shall
be accomplished by limiting the amount and length of time of bare ground exposure. Temporary ground covers, sediment entrapment facilities,
vegetated buffer strips, or other appropriate techniques shall be used to minimize erosion impacts on surface water features. Erosion control plans
approved by a Soil and Water Conservation District may be required if project size and site physical characteristics warrant; and
b. Be designed and constructed to effectively manage reasonably expected quantities and qualities of stormwater runoff. Impervious surface
coverage within any tier shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the tier area; except, that for commercial PUDs, thirty five percent (35%)
impervious surface coverage may be allowed in the first tier of general development lakes with an approved stormwater management plan and
consistency with this title.
4. Centralization And Design Of Facilities: Centralization and design of facilities and structures shall be done according to the following standards:
a. Planned unit developments shall be connected to publicly owned water supply and sewer systems, if available. On site water supply and sewage
treatment systems shall be centralized and designed and installed to meet or exceed applicable standards or rules of the Minnesota Department of
Health and this title. On site sewage treatment systems shall be located on the most suitable areas of the development, and sufficient lawn area
free of limiting factors shall be provided for a replacement soil treatment system for each sewage system;
b. Dwelling units or sites shall be clustered into one or more groups and located on suitable areas of the development. They shall be designed and
located to meet or exceed the following dimensional standards for the relevant shoreland classification: setback from the ordinary high water level,
elevation above the surface water features, and maximum height. Setbacks from the ordinary high water level shall be increased in accordance
with this title for developments with density increases;
c. Shore recreation facilities, including, but not limited to, swimming areas, docks, and watercraft mooring areas and launching ramps, shall be
centralized and located in areas suitable for them. Evaluation of suitability shall include consideration of land slope, water depth, vegetation, soils,
depth to groundwater and bedrock, or other relevant factors. The number of spaces provided for continuous beaching, mooring, or docking of
watercraft shall not exceed one for each allowable dwelling unit or site in the first tier (notwithstanding existing mooring sites in an existing
commercially used harbor). Launching ramp facilities, including a small dock for loading and unloading equipment, may be provided for use by
occupants of dwelling units or sites located in other tiers; (Prior Code § 20-92-17)
d. Structures, parking areas, and other facilities shall be treated to reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by
vegetation, topography, increased setbacks, color, or other means acceptable to the City Council, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.
Vegetative and topographic screening shall be preserved, if existing, or may be required to be provided; (Prior Code § 20-92-17; amd. 2018 Code)
e. Accessory structures and facilities, except water oriented accessory structures, shall meet the required principal structure setback and shall be
centralized; and
f. Water oriented accessory structures and facilities may be allowed if they meet or exceed design standards contained in subsection 11-92-11D of
this chapter and are centralized.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 463/497
G. Conversions: The City may allow existing resorts or other land uses and facilities to be converted to residential planned unit developments if all of the
following standards are met:
1. Proposed conversions shall be initially evaluated using the same procedures for residential planned unit developments involving all new
construction. Inconsistencies between existing features of the development and these standards shall be identified.
2. Deficiencies involving water supply and sewage treatment, structure color, impervious coverage, open space, and shore recreation facilities shall be
corrected as part of the conversion or as specified in the conditional use permits.
3. Shore and bluff impact zone deficiencies shall be evaluated and reasonable improvements made as part of the conversion. These improvements
shall include, where applicable, the following:
a. Removal of extraneous buildings, docks, or other facilities that no longer need to be located in shore or bluff impact zones;
b. Remedial measures to correct erosion sites and improve vegetative cover and screening of buildings and other facilities as viewed from the water;
and
c. If existing dwelling units are located in shore or bluff impact zones, conditions are attached to approvals of conversions that preclude exterior
expansions in any dimension or substantial alterations. The conditions must also provide for future relocation of dwelling units, where feasible, to
other locations, meeting all setback and elevation requirements when they are rebuilt or replaced.
4. Existing dwelling unit or dwelling site densities that exceed standards in this title may be allowed to continue but shall not be allowed to be increased,
either at the time of conversion or in the future. Efforts shall be made during the conversion to limit impacts of high densities by requiring seasonal
use, improving vegetative screening, centralizing shore recreation facilities, installing new sewage treatment systems, or other means. (Prior Code
§ 20-92-17)
11-92-18: NOTICES AND APPROVALS TO DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES:
A. Copies of all notices of any public hearings to consider variances, amendments, or conditional uses under local shoreland management controls shall
be sent to the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources or the Commissioner's designated representative and postmarked at least ten
(10) days before the hearings. Notices of hearings to consider proposed subdivisions/plans shall include copies of the subdivision/plat.
B. A copy of approved amendments and subdivisions/plats, and final decisions granting variances or conditional uses under local shoreland management
controls shall be sent to the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources or the Commissioner's designated representative and postmarked
within ten (10) days of final action. (Prior Code § 20-92-18)
Chapter 93
W WETLANDS OVERLAY DISTRICT
11-93-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to ensure that the wetland resources within the City are protected and conserved. Wetland resources serve to
provide food, shelter and habitat for fish and wildlife, store surface runoff and reduce flooding damages, replenish subsurface water supplies, provide
outdoor recreation areas and enhance the natural beauty and biodiversity of landscapes within the City. This chapter incorporates by reference the
Wetland Conservation Act of 1991, Laws of Minnesota 1991, chapter 354, as amended by Laws 1993, chapter 175 and the accompanying rules of the
Minnesota Board of Water and Soil Resources (Minnesota Rules chapter 8420, as amended) whose purpose is to:
A. Achieve no net loss in the quantity, quality, and biological diversity of Minnesota's existing wetlands;
B. Increase the quantity, quality and biological diversity of Minnesota's wetlands by restoring or enhancing diminished or drained wetlands;
C. Avoid direct or indirect impacts from activities that destroy or diminish the quantity, quality and biological diversity of wetlands; and
D. Replace wetland values where avoidance of activity is not feasible and prudent. These purposes being consistent with the City's desire to preserve
areas containing low lands, marshes, wetlands, drainage areas, water bodies and waterways which are essential to the health, safety and general
welfare of the City's residents. (Prior Code § 20-93-1)
11-93-2: SCOPE:
A. Wetlands must not be drained or filled wholly or partially unless replaced by restoring or creating wetland areas of at least equal public value. This
chapter, along with the above mentioned references, shall be utilized by the City to ensure the protection of the City's wetland resources.
B. In addition to the provisions of this chapter, City decisions on draining and filling of wetlands are subject to Minnesota Statutes chapters 116B and 116D,
which provide that an action which is likely to have material adverse effects on natural resources must not be allowed if there is a feasible and prudent
alternative consistent with the requirements of the public health, safety and welfare and the State's paramount concern for the protection of its natural
resources. Economic considerations alone do not justify adversely effective actions. (Prior Code § 20-93-2)
11-93-3: DISTRICT APPLICATION:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 464/497
A. All wetlands within the City are hereby designated as part of the Otsego Wetlands Overlay District, and the requirements set forth in this chapter shall
govern development and other activities within these districts.
B. The Otsego Wetlands Overlay District shall be applied to and superimposed as an overlay upon all zoning districts as contained herein as existing or
amended by the text of this chapter. The regulations and requirements imposed by the Otsego Wetlands Overlay District shall be in addition to those
established for districts which jointly apply. Under the joint application of districts, the more restrictive requirements shall apply.
C. The boundaries of wetlands within the City may be changed by the City Council, Department of Natural Resources, or Army Corps of Engineers,
whatever applicable, when it can be demonstrated by registered site survey and topographic work, and hydrologic analysis performed by registered
engineer or land surveyor that the established boundaries are incorrect. (Prior Code § 20-93-3)
11-93-4: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses within a wetland, and as described in this chapter, are subject to guidelines established by the Minnesota Department of Natural
Resources and the United States Army Corps of Engineers. Uses within a wetland which are not prohibited by this chapter are:
A. The use of the bed of the wetlands for pasture or cropland during dry period if dikes, ditches, tile lines, or buildings are not constructed and the
agricultural use does not result in the drainage of the wetlands.
B. The filling of a wetland to accommodate wheeled booms on irrigation devices if the fill does not impede normal drainage.
C. The control of noxious weeds if the control does not drain or fill the wetland.
D. Excavation in wetlands if done in a manner such that the wetlands are not drained or filled. (Prior Code § 20-93-4)
11-93-5: CONDITIONAL USES:
Permitting for conditional uses in the W District shall be based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by chapter 4 of this title. Conditional use permits
shall be subject to the elevation criteria as set forth in subsection 11-4-2F of this title. Subject to other more restrictive limitations which may be imposed by
this chapter, the uses listed in subsection B of this section may be allowed in wetlands by conditional use permit subject to the following:
A. 1. A wetland may not be drained or filled, wholly or partially, unless either the activity meets the exemption criteria stated in subsection B of this section
or unless it is replaced under an approved replacement plan meeting the criteria of subsection 11-93-14C of this chapter.
2. A wetland activity will be considered exempt if it qualifies for any one of the exemptions, even though it may be indicated as not exempt under
another exemption.
3. These exemptions do not apply to calcareous fens as identified by the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources.
4. No exemptions apply to wetlands that have been previously restored or created as a result of an approved replacement plan. All such wetlands are
subject to replacement on subsequent drainage or filling.
5. Nonexempt wetlands cannot be partially drained or filled in order to claim an exemption or no-loss determination on the remainder. Therefore, no
exemptions or no-loss determinations can be applied to the remaining wetland that would not have been applicable before the impact.
6. Present and future owners of wetlands drained or filled without replacement under an exemption in subsections B1, B2, B4, B7, B8 and B23 of this
section can make no use of the wetland area after it is drained or filled, other than as agricultural land, for ten (10) years after the draining or filling,
unless it is first replaced under the requirements of Minnesota Statutes section 103G.222, paragraph (g). Also, for ten (10) years, the wetland may
not be restored for replacement credit. At the time of draining or filling, the landowner shall record a notice of these restrictions in the Office of the
Wright County Recorder. At a minimum, the recorded document must contain the name or names of the landowners, a legal description of the
property to which the restrictions apply, a statement of the restrictions, the date on which the ten (10) year period expires, the City as the local
government which certified the exemption, if such occurred, the signatures of all owners, and an acknowledgment.
7. A person conducting an activity in a wetland under an exemption in subsection B of this section shall ensure that:
a. Appropriate erosion control measures are taken to prevent sedimentation of the water;
b. The activity does not block fish activity in a watercourse; and
c. The activity is conducted in compliance with all other applicable Federal, State, and local requirements, including best management practices and
water resource protection requirements established under Minnesota Statutes chapter 103H.
B. A request for an exemption shall be required of a perspective applicant on a form provided by the City. Exemptions which qualify for City review are as
follows:
1. Activities in a wetland that was planted with annually seeded crops, was in a crop rotation seeding of pasture grasses or legumes, or was required to
be set aside to receive price support or other payments under United States Code, title 7, sections 1421 to 1469, in six (6) of the last ten (10) years
prior to January 1, 1991.
a. Documentation, such as Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service aerial photographs, Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation
Service form 578 or equivalent, United States Department of Agriculture records, or affidavit of landowner is required to accompany the application
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 465/497
for exemption and be furnished by the applicant.
b. Set aside land used for this exemption must be wetland types 1 and 2.
2. Activities in a wetland that is or has been enrolled in the Federal Conservation Reserve Program under United States Code, title 16, section 3831,
that:
a. Was planted with annually seeded crops, was in a crop rotation seeding, or was required to be set aside to receive price support or payment under
United States Code, title 7, sections 1421 to 1469, in six (6) of the last ten (10) years prior to being enrolled in the program; and
b. Has not been restored with assistance from a public or private wetland restoration program. Federal documentation that the wetland is or has
been enrolled in the Federal Conservation Reserve Program is required to accompany the application for exemption and be furnished by the
applicant. The landowner must also meet the same requirements of this subsection B2 for the exemption stated in Minnesota Statutes section
103G.2241, subdivision 1, clause (1); except, that the years required are at least six (6) of the ten (10) years preceding the year of enrollment in
the Conservation Reserve Program. The landowner must also state in writing that the wetland was not restored with assistance from a public or
private Wetland Restoration Fund, or that the restoration was done under a contract or easement providing the landowner with the right to drain
the restored wetland.
3. Activities necessary to repair and maintain existing public or private drainage systems as long as wetlands that have been in existence for more than
twenty (20) years are not drained. This exemption allows maintenance which fills wetlands that have been in existence for more than twenty (20)
years when the wetlands are located within the right-of-way acreage of the ditch or within a one rod width on either side of the top of the ditch,
whichever is greater, and the filling is limited to the side casting of spoil materials resulting from the maintenance and the spoil deposition area is
permanently seeded into grass after maintenance activities are completed.
a. The owner must provide documentation that the wetlands which will be partially or completely drained by the maintenance have not existed for
more than twenty (20) years.
b. Aerial photographs from two (2) years of normal or wetter than normal water level conditions showing no wetlands are one form of acceptable
documentation. If aerial photographs are unavailable, a sworn affidavit may be submitted. Otherwise, the landowner must show that the
maintenance will not reduce the wetland from what it was twenty (20) years ago or more.
c. This exemption includes lowering the elevation of previously placed tile when made necessary by land subsidence, provided the lowering does not
drain wetlands.
4. Activities in a wetland that has received a commenced drainage determination provided for by the Federal Food Security Act of 1985, that was made
to the County Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service Office prior to September 19, 1988, and a ruling and any subsequent appeals or
reviews have determined that drainage of the wetland had been commenced prior to December 23, 1985.
The wetland landowner must provide Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service documents confirming that the County Agricultural
Stabilization and Conservation Service Office determined before September 19, 1988, that drainage had begun before December 23, 1985 and that
the determination has not been overturned by subsequent appeal or review and is not currently under administrative review.
5. Activities exempted from Federal regulation under United States Code, title 33, section 1344(f).
a. The City shall certify the exemption only if the landowner furnishes proof of qualification for one of the exemptions from the United States Army
Corps of Engineers.
b. This exemption does not apply to a project with the purpose of converting a wetland to a nonwetland, either immediately or gradually, or converting
the wetland to another use, or when the fill will result in significant discernible change to the flow or circulation of water in the wetland, or partly
draining it, or reducing the wetland area.
6. Activities authorized under, and conducted in accordance with, an applicable general permit issued by the United States Army Corps of Engineers
under section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act, United States Code, title 33, section 1344, except the nationwide permit in Code of Federal
Regulations, title 33, section 330.5, paragraph (a), clause (14), limited to when a new road crosses a wetland, and all of clause (26).
a. This exemption is for nationwide permits 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 20, 21, 22, 23 and 25 issued under Code of Federal Regulations, title
33, section 330.5. The City shall certify such an exemption only if the applicant furnishes proof of qualification for one of these nationwide permits
from the United States Army Corps of Engineers. Nationwide permit 14 for a new road does not qualify for this exemption, nor do nationwide
permits under numbers not listed in this exemption.
b. To qualify for a nationwide permit, the applicant for a United States Army Corps of Engineers permit must meet any regional conditions imposed by
the United States Army Corps of Engineers, and must obtain from the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency an individual section 401 certification
when required.
7. Activities in a type 1 wetland on agricultural land, as defined in United States Fish and Wildlife Circular No. 39 (1971 edition) except for bottomland
hardwood type 1 wetlands.
a. The wetland landowner must provide the same proofs required by the first paragraph of exemption 1, for lands abutting at least fifty percent (50%)
of the wetland's boundary. The City may seek the advice of the technical panel as to whether the wetland is a type 1 wetland not of the bottomland
hardwood type.
b. The type of the wetland will be determined according to United States Fish and Wildlife Service Circular No. 39 (1971 edition). Alternatively, the
type of the wetland can be determined from the Cowardin (et al., 1979) classification system: PEM1A, PEMA, PEMJ, and PEM1J may be
considered to be a type 1 wetland.
c. This exemption applies if the wetland is all type 1 wetland, or is a combination of types 1 and 2 wetlands, on agricultural land, and the type 2
wetland area is less than two (2) acres.
8. Activities in a type 2 wetland that is two (2) acres in size or less located on agricultural land.
a. The wetland landowner must provide the same material as required from the landowner by exemption 7. The City may seek the advice of the
technical panel as to whether the wetland is a type 2 wetland, two (2) acres or less in size.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 466/497
b. The wetland size is the area within its boundary. The boundary must be determined according to the "Federal Manual for Identifying and
Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands" (January 1989). The type of the wetland must be determined according to United States Fish and Wildlife
Service Circular No. 39 (1971 edition). Alternatively, type can be determined from the Cowardin (et al., 1979) classification system: PEM1B and
PEMB may be considered to be a type 2 wetland.
c. This exemption applies if the wetland is a type 2 wetland, or is a combination of types 1 and 2 wetlands, on agricultural land, and the type 2
wetland area is less than two (2) acres.
9. Activities in a wetland restored for conservation purposes under a contract or easement providing the landowner with the right to drain the restored
wetland.
The wetland landowner must provide a contract or easement conveyance or affidavit demonstrating that the landowner or a predecessor restored the
wetland for conservation purposes but retained the right to subsequently drain the restored wetland.
10. Activities in a wetland created solely as a result of:
Beaver dam construction;
Blockage of culverts through roadways maintained by a public or private entity;
Actions by public entities that were taken for a purpose other than creating the wetland; or
Any combination of the above three (3).
a. Wetland areas created by beaver activities may be drained by removing those materials placed by the beaver. Drainage is permitted by removing
or moving materials blocking installed roadway culverts and drainage structures. Additional excavation or removal of other materials is not
permitted unless it can be shown by aerial photographs that the proposed activity will not drain or fill the wetland that was there before the beaver
dam was built or the culvert became plugged.
b. Wetlands may be drained or filled if the landowner can show that the wetland was created solely by actions the purpose of which was not to create
the wetland and were approved, permitted, funded, or overseen by a public entity.
c. Impoundments or excavations constructed in nonwetlands solely for the purpose of effluent treatment, stormwater retention, soil and water
conservation practices, and water quality improvements, and not as part of a compensatory wetland mitigation process that may, over time, take
on wetland characteristics, are also exempted.
11. Placement, maintenance, repair, enhancement, or replacement of utility or utility type service, including the transmission, distribution, or furnishing,
at wholesale or retail, or natural or manufactured gas, electricity, telephone, or radio service or communications if:
The impacts of the proposed project on the hydrologic and biological characteristics of the wetland have been avoided and minimized to the extent
possible; and
The proposed project significantly modifies or alters less than one-half (1/2) acre of wetlands.
a. For new placement and enhancement of existing facilities, the utility must demonstrate that the character and extent of the impacts of the
proposed project on the wetlands have been minimized and that the entire project will, cumulatively, drain or fill less than one-half (1/2) acre of
wetland.
b. For maintenance, repair, and replacement, the City may issue a seasonal or annual exemption certification or the utility may proceed without City
certification if it is carrying out the work according to Best Management Practices. Work of an emergency nature may proceed as necessary and
any drain or fill activities shall be addressed with the City after the emergency work has been completed.
12. Activities associated with routine maintenance of utility and pipeline rights-of-way, provided the activities do not result in additional intrusion into the
wetland.
a. This exemption is for maintenance, but not expansion, of the rights-of-way in which utilities are located. Spill remediation is not routine
maintenance.
b. The City may issue a seasonal or annual exemption certification or the utility may proceed if it is carrying out the work according to Best
Management Practices. Work of an emergency nature may proceed as necessary, and any drain or fill activities shall be addressed with the City
after the emergency work has been completed.
13. Alteration of a wetland associated with the operation, maintenance, or repair of an interstate pipeline within all existing or acquired interstate
pipeline rights-of-way. This exemption includes construction activities.
14. Temporarily crossing or entering a wetland to perform silvicultural activities, including timber harvest as part of a forest management activity, so
long as the activity limits the impact on the hydrologic and biologic characteristics of the wetland; the activities do not result in the construction of
dikes, drainage ditches, tile lines, or buildings; and the timber harvesting and other silvicultural practices do not result in the drainage of the wetland
or public waters.
This exemption is for temporary use roads constructed for the primary purpose of providing access for the conduct of silvicultural activities.
15. Permanent access for forest roads across wetlands so long as the activity limits the impact on the hydrologic and biologic characteristics of the
wetland; the construction activities do not result in the access becoming a dike, drainage ditch or tile line; with filling avoided wherever possible; and
there is no drainage of the wetland or public waters.
This exemption is the same as subsection B14 of this section; except, that it is for permanent forest roads which are roads constructed for the
primary purpose of providing access for the conduct of silvicultural activities.
16. Activities associated with routine maintenance or repair of existing public highways, roads, streets, and bridges, provided the activities do not result
in additional intrusion into the wetland outside of the existing right-of-way.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 467/497
This exemption does not prevent repairing washouts or adding material to the driving surface, provided the road's occupancy of the wetland outside
of the existing right-of-way does not increase.
17. Emergency repair and normal maintenance and repair of existing public works, provided the activity does not result in additional intrusion of the
public works into the wetland and does not result in the draining or filling, wholly or partially, of a wetland.
This exemption applies to public works other than roads, such as buildings and bridges.
18. Normal maintenance and minor repair of structures causing no additional intrusion of an existing structure into the wetland, and maintenance and
repair of private crossings that do not result in the draining or filling, wholly or partially, of a wetland.
This exemption applies to private structures, such as buildings and road crossings.
19. Duck blinds. This exemption allows floating duck blinds and blinds on poles or pilings. This exemption does not allow fill other than poles or pilings.
20. Aquiculture activities including pond excavation and associated access roads and dikes authorized under, and conducted in accordance with, a
permit issued by the United States Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act, United States Code, title 33, section
1344, but not including buildings.
21. Wild rice production activities, including necessary diking and other activities authorized under a permit issued by the United States Army Corps of
Engineers under section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act, United States Code, title 33, section 1344.
Documentation demonstrating that the exemption applies may include showing possession of a United States Army Corps of Engineers permit for
the project.
22. Normal agricultural practices to control pests or weeds, defined by rule as either noxious or secondary weeds, in accordance with applicable
requirements under State and Federal law, including established Best Management Practices.
This exemption does not allow diking, ditching, tiling or filling, or other control practices that would result in the conversion of wetlands.
23. Activities in a wetland that is on agricultural land annually enrolled in the Federal Food, Agricultural, Conservation, and Trade Act of 1990, United
States Code, title 16, section 3821, subsection (a), clauses (1) to (3), as amended, and is subject to sections 1421 to 1424 of the Federal Act in
effect on January 1, 1991; except, that land enrolled in a Federal farm program is eligible for easement participation for those acres not already
compensated under a Federal program.
Documentation such as a written statement from the local Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service Office that the proposed activity would
not result in loss of eligibility for benefits under the farm program may be used as evidence for this exemption. If the activity would result in loss of
eligibility, the landowner cannot qualify for the exemption by withdrawing from the program.
24. Development projects and ditch improvement projects in the State that have received preliminary or final plat approval, or infrastructure that has
been installed, or having local site plan approval, conditional use permits, or similar official approval by a Governing Body or government agency,
within five (5) years before July 1, 1991. Plat approval must be preliminary as approved by the City.
a. Subdividers who obtained preliminary plat approval in the specified time period, and other project developers with one of the listed approvals
timely obtained, provided approval has not expired and the project remains active, may drain and fill wetlands, to the extent documented by the
approval, without replacement. Those elements of the project that can be carried out without changing the approved plan and without draining or
filling must be done in that manner. If wetlands can be avoided within the terms of the approved plan, they must be avoided.
b. For County, joint County, and watershed district ditch projects, this exemption applies to projects that received final approval in the specified time
period.
25. Activities that result in the draining or filling of less than four hundred (400) square feet of wetlands.
This exemption applies if the total wetland loss by draining and filling will be less than four hundred (400) square feet per year per landowner, and the
cumulative impact by all persons on a wetland over time without replacement after January 1, 1992, does not exceed five percent (5%) of the
wetland's area. (Prior Code § 20-93-5)
11-93-6: EXEMPTION DETERMINATIONS:
A. A landowner intending to drain or fill a wetland without replacement, claiming exemption, must apply for a conditional use permit from the City before
beginning drainage or filling activities for determination whether or not the activity is exempt. A landowner who does not request a determination may
be subject to the enforcement provisions contained herein and Minnesota Statutes section 103G.2372. The City will keep on file all documentation and
findings of fact concerning exemption determinations for a period of ten (10) years.
B. The City will offer exemption certificates as part of the wetland program within their jurisdiction.
C. The landowner applying for exemption is responsible for submitting the proof necessary to show qualification for the particular exemption claimed.
D. The City will place the decision authority for exemption applications with the City Engineer.
E. The City Engineer's decision shall be based on the exemption standards in section 11-93-5 of this chapter. If the decision requires a finding of wetland
size or type, the City Engineer may seek the advice of the technical panel.
F. A landowner draining or filling a wetland under an exemption shall ensure that appropriate erosion control measures are taken to prevent sedimentation
of the water, that the drain or fill does not block fish passage, and the drain or fill is conducted in compliance with all other applicable Federal, State,
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 468/497
and local requirements, including Best Management Practices and water resource protection requirements established under Minnesota Statutes
chapter 103H. (Prior Code § 20-93-6)
11-93-7: NO-LOSS DETERMINATIONS:
A. A landowner unsure if proposed work will result in a loss of wetland may apply by conditional use permit application to the City for a determination. A
landowner who does not request a determination may be subject to the enforcement provisions contained herein and in Minnesota Statutes section
103G.2372. The City will keep on file all documentation and findings of fact concerning no-loss determinations for a period of ten (10) years.
B. The landowner applying for a no-loss determination is responsible for submitting the proof necessary to show qualification for the claim.
C. The City will place the decision authority for no-loss applications with the City Engineer.
D. The City Engineer shall issue a no-loss certificate if the landowner requests and if either:
1. The work will not drain or fill a wetland;
2. Water level management activities will not result in the conversion of a wetland to another land use;
3. The activities are in a surface impoundment for containment of fossil fuel combustion waste or water retention, and are not part of a compensatory
wetland mitigation program; or
4. The activity is being conducted as part of an approved replacement plan or is conducted or authorized by public agencies for the purpose of wetland
restoration and the activity is restricted to placing fill in a previously excavated drainage system to restore a wetland to its original condition. (Prior
Code § 20-93-7)
11-93-8: REPLACEMENT PLAN DETERMINATIONS:
A. A landowner intending to drain or fill a wetland who does not qualify for an exemption or no-loss determination shall obtain approval of a replacement
plan from the City before beginning draining or filling the wetland. A person who does not do so is subject to the enforcement provisions in section 11-
93-12 of this chapter and Minnesota Statutes section 103G.2372. An application for approval of a replacement plan may be obtained from the City. The
City will, within ten (10) days of receipt of the application, mail a copy of the application and an invitation to submit comments to:
1. The Board of Water and Resources, who will subsequently publish the application in the Environmental Quality Board Monitor.
2. Members of the public who have requested a copy.
3. The Soil and Water Conservation District.
4. The Watershed District or Water Management Organization, if there is one.
5. The Wright County Board of Water and Soil Resources.
6. Mayors of the cities within the watershed.
7. The Commissioners of Agriculture and Natural Resources.
B. At the same time, the City will publish notice of the application with an invitation to comment in a general circulation newspaper in the area affected.
C. The City will not make its decision before thirty (30) days and not more than sixty (60) days have elapsed from the mailing of notice, publication in the
Environmental Quality Board Monitor, when required, or publication in the newspaper, whichever is later. The City decision will not be effective until
thirty (30) days after a copy of the decision has been mailed to the Environmental Quality Board Monitor for publication, when required, and mailed to
the same list specified in subsection A of this section for notice of the application and to the applicant. The mailing to the applicant will be by registered
mail and will advise that the decision is not effective for thirty (30) days, and is stayed if it is appealed.
D. Publication in the Environmental Quality Board Monitor of replacement plan applications and decisions will be performed, except for the fill activities
described in subsection E of this section, when the City will publish a general notice in the Environmental Quality Board Monitor that it will not be
publishing notice of such individual activities, but will instead provide mailed notice of each project to anyone asking to be put on the City's mailing list
for such projects. This notice will be published not less often than once every year. The notice will advise how persons may submit their names and
addresses to be put on the mailing list.
E. Projects eligible for this form of Environmental Quality Board Monitor notice are all those which will fill less than one-tenth (0.1) acre of wetland; and all
those which will fill less than one-fourth (1/4) acre of wetland, and result from a private road fill or the construction or expansion of a single-family
dwelling unit or a farm building when the project cannot be modified so as to avoid the fill.
F. The City's decision shall be based on the replacement standards contained in this chapter and on the technical determination of the technical evaluation
panel concerning the public values, location, size, and type of the wetland being altered. The City will consider the recommendation of the technical
evaluation panel to approve, modify, or reject the proposed replacement plan.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 469/497
G. For wetland replacement plans involving both the City and one or more other local government units, approval of all local government units involved
must be obtained before the project may proceed. (Prior Code § 20-93-8)
11-93-9: TECHNICAL EVALUATION PANEL AND PROCEDURES:
A. The City will form, by resolution, a technical evaluation panel consisting of three (3) persons:
1. A technical professional employee of the Board of Water and Soil Resources.
2. A technical professional employee of the Wright County Soil and Water Conservation District.
3. A technical professional with expertise in water resources management appointed by the City.
B. The member appointed by the City will act as the contact person and coordinator for the panel. Two (2) members of the technical review panel will be
knowledgeable and trained in applying methodologies of the "Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands" (January 1989),
and evaluation of public values. The technical evaluation panel reserves the right to invite additional wetland experts to help the panel in its work.
C. The panel will make technical determinations on questions of public values, location, size, and type for replacement plans if requested to do so by the
City, the landowner, or a member of the technical evaluation panel. The panel may review replacement plans and recommend to the City either
approval, approval with changes or conditions, or rejection. The panel will make no determinations or recommendations without at least one member
having made an on site inspection. Panel determinations and recommendations must be endorsed by at least two (2) of the three (3) members.
D. The panel, or one of its members when so authorized by all of the members, may assist the City in making wetland size and type determinations when
asked to do so by the City as part of making an exemption or no-loss determination.
E. If requested by the City, the landowner, or a member of the technical evaluation panel, the panel will answer technical questions or participate in the
monitoring of replacement wetlands and will similarly participate in the monitoring of banked wetlands. (Prior Code § 20-93-9)
11-93-10: APPEAL OF CITY DECISIONS:
A. Appeal Of Replacement Plan Decisions:
1. The decision of the City to approve, approve with conditions, or reject a replacement plan, becomes final if not appealed to the Board of Water and
Soils Resources within thirty (30) days after the date on which the decision is mailed to those required to receive notice of the decision.
2. Appeal may be made by the landowner, by any of those required to receive notice of the decision, or by one hundred (100) residents of the County in
which a majority of the wetland is located.
3. Appeal is effective upon mailing of the notice of appeal to the Board of Water and Soils Resources with an affidavit that a copy of the notice of
appeal has been mailed to the City. The City shall then mail a copy of the notice of the appeal to all those to whom it was required by this chapter to
mail a copy of the notice of decision.
B. Appeal Of Exemption And No-Loss Determinations:
1. An exemption or no-loss determination may be appealed to the board by the landowner after first exhausting all City administrative appeal options.
2. Those required to receive notice of replacement plan decisions as provided in section 11-93-8 of this chapter may petition the board to hear an
appeal from an exemption or no-loss determination. The board will grant the petition unless it finds that the appeal is meritless, trivial, or brought
solely for the purposes of delay. In determining whether to grant the appeal, the board will also give consideration to the size of the wetland, other
factors in controversy, any patterns of similar acts by the City or landowner or petitioner, and the consequences of the delay.
3. The determination of the City on the exemption or no-loss application is final unless an appeal or petition is mailed to the board within thirty (30) days
after the decision is mailed to the landowner. The appeal or petition must be accompanied by an affidavit that a copy has been sent to the City and to
the landowner if it is a petition.
C. Board Of Soil And Water Resources Procedures:
1. The appeal will be decided by the board within sixty (60) days after receiving the notice of appeal and affidavit or granting the petition. Parties to the
appeal will be the appellant, the City and in the case of replacement plan appeals, all those required to receive notice of the City's decision.
2. Upon appeal, the City will forward to the board the record on which it based its decision. The board will make its decision on the appeal after hearing.
Thirty (30) days' notice of the hearing will be given by the board to the parties. The parties may present written and oral argument. When the City has
made formal findings contemporaneously with its decision and there is an accurate verbatim transcript of the proceedings and the proceedings were
fairly conducted, the board will base its review on the record. Otherwise, it may take additional evidence, or remand the matter.
3. The board will affirm the City's decision if the City's findings of fact are not clearly erroneous; if the City correctly applied the law to the facts,
including this chapter; and if the City made no procedural errors prejudicial to a party. Otherwise, the board will reverse the decision, amend it, or
remand it with instructions for further proceedings. (Prior Code § 20-93-10)
11-93-11: COMPENSATION:
Replacement plan applicants who have completed the City process and the Board of Water and Soil Resources appeal process and the plan has not been
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 470/497
approved as submitted, may apply to the Board of Water and Soil Resources for compensation under Minnesota Statutes section 103G.237. (Prior Code
§ 20-93-11)
11-93-12: ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES:
A. Enforcing Authorities: The Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources, conservation officers, and other peace officers may issue cease and
desist orders and restoration and replacement orders.
B. Cease And Desist Orders:
1. Site specific cease and desist orders may be issued when the enforcement authority has probable cause that a drain or fill activity is being or has
been conducted in a wetland and does not qualify for an exemption or a no-loss determination and is being or has been conducted without prior
approval of a replacement plan by the City.
2. A cease and desist order will not be issued if the landowner has a valid certificate of exemption or no-loss from the City or has evidence to support
an exemption. Otherwise:
a. The enforcement authority may issue a cease and desist order upon discovery of the drain or fill activity;
b. The order may be withheld to give the landowner time to produce the evidence required by the City to the enforcement authority of qualification for
an exemption or no-loss determination; or
c. A cease and desist order may be issued with an effective date three (3) weeks from the date of issuance. The enforcement authority may exercise
this option when the enforcement authority cannot readily make a determination on the facts and circumstances to deny a landowner's claim of
exemption or no-loss, and continued drain or fill activity would not cause irreparable harm to the wetland.
3. The enforcement authority will advise the landowner that the landowner's application, if any, for an exemption or no-loss determination, should be
made immediately to the City and that whatever drain and fill work the landowner has done may require restoration according to a restoration plan
designed by the Soil and Water Conservation District, if the application for exemption or no-loss determination is denied.
4. The enforcement authority issuing a cease and desist order will submit copies to the Soil and Water Conservation District, City, and department.
5. If an application for an exemption or no-loss determination is triggered by a cease and desist order, the City or the technical evaluation panel will
make a decision within three (3) weeks from the date of application. The City or the technical evaluation panel will review evidence of exemption or
no-loss produced by the landowner, inspect the site if necessary, and determine:
a. If the area in question is a wetland; and
b. If the activity qualifies for an exemption or no-loss determination.
6. In cases where the cease and desist order has been issued to the City, the determination of exemption or no-loss will be made by the Board of Soil
and Water Resources.
7. If the decision is that the activity is exempt or results in a no-loss determination, the decision maker will issue a certificate of exemption or no-loss,
request that the enforcement authority rescind the cease and desist order, and notify the Soil and Water Conservation District, the department, and
the landowner.
8. If the application is denied, the decision maker shall immediately notify the Soil and Water Conservation District, the department, the enforcement
authority, and the landowner.
C. Restoration And Replacement Orders:
1. The enforcement authority will issue a restoration order or replacement order when the drain or fill has already been completed when discovered, or
after a cease and desist order has been issued and the landowner does not seek an exemption or no-loss determination within three (3) weeks, or
the City denies the application.
2. Promptly upon being informed by the enforcement authority of the need, the Soil and Water Conservation District staff person shall inspect the site
and prepare a plan in consultation with the City for restoring the site to its prealtered condition, unless the Soil and Water Conservation District
person concludes that restoration is impossible. The Soil and Water Conservation District shall incorporate its plan into a restoration or replacement
order and send it to the enforcement authority for service in person or by certified mail to the landowner.
3. The restoration order will specify a date by which the landowner must either:
a. Restore the wetland according to the Soil and Water Conservation District plan and obtain a certificate of satisfactory restoration from the Soil and
Water Conservation District; or
b. Submit a replacement plan to the City.
4. The order will state that it will be canceled when the landowner obtains a certificate of exemption or no-loss from the City or a certificate that
restoration has been completed according to an approved restoration plan. Otherwise, the landowner must restore the wetland in the manner
required by the restoration order.
5. If the Soil and Water Conservation District determines that restoration will not restore all the loss caused by the drain or fill activity, the enforcement
authority may order a combination of restoration and replacement, or may order replacement rather than restoration, as determined by the Soil and
Water Conservation District. The order will direct the landowner to obtain replacement plan approval from the City. The order must specify that if
replacement plan approval is not obtained, the landowner must restore the wetland in a manner determined by the Soil and Water Conservation
District.
6. Each cease and desist, restoration, and replacement order will tell the landowner that violation of the order is a misdemeanor.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 471/497
7. If, as part of a misdemeanor proceeding, the court orders restoration or replacement, the Soil and Water Conservation District will determine which is
appropriate, and if it is restoration, the method of restoration. If the court orders replacement, the landowner must follow the replacement plan
process in this chapter unless the court orders otherwise. (Prior Code § 20-93-12)
11-93-13: MINING:
Wetlands may not be drained or filled as part of a project for which a permit to mine is required by Minnesota Statutes section 93.481 or by title 4, chapter
9 of this Code. Draining or filling of wetlands created by pits, stockpiles or tailing basins by actions whose purpose was not to create the wetland may be
exempt. The landowner must contact the City to verify this exemption. (Prior Code § 20-93-13)
11-93-14: STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES FOR EVALUATING WETLAND REPLACEMENT PLANS:
A. Procedures:
1. Generally: No person shall drain or fill a wetland, wholly or partially, without first having a wetland value replacement plan approved by the City
Council consistent with this chapter and provided, that the activity is not prohibited under the special considerations provisions in subsection D9 of
this section.
2. Preapplication Conference And Site Visit: Before preparation of a wetland value replacement plan, the landowner must meet with the City for a
preapplication conference and site visit. A landowner may submit the sequencing information required in subsection B of this section and request a
determination of compliance with the sequencing requirements from the City before preparing a replacement plan.
3. Evaluation: Technical questions concerning the public value, location, size, and type of wetland shall be submitted to the technical evaluation panel.
Wetland boundaries must be determined using the methodologies in the Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands
(January 1989).
Wetland type must be identified according to Cowardin, et al., 1979, Classification of Wetlands and Deepwater Habitats of the United States and
according to United States Fish and Wildlife Service Circular No. 39 (1971 edition) "Wetlands of the United States". The technical evaluation panel
will provide its determinations to the City for consideration.
B. Sequencing:
1. Requirement: Except for wetlands located in cultivated fields that are subject to subsection B8 of this section, and calcareous fens that are subject to
subsection B9 of this section, the City will not consider or approve a wetland replacement plan unless the City finds that the applicant has
demonstrated that the activity impacting a wetland has complied with all of the following principles in descending order or priority:
a. Avoids direct or indirect impacts to the wetland that may destroy or diminish the wetland under the criteria in subsection B3 of this section;
b. Minimizes the impact to the wetland by limiting the degree or magnitude of the wetland activity and its implementation under the criteria in
subsection B4 of this section;
c. Rectifies the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected wetland under the criteria in subsection B5 of this section;
d. Reduces or eliminates the impact to the wetland over time by preservation and maintenance operations under the criteria in subsection B6 of this
section; and
e. Replaces unavoidable impacts to the wetland by restoring or creating substitute wetland areas having equal or greater public value as provided in
this chapter.
2. Application Options: An applicant may either submit the information required for sequencing analysis as part of the application for replacement plan
approval or apply for a preliminary sequencing determination from the City before preparing a replacement plan. The City may request additional
information needed to make a determination. For projects impacting wetland areas less than 0.1 acre, the City may provide an on site sequencing
determination without written documentation from the applicant.
3. Determination Of Impact Avoidance:
a. Avoidance Required: Avoidance will be required when indicated by special considerations as stated in this chapter.
b. Wetland Dependence Determination:
(1) Based on information provided by the applicant, the City will determine if the proposed project is wetland dependent. A project is wetland
dependent if wetland features, functions, or values are essential to fulfill the basic purpose of the project. A wetland present at the site of a
proposed project does not make that project wetland dependent.
(2) A project that has been determined by the City to be wetland dependent is exempt from the analysis of avoidance alternatives in subsection
B3c of this section.
c. Alternative Analysis:
(1) The applicant shall provide the City with documentation describing at least two (2) alternatives in addition to the proposed project, one of which
may be the no-build alternative, that would avoid impacts to wetlands. The alternatives may include consideration of alternate sites or alternative
project configurations on the proposed site. The alternatives must be judged by the City as good faith efforts, or the City will require the applicant
to redraft them for reconsideration.
(2) The City will determine whether any feasible and prudent alternatives are available that would avoid impacts to wetlands. An alternative will be
considered feasible and prudent if it is capable of being done from an engineering point of view, is in accordance with accepted engineering
standards and practices, is consistent with reasonable requirements of the public health, safety, and welfare, is an environmentally preferable
alternative based on a review of social, economic, and environmental impacts, and would create no truly unusual problems. The City will
consider the following in evaluating alternatives as applicable:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 472/497
(A) Whether the basic project purpose can be reasonably accomplished using one or more other sites in the same general area that would avoid
wetland impacts. An alternate site will not be excluded from consideration only because it includes or requires an area not owned by the
applicant that could reasonably be obtained, used, expanded, or managed to fulfill the basic purpose of the proposed project;
(B) The general suitability of alternate sites considered by the applicant;
(C) Whether reasonable modification of the size, scope configuration, or density of the project would avoid impacts to wetlands;
(D) Efforts by the applicant to accommodate or remove constraints on alternatives imposed by zoning standards or infrastructure, including
request for conditional use permits, variances, or planned unit developments; and
(E) The physical, economic and demographic requirements of the project. Economic considerations alone do not make an alternative not
feasible and prudent.
(3) If the City determines that a feasible and prudent alternative exists that would avoid impacts to wetlands, it will deny the replacement plan. If no
feasible and prudent alternative is available that would avoid impacts to wetlands, the City will evaluate the replacement plan for compliance with
subsections B4 to B6 of this section.
4. Determination Of Impact Minimization:
a. The applicant shall demonstrate to the City satisfaction that the activity will minimize impacts to wetlands. In reviewing the sufficiency of the
applicant's efforts to minimize wetland impacts, the City will consider:
(1) The spatial requirements of the project;
(2) The location of existing structural or natural features that may dictate the placement or configuration of the project;
(3) The purpose of the project and how the purpose relates to placement, configuration, or density;
(4) The sensitivity of the site design to the natural features of the site, including topography, hydrology and existing vegetation;
(5) The value, function, and spatial distribution of the wetlands on the site;
(6) Individual and cumulative impacts; and
(7) An applicant's efforts to:
(A) Modify the size, scope, configuration, or density of the project;
(B) Remove or accommodate site constraints including zoning, infrastructure, access, or natural features; and
(C) Otherwise minimize impacts.
b. If the City finds that an applicant has not complied with the requirements to minimize wetland impacts, the City will list, in writing, its objections to
the project. If, within thirty (30) days, the applicant does not withdraw the project proposal or indicate intent to submit an amended project proposal
satisfying the City's objections, the statement of objections shall constitute a denial.
5. Determination Of Impact Rectification: Temporary impacts to a wetland must be rectified by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected wetland.
a. Activities may qualify for a no-loss determination in section 11-93-7 of this chapter by meeting all of the following conditions:
(1) The physical characteristics of the affected wetland, including ground elevations, contours, inlet dimensions, outlet dimensions, substrate, and
hydrologic regime, are restored to preproject conditions sufficient to ensure that all preproject functions and values are restored;
(2) The activity is completed and the physical characteristics of the wetland are restored within six (6) months of the start of the activity; and
(3) The party responsible for the activity provides a performance bond to the City for an amount sufficient to cover the estimated cost to restore the
wetland to preproject conditions. The City will return the performance bond to the responsible party upon a determination by the City that the
conditions in this subsection and subsection B5b of this section have been met.
b. An applicant shall be granted a no-loss determination under the criteria in subsection B5a of this section once in a ten (10) year period for a
particular site within a wetland; except, that repairs to the original project shall be allowed under the no-loss determination, if the City determines
the request to be necessary and reasonable.
c. Wetland impacts that do not qualify for a no-loss determination according to the criteria in subsection B5a of this section are subject to
replacement under the criteria in subsections C to I of this section.
6. Determination Of Reduction Of Elimination Of Impacts Over Time: After an activity is completed, further wetland impacts from the draining or filling
must be reduced or eliminated by maintaining, operating, and managing the project in a manner that preserves and maintains remaining wetland
functions and values. The City will require applicants to implement Best Management Practices to protect wetland functions and values.
7. Unavoidable Impacts: Unavoidable wetland impacts that remain after efforts to minimize, rectify, or reduce or eliminate them must be replaced
according to subsections B to I of this section.
8. Wetlands On Cultivated Fields: If the wetland is located on a cultivated field, replacement must be accomplished through restoration without regard
to the priority order in subsection B1 of this section. A wetland drained or filled under this provision must not be converted to nonagricultural land for
ten (10) years. The landowner must execute and record a notice of this requirement in the Office of the County Recorder for Wright County.
9. Calcareous Fens: Calcareous fens, as identified by the Commissioner, may not be filled, drained, or otherwise degraded, wholly or partially, by any
action, unless the Commissioner, under an approved management plan, decides some alteration is necessary, as provided in this chapter. (Prior
Code § 20-93-14)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 473/497
C. Replacement Plan Components: On an application form provided by the City and with needed attachments supplied by the applicant, the following
documentation must be provided, except that, for replacement plans utilizing the wetland bank as provided by section 11-93-15 of this chapter.
Subsections C2 and C4 of this section do not apply; instead the applicant shall submit the credit transfer form. (Prior Code § 20-93-14; amd. 2018
Code)
1. Organizational information, including the following:
a. The Post Office address of the applicant;
b. For corporations, the principal officers of the corporation, any parent companies, owners, partners, and joint venturers, and a designated contact
person;
c. Managing agents, subsidiaries, or consultants that are or may be involved with the wetland draining or filling project;
2. Either an affidavit confirming that the wetland values will be replaced before or concurrent with the actual draining or filling of a wetland or an
irrevocable bank letter of credit to guarantee the successful completion of the wetland value replacement;
3. For the impacted wetland:
a. A recent aerial photograph or accurate map of the impacted wetland area;
b. The location of the wetland, including the County, watershed name or number, and public land survey coordinate of approximate wetland center;
c. The size of the wetland, in acres or square feet;
d. The type of wetland using United States Fish and Wildlife Service Circular No. 39 (1971 edition) and National Wetland Inventory mapping
conventions (Cowardin et al., 1979);
e. A list of the dominant vegetation in the impacted wetland area, including common names of the vegetation exceeding twenty percent (20%)
coverage and an estimate of coverage, for example, fifty percent (50%) willow, twenty percent (20%) cattails, and thirty percent (30%) sedge;
f. A soils map of the site showing soil type and substrate, where available;
g. The size of the watershed that drains surface water into the wetland as determined from a United States Government Survey topographical map
or other suitable topographical survey;
h. The locations of any surface inlets or outlets, natural or otherwise, draining into or out of the wetlands, and if the wetland is within the floodplain of
a stream, river, or other watercourse, the distance and direction to the watercourse;
i. A map, photograph, or written description of the land use of the immediate watershed within one mile of the impacted wetland. The surrounding
land use information shall also indicate the presence and location, if any, of wetland preservation regions and areas, wetland development
avoidance regions and areas, and wetland deficient regions and areas as identified in the comprehensive water plan;
j. The nature of the proposed project, its areal extent, and the impact on the wetland must be shown in sufficient detail to allow the City to determine
the amount and types of wetland to be impacted and to demonstrate compliance with the replacement sequencing criteria in subsection B of this
section if applicable;
k. Evidence of ownership or rights to the affected areas, including a legal description. When two (2) or more landowners are involved, including both
the impact site and the proposed replacement site, a contract or other evidence of agreement signed by all landowners and notarized must be
included with the replacement plan. The contract or agreement must contain an acknowledgement of the covenant provisions in subsection C4f of
this section by landowners on which a replacement wetland is proposed and the location and acreage of replacement wetlands. The contract
becomes binding upon final approval of the replacement plan;
l. A list of all other local, State, and Federal permits and approvals required for the activity; and
m. Other information considered necessary by the City for evaluation of the activity.
4. For the replacement wetland subsections C3a to C3i and C3k to C3m of this section and:
a. An explanation of the size and type of wetland that will result from successful completion of the replacement plan;
b. Scale drawings showing plan and profile views of the replacement wetland and fixed photo reference points for monitoring purposes. Photo
reference points should include views of any control structures and enough additional points to adequately depict the entire project;
c. How the replacement wetland shall be constructed, for example, excavation or restoration by blocking an existing tile; the type, size, and
specifications of outlet structures; elevations, relative to mean sea level or established bench mark, of key features, for example, sill, emergency
overflow, and structure height; and Best Management Practices that will be implemented to prevent erosion or site degradation;
d. For created wetlands only, additional soils information sufficient to determine the capability of the site to produce and maintain wetland
characteristics;
e. A timetable that clearly states how and when implementation of the replacement plan shall proceed, and when construction of the replacement
wetland shall be finalized;
f. A notice in a form provided by the board attached to and recorded with the deed for lands containing a replacement wetland, specifying the
following:
(1) The location of the replacement wetland; (Prior Code § 20-93-14)
(2) That the wetland is subject to the Wetland Conservation Act; (Prior Code § 20-93-14; amd. 2018 Code)
(3) That the fee title owner is responsible for the costs of repairs or reconstruction, if necessary, or for replacement costs;
(4) That reasonable access to the replacement wetland shall be granted to the proper authorities for inspection, monitoring, and enforcement
purposes;
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 474/497
(5) That costs of title review and document recording is the responsibility of the fee title owner; and (Prior Code § 20-93-14)
(6) That the City or board can require necessary repairs or reconstruction work to return the wetland to the specifications of the approved
replacement plan and require reimbursement of reasonable costs from the wetland owner, or can require replacement of the wetland according
to the Wetland Conservation Act; (Prior Code § 20-93-14; amd. 2018 Code)
g. A statement that the replacement wetland was not previously restored or created under a prior approved replacement plan;
h. A statement that the replacement wetland was not drained or filled under an exemption during the previous ten (10) years;
i. A statement that the replacement wetland was not restored with financial assistance from public conservation programs;
j. A statement that the replacement wetland was not restored using private funds other than those of the landowner unless the funds are paid back
with interest to the individual or organization that funded the restoration and the individual or organization notifies the City in writing that the
restored wetland may be considered for replacement;
k. A plan for monitoring the success of the replacement plan in meeting the project goal of subsection D1 of this section, and as specified in this
chapter; and
l. Other information considered necessary for evaluation of the project by the City.
5. The applicant must provide information known to the applicant or readily available concerning the special considerations criteria in subsection D9 of
this section.
D. Replacement Plan Evaluation Criteria:
1. Sequencing: Prior to the City considering or approving a replacement plan, the applicant must have exhausted all possibilities to avoid and minimize
adverse wetland impacts according to sequencing in subsection B of this section. The applicant must demonstrate to the City that the replacement
plan complies with this subsection and subsection E of this section.
2. Type Of Replacement: The order of preference for the method of replacement, from most preferred to least preferred, is project specific restoration,
project specific creation, then wetland banking. Modification or conversion of nondegraded wetlands from one wetland type to another, for example
by impoundment of additional water, does not constitute adequate replacement.
Wetlands drained or filled under an exemption may not be restored for replacement credit for ten (10) years after draining or filling.
3. Timing Of Replacement: Replacement of wetland values must be completed before or concurrent with the actual draining or filling of a wetland,
unless an irrevocable bank letter of credit is submitted to the City to guarantee successful completion of the replacement. All wetlands to be restored
or created for replacement must be designated for replacement before restoration or creation. Submission to the City of the information required in
subsection C of this section and subsequent approval shall be considered evidence of designation for replacement, provided the information is
submitted before the actual restoration or creation.
4. Location Of Replacement Wetlands: Replacement wetlands must be located within the same watershed or County as the impacted wetlands.
5. Statewide Replacement For Public Transportation Projects: Wetlands impacted by public transportation projects may be replaced Statewide,
provided they are approved by the Commissioner under an established wetland banking system or under this chapter.
6. Size Of Replacement Wetlands: Replacement wetlands must be of a size sufficient to ensure that they provide equal or greater public value than the
wetland that was drained or filled. For a wetland located on nonagricultural land, the minimum size of the replacement wetland must be in the ratio of
two (2) acres of replaced wetland for each acre of drained or filled wetland. For a wetland located on agricultural land, the minimum size of the
replacement wetland must be in the ratio of one acre of replaced wetland for each acre of drained or filled wetland. The actual replacement ratios
required for a replacement wetland may be more than the minimum, subject to the evaluation of wetland functions and values. A review by the City
will determine the actual required replacement ratios. Future owners may make no use of the wetland after it is altered, other than as agricultural
land for a period of ten (10) years unless future replacement to achieve a two to one (2:1) ratio occurs. The landowner shall record a notice of this
restriction in the Office of the Wright County Recorder.
7. Carbon Balance: When it is necessary to replace a drained or filled peat land, the replacement wetland must be revegetated with planted or naturally
invading vegetation established within three (3) growing seasons.
8. Ecological Consistency: Restoration and replacement of wetlands must be accomplished according to the ecology of the landscape area affected. A
replacement plan that would result in wetlands or wetland characteristics that do not naturally occur in the landscape area in which the replacement
will occur will not be approved.
9. Special Considerations: The factors in subsections D9a to D9i of this section, when identified as being applicable to an impact site or a replacement
site, will be considered by the City in the review of replacement plans.
a. Federal Or State Listed Endangered Species: A replacement plan for activities that involve sites where Federal or State listed endangered species
are known to be present will not be approved if it is determined that the proposed activities will constitute a taking of those listed species under
Minnesota Statutes section 84.0895. Limited information on the presence of listed species at a particular site is available from the department's
natural heritage program. Activities that involve taking listed species are subject to Minnesota Statutes section 84.0895.
b. Rare Natural Communities: A replacement plan for activities that involve the modification of a rare natural community as determined by the
department's Natural Heritage Program will not be approved if the City determines that the proposed activities will permanently adversely affect the
natural community.
c. Special Fish And Wildlife Resources: A replacement plan for activities that would have a significant adverse impact that cannot be mitigated on a
special or locally significant fish and wildlife resource will not be approved. These activities include, but are not limited to:
(1) Fish passage and spawning areas;
(2) Colonial water bird nesting colonies;
(3) Migratory waterfowl concentration areas;
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 475/497
(4) Deer wintering areas; and/or
(5) Wildlife travel corridors.
Activities involving streams must not block fish passage unless approved by the department.
d. Archaeological Or Historic Sites: A replacement plan for activities that involve the modification of known archaeological or historical sites on or
eligible for the National Register of Historic Places, as designated by the State Historic Preservation Officer, will not be approved if the City
determines that the proposed activities will have a significant adverse impact on the archaeological or historical value of the site.
e. Groundwater Sensitivity: A replacement plan for activities will not be approved if the City determines the activities would have a significant adverse
impact on groundwater quality. The publication "Criteria and Guidelines for Assessing Geologic Sensitivity of Ground Water Resources in
Minnesota" (MDNR, 1991) may be used as a guide in determining potential impacts.
f. Sensitive Surface Waters: A replacement plan will not be approved if the City determines the activities will have a significant adverse impact on the
water quality of outstanding resource value waters or on trout waters designated by the Commissioner.
g. Education Or Research Use: Wetlands known to be used for educational or research purposes must be maintained or adequately replaced.
h. Waste Disposal Sites: The City will evaluate the type and amount of waste material found at the site. Activities involving known or potential
hazardous wastes or contaminants must be conducted according to applicable Federal and State standards.
i. Consistency With Other Plans: The City will consider the extent to which proposed activities are consistent with other plans, such as watershed
management plans, Land Use Plans, zoning, and Master Plans.
10. Evaluation Of Wetland Functions And Values: Replacement wetlands must replace the functions and values that are lost from a wetland that is
drained or filled. A replacement wetland should replace the same combination of functions and values provided by the impacted wetland. The
evaluation of wetlands shall be performed in accordance with part 8420.540 of the Board of Water and Soil Resources Wetland Conservation Act
Rules (August, 1993).
E. Wetland Replacement Standards:
1. General Requirements: The standards and guidelines in this subsection E shall be used in wetland creation and restoration efforts to ensure
adequate replacement of wetland functions and values.
2. Specific Requirements: The standards in subsections E2a to E2h of this section shall be followed in all wetland replacements unless the technical
evaluation panel determines that a standard is clearly not appropriate.
a. Water control structures must be constructed using specifications provided in the Minnesota Wetland Restoration Guide or their equivalent.
Control structures may be subject to the department dam safety regulations.
b. Best Management Practices must be established and maintained adjacent to the entire perimeter of all replacement wetlands.
c. For replacement wetlands where the dominant vegetation of the wetland type identified as the replacement goal is not likely to recover naturally in
a five (5) year period, wooded and shrub wetlands especially, the replacement wetland must be seeded or planted with appropriate species, as
determined by the Soil and Water Conservation District, in coordination with the department. If the replacement wetland is seeded or planted, the
seed or planting stock should be of local wetland origin to preserve local genotypes. During the monitoring period, the applicant must take
reasonable steps to prevent invasion by any species, for example, purple loosestrife and Eurasian water milfoil, that would defeat the revegetation
goal of the replacement plan.
d. Erosion control measures as determined by the Soil and Water Conservation District must be employed during construction and until permanent
ground cover is established to prevent siltation of the replacement wetland or nearby water bodies.
e. For all restored wetlands where the original organic substrate has been stripped away and for all created wetlands, provisions must be made for
providing an organic substrate. When feasible, the organic soil used for backfill should be taken from the drained or filled wetland.
f. The bottom contours of created types 3, 4, and 5 wetlands shall be undulating, rather than flat, to provide a variety of water depths.
g. Side slopes of created wetlands and buffer strip must not be steeper than five feet (5') horizontally for every one foot (1') vertically as averaged
around the wetland. Side slopes of ten to one (10:1) to fifteen to one (15:1) are preferred.
h. Created wetlands shall have an irregular edge to create points and bays.
F. Monitoring: The purpose of wetland value replacement monitoring is to ensure that the replacement wetland achieves the goal of replacing lost functions
and values.
G. Duration Of Monitoring: Monitoring shall be by means of an annual report as specified in subsection H of this section and shall continue for five (5)
years following completion of the wetland replacement project. Through written notification to the applicant, the City may extend the required monitoring
period for not more than an additional five (5) years if, at the end of the initial five (5) year period, the goal of the replacement plan has not been
achieved, but may be achieved with more time.
H. Monitoring Annual Report:
1. Purpose: The purpose of the annual report is to describe actual wetland restoration or creation activities completed during the past year, activities
planned for the upcoming year, and the information in subsection H2 of this section. The applicant shall submit the annual report to the City on a date
determined by the City until the applicant has fulfilled all of the requirements of the City.
2. Report Content: The annual report shall include the following information and other site specific information identified by the City:
a. A description of the project location, size, current wetland type (Cowardin classification), and desired wetland type (goal);
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 476/497
b. A comparison of the as built specifications versus the design specifications (first annual plan only) and a rationale for significant changes;
c. Hydrology measurements: Seasonal water level elevations during the period April through October (msl or referenced to a known bench mark);
d. A list of the dominant vegetation in the wetland, including common names of the vegetation exceeding twenty percent (20%) coverage and an
estimate of coverage, for example, fifty percent (50%) willow, twenty percent (20%) cattail, and thirty percent (30%) sedge; and
e. Color photographs of the project area taken anytime during the period June through August, referenced to the fixed photo reference points
identified on the wetland replacement plan and labeled accordingly.
I. Monitoring Determinations By City: The City:
1. Will inspect the project when construction is complete and certify compliance with construction specifications, and may inspect the project at any
time during the construction and monitoring period, and any time after that to assess the long term viability of the replaced wetland. When the City
certifies that the construction specifications have been met, the City will so advise the applicant and return any bond or other security that the
applicant had provided;
2. May order corrective action at any time during the required monitoring period if it determines that the goal of the approved replacement plan will not
be met, and may require the applicant to prepare an amended wetland value replacement plan for review and approval by the City which describes
in detail the corrective measures to be taken to achieve the goal of replacing lost wetland functions and values;
3. Shall make a finding based on a site visit at the end of the monitoring period as to whether the goal of the replacement plan has been met. If the goal
of the replacement plan has not been met, the City will order corrective action and extend the monitoring period; and
4. Will require one or more of the following actions if, during the monitoring period, the City finds that the goal of the replacement plan will not be met:
a. Order the applicant to prepare and implement a new replacement plan;
b. Issue a cease and desist order on the draining and filling activity if it has not been completed;
c. Order restoration of the impacted wetland;
d. Obtain forfeiture of a bond or other security and use the proceeds to replace the lost wetland values;
e. Ask the District Court to order the applicant to fulfill the replacement plan; or
f. Other actions that the City determines necessary to achieve the goal of the replacement plan. (Prior Code § 20-93-14)
11-93-15: STANDARDS AND CRITERIA FOR STATE WETLAND BANKING:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide City standards for procedures related to a State wetland banking system as provided in Minnesota Rules parts
8420.0700 to 8420.0760. The City is responsible for approving bank plans, certifying deposits, and monitoring of banked wetlands and enforcement under
the rules. (Prior Code § 20-93-15; amd. 2018 Code)
11-93-16: CALCAREOUS FENS:
Calcareous fens may not be drained or filled or otherwise altered or degraded except as provided in a management plan approved by the Commissioner.
No exemptions shall be granted for any drain or fill activities which affect calcareous fens. (Prior Code § 20-93-16)
Chapter 94
FP FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT
11-94-1: STATUTE AUTHORITY; FINDINGS OF FACT; PURPOSE:
A. Statute Authority: This chapter is established pursuant to Minnesota Statutes chapters 103F and 462, as amended.
B. Findings Of Fact:
1. The flood hazard areas of the City are subject to periodic inundation which results in potential loss of life, loss of property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures or flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
2. This chapter is based upon a reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards which is consistent with the standards established by the Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources.
C. Purpose: It is the purpose of this district to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize those losses described in subsection
B1 of this section by provisions contained herein. (Prior Code § 20-94-1)
11-94-2: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
This chapter does not imply that areas outside the FP Floodplain Overlay District boundaries or land uses allowed within this district will be free from
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 477/497
flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages which
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Prior Code § 20-94-2)
11-94-3: DISTRICT APPLICATION:
The FP Floodplain Overlay District shall be applied to and superimposed as an overlay upon all districts as existing or amended by the text and map of this
chapter. The regulations and requirements imposed by the FP Floodplain Overlay District shall be in addition to those established by all other districts of
this title. The FP Floodplain Overlay District shall be established based upon the specific information contained in the Flood Boundary, Floodway, and
Flood Insurance Rate Maps and the Flood Insurance Study for the City. All aforementioned official road maps and documents are hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be an integral part of this chapter. (Prior Code § 20-94-3)
11-94-4: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Scope: This district shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City shown on the Official Zoning Map and/or the attachments thereto as being
located within the boundaries of the 100-year regional flood specified as the Floodway or Flood Fringe Districts.
B. Official Zoning Map:
1. Established: The Official Zoning Map, together with all materials attached thereto, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this
chapter. The attached material shall include the Flood Insurance Study for the City prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) dated September 30, 1992, the Flood Insurance Study for Wright County prepared by FEMA dated August 18, 1992, the Flood Insurance
Rate Maps for the City of Otsego dated September 30, 1992, and panel #270534 0032C of the Flood Insurance Rate Map for Wright County dated
August 18, 1992, therein. The Official Zoning Map shall be on file in the Office of the Zoning Administrator.
2. Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation: The regulatory flood protection elevation shall be an elevation no lower than one foot (1') above the elevation
of the 100-year regional flood, plus any increases in flood elevation caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from designation of a
floodway.
C. Interpretation Of District Boundaries: The boundaries of the Floodplain Overlay District shall be determined by scaling distances on the Official Zoning
Map. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the district as shown on the Official Zoning Map, as for example,
where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, the City Engineer shall make the necessary
interpretation. The person contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present a case and to submit
technical evidence if so desired, pursuant to chapter 6 of this title. (Prior Code § 20-94-4)
11-94-5: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
The area within a Floodplain District is further divided into the following districts:
A. Floodway District: Includes the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the adjoining floodplain which are required to carry and discharge the
regional flood. The Floodway District shall include those areas designated as floodway on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map.
B. Flood Fringe District: Includes the area outside of the floodway, but subject to inundation by the 100-year regional floods. The Flood Fringe District shall
include those areas designated as floodway fringe on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map. (Prior Code § 20-94-5)
11-94-6: FW FLOODWAY DISTRICT:
A. Permitted Uses: The permitted uses shall be subject to other more restrictive limitations which may be imposed by this chapter. The following are
permitted uses within the FW District:
1. General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and crop harvesting.
2. Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas, and airport landing strips.
3. Private and public golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife
and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, and single
or multiple purpose recreational trails.
4. Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas.
B. Standards For Permitted Uses:
1. The use shall have a low flood damage potential.
2. The use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning district if one exists.
3. The use shall not obstruct flood flows or increase flood elevations and shall not involve permanent or temporary structures, fill, obstructions,
excavations or storage of materials or equipment.
C. Permitted Accessory Uses: None.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 478/497
D. Conditional Uses: An application for a conditional use shall be subject to the standards and criteria and evaluation procedures specified in chapter 4 of
this title and section 11-94-13 of this chapter and subject to other more restrictive limitations which may be imposed by this chapter. The following uses
may be allowed as a conditional use permit in the FW District:
1. Extraction and storage of sand, gravel, and other materials.
2. Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves, and water control structures.
3. Placement of fill.
4. Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines, and pipelines.
5. Storage yards for equipment, machinery, or materials.
6. Structural works for flood control such as levees, dikes and flood walls constructed to any height where the intent is to protect individual structures
and levees or dikes where the intent is to protect agricultural crops for a frequency flood event equal to or less than the 10-year frequency flood
event.
7. Structures accessory to the uses listed in subsection A of this section and the uses listed in this subsection D.
8. Travel trailers and travel vehicles either on individual lots of record or in existing or new subdivisions or commercial or condominium type
campgrounds, subject to the exemptions and provisions of section 11-94-10 of this chapter.
E. Standards For Conditional Uses: No structure (temporary or permanent), fill (including fill for roads and levees), deposit, obstruction, storage of
materials or equipment, or other uses shall be allowed as a conditional use which, acting alone or in combination with existing or anticipated future
uses, adversely affect the capacity of the floodway, or increases flood heights. Consideration of the effects of a proposed use shall be based upon the
reasonable assumption that there will be an equal degree of encroachment extending for a significant reach on both sides of the stream. All conditional
use applications shall be accompanied by a floodway impact statement drafted by a registered engineer. The City Engineer shall be responsible for
submitting the proposal and application to the Department of Natural Resources and any other governmental unit having jurisdiction over the area for
review and comment.
1. Fill:
a. Fill, dredge spoil and all other similar materials deposited or stored in the floodplain shall be protected from erosion by vegetative cover, mulching,
riprap or other acceptable method.
b. Dredge spoil sites and sand and gravel operations shall not be allowed in the floodway unless a long term site development plan is submitted
which includes an erosion/sedimentation prevention element to the plan. (Prior Code § 20-94-6)
c. As an alternative, and consistent with subsection E1b of this section, dredge spoil disposal and sand and gravel operations may allow temporary,
on site storage of fill or other materials which would have caused an increase to the stage of the 100-year or regional flood but only after the City
Council has received an appropriate plan which assures the removal of the materials from the floodway based upon the flood warning time
available. The conditional use permit must be title registered with the property in the Office of the Wright County Recorder. (Prior Code § 20-94-6;
amd. 2018 Code)
F. Accessory Structures:
1. Accessory structures shall not be designed for human habitation.
2. Accessory structures, if permitted, shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of
floodwaters.
a. Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow.
b. So far as practicable, structures shall be placed approximately on the same flood flow lines as those of adjoining structures.
3. Accessory structures shall be elevated on fill or structurally dry floodproofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 floodproofing classifications in the
State Building Code. As an alternative, an accessory structure may be floodproofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 floodproofing classification in the State
Building Code provided the accessory structure constitutes a minimal investment, does not exceed five hundred (500) square feet in size, and for a
detached garage, the detached garage must be used solely for parking of vehicles and limited storage. All floodproofed accessory structures must
meet the following additional standards, as appropriate:
a. The structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure and shall be designed to equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls; and
b. Any mechanical and utility equipment in a structure must be elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or properly floodproofed.
G. Storage Of Material And Equipment: The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding, buoyant, flammable, explosive, or could be
injurious to human, animal, or plant life, is prohibited. Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to major damage by floods
and firmly anchored to prevent flotation or readily moveable from the area within the time available after flood warning.
H. Garbage And Solid Waste Disposal: No conditional use permits for garbage and waste disposal sites shall be issued for floodway areas. There shall be
no further encroachment upon the floodway at existing sites.
I. Changing Wetlands Or Public Waters: Structural works for flood control that will change the course, current or cross section of protected wetlands or
public waters shall be subject to the provisions of Minnesota Statutes 1976, chapters 103A, B, E, F, G and I. Communitywide structural works for flood
control intended to remove areas from the regulatory floodplain shall not be allowed in the floodway.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 479/497
A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the floodway shall not cause an increase to the 100-year or regional flood and the technical analysis must
assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides of a stream. (Prior Code § 20-94-6)
11-94-7: FF FLOOD FRINGE DISTRICT:
A. Permitted Uses: The permitted uses shall be subject to other more restrictive limitations which may be imposed by this chapter. The following shall be
permitted uses within the FF District:
1. General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and crop harvesting.
2. Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas, and airport landing strips.
3. Private and public golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife
and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, and single
or multiple purpose recreational trails.
4. Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas.
B. Conditional Uses: The conditional uses shall be subject to other more restrictive limitations which may be imposed by this chapter. The following are
conditional uses which may be allowed within the FP-FF District:
1. Any structure that is not elevated on fill or floodproofed in accordance with this subsection B shall only be allowable as a conditional use. An
application for a conditional use shall be subject to the standards and criteria and evaluation procedures specified in chapter 4 of this title, subsection
C of this section and section 11-94-13 of this chapter.
a. Residential Uses: Residences shall be constructed on fill with the first floor or basement floor at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation.
The finished fill elevation shall be no more than one foot (1') below the regulatory flood protection elevation for the particular area and shall extend
at such elevation at least fifteen feet (15') beyond the limits of any structure or building erected thereon.
b. Nonresidential Structures: Commercial, manufacturing, and industrial structures shall ordinarily be elevated on fill so that their first floor (including
basement) is above the regulatory flood protection elevation, but may, in special circumstances, be floodproofed in accordance with the State
Building Code. Structures that are not elevated to above the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be floodproofed to FP-1 or FP-2
classification as defined by the State Building Code. Structures floodproofed to FP-3 or FP-4 classification shall not be permitted.
C. Standards For Uses:
1. Low Flood Damage Potential: The use shall have a low flood damage potential.
2. Use Permitted In Underlying District: The use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning district if one exists.
3. Shall Not Affect Flooding: The use shall not obstruct flood flows or increase flood elevations and shall not involve structures, fill, obstructions,
excavations or storage of materials or equipment.
4. Residential Uses: Residences that do not have vehicular access at or above an elevation not more than two feet (2') below the regulatory flood
protection elevation shall not be permitted unless granted a variance by the Board of Adjustment. In granting a variance, the Board shall specify
limitations on the period of use or occupancy of the residence.
5. Business Uses: Commercial structures generally must be constructed on fill with no first floor or basement floor below the flood protection elevation.
Accessory land uses, such as yards, railroads tracks, and parking lots may be at lower elevations. However, a permit for such facilities to be used by
the general public shall not be granted, in the absence of a flood warning system, if the area is inundated to a depth greater than two feet (2') or
subject to flood velocities greater than four feet (4') per second upon the occurrence of the regional flood.
6. Manufacturing And Industrial Uses: Manufacturing and industrial buildings, structures and appurtenant works shall be protected to the flood
protection elevation. Measures shall be taken to minimize interference with normal plant operations especially for streams having protracted flood
durations. Certain necessary land uses such as yards and parking lots may be at lower elevations subject to requirements set out in subsection C5
of this section. In considering permit applications, the City Engineer shall give due consideration to needs of an industry whose business requires
that it be located in floodplain areas.
7. Waste Treatment And Waste Disposal:
a. No new construction, addition, or modification to existing waste treatment facilities shall be permitted within the flood fringe unless emergency
plans and procedures for action to be taken in the event of flooding are prepared, filed with, and approved by the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency. The emergency plans and procedures must provide for measures to prevent introduction of any pollutant or toxic material into the
floodwaters.
b. There shall be no disposal of garbage or solid waste materials within flood fringe areas except upon issuance of a conditional use permit at sites
approved by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency and subject to the requirements of chapter 4 of this title.
8. Flood Control Works: Establishment of flood control works shall be subject to the provisions of Minnesota Statutes 1976, chapter 103G and chapter
4 of this title.
a. The minimum height and design of any dikes, levees, floodwalls, or similar structural works shall be based upon the flood profile of the regional
flood defined between the structures subject to the following:
(1) For urban areas, the minimum height and design of structure works shall be at least three feet (3') above the elevation of the regional flood or
at the elevation of the standard project flood, whichever is greater.
(2) Modifications and additions to existing structural works shall assure that the work will provide a means of decreasing the flood damage
potential in the area. Any existing structural work which potentially threatens public health or safety shall be modified or reconstructed in order to
meet the standards contained herein within a period of one year of the effective date hereof.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 480/497
b. Flood protection elevations and floodway limits which reflect proposed measures for flood control shall not be effective until such measures are
constructed and operative unless the proposed measures will increase flood heights, in which event, the regulatory flood protection elevations and
floodplain limits shall reflect the anticipated increases.
c. Detailed plans shall be submitted to the City Engineer for any new developments placed on the floodplain landward from the dikes and levees. The
plans must provide for ponding areas or other measures to protect against flooding from internal drainage.
9. Fill For Construction: Fill shall be properly compacted and the slopes shall be properly protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other
acceptable method. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for removing the special flood hazard area
designation for certain structures properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA's requirements incorporate specific fill
compaction and side slope protection standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards shall be investigated prior to the
initiation of site preparation if a change of special flood hazard area designation will be requested.
10. Structural Floodproofing Standards: Alternative elevation methods other than the use of fill may be utilized to elevate a structure's lowest floor
above the regulatory flood protection elevation. These alternative methods may include the use of stilts, pilings, parallel walls, etc., or above grade,
enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages. The base or floor of an enclosed area shall be considered above grade and not a
structure's basement or lowest floor if: a) the enclosed area is above grade on at least one side of the structure; b) is designed to internally flood and
is constructed with flood resistant materials; and c) is used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage. The above noted alternative
elevation methods are subject to the following additional standards:
a. Design And Certification: The structure's design and as built condition shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as being
in compliance with the general design standards of the State Building Code and, specifically, that all electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and
air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or be designed to prevent
floodwater from entering or accumulating within these components during times of flooding.
b. Specific Standards For Above Grade, Enclosed Areas: Above grade, fully enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages shall be
designed to internally flood and the design plans must stipulate:
(1) The minimum area of openings in the walls where internal flooding is to be used as a floodproofing technique. When openings are placed in a
structure's walls to provide for entry of floodwaters to equalize pressures, the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1') above
grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters.
(2) That the enclosed area will be designed of flood resistant materials in accordance with the FP-3 or FP-4 classifications in the State Building
Code and shall be used solely for building access, parking of vehicles or storage.
c. Basements: Basements, as defined in section 11-2-2 of this title, shall be subject to the following:
(1) Residential basement construction shall not be allowed below the regulatory flood protection elevation.
(2) Nonresidential basements may be allowed below the regulatory flood protection elevation, provided the basement is structurally dry
floodproofed in accordance with subsection C10d of this section.
d. Areas Of Nonresidential Structures: All areas of nonresidential structures, including basements to be placed below the regulatory flood protection
elevation, shall be floodproofed in accordance with the structurally dry floodproofing classifications in the State Building Code. Structurally dry
floodproofing must meet the FP-1 or FP-2 floodproofing classification in the State Building Code and this shall require making the structure
watertight with the walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. Structures floodproofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 classification shall not be permitted.
(Prior Code § 20-94-7)
11. Control Plan For Fill: When, at any one time, more than one thousand (1,000) cubic yards of fill or other similar material is located on a parcel for
such activities as on site storage, landscaping, sand and gravel operations, land fills, roads, dredge spoil disposal or construction of flood control
works, an erosion/sedimentation control plan shall be submitted unless the community is enforcing a State approved shoreland management
ordinance. In the absence of a State approved shoreland ordinance, the plan shall clearly specify methods to be used to stabilize the fill on site for a
flood event at a minimum of the 100-year or regional flood event. The plan shall be prepared and certified by a registered professional engineering or
other qualified individual acceptable to the City Council. The plan may incorporate alternative procedures for removal of the material from the
floodplain if adequate flood warning time exists. (Prior Code § 20-94-7; amd. 2018 Code)
12. Storage Of Materials And Equipment:
a. The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or plant life is
prohibited. (Prior Code § 20-94-7)
b. Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning and in
accordance with a plan approved by the City Council. (Prior Code § 20-94-7; amd. 2018 Code)
11-94-8: SUBDIVISIONS:
A. Review Criteria: No land shall be subdivided which is unsuitable for the reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment
facilities. All subdivisions shall be in compliance with the provisions of title 10 of this Code. All lots within the floodplain districts shall contain a building
site at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. All subdivisions shall have water and sewage treatment facilities that comply with the
provisions of this chapter and have road access both to the subdivision and to the individual building sites no lower than two feet (2') below the
regulatory flood protection elevation, and the required elevation of all access roads shall be clearly labeled on all required subdivision drawings and
platting documents.
B. Removal Of Special Flood Hazard Area Designation: FEMA has established criteria for removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain
structures properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA's requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope
protection standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards shall be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a
change of special flood hazard area designation will be requested. (Prior Code § 20-94-8)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 481/497
11-94-9: PUBLIC UTILITIES, RAILROADS, ROADS AND BRIDGES:
A. Public Utilities: All public utilities and facilities such as gas, electrical, sewer, and water supply systems to be located in the floodplain shall be
floodproofed in accordance with the State Building Code or elevated to above the regulatory flood protection elevation.
B. Public Transportation Facilities: Railroad tracks, roads, and bridges to be located within the Floodway District shall comply with section 11-94-6 of this
chapter. Elevation to the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be provided where failure or interruption of these transportation facilities would result
in danger to the public health or safety or where such facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or auxiliary roads or railroads
may be constructed at a lower elevation where failure or interruption of transportation services would not endanger the public health or safety.
C. On Site Sewage Treatment And Water Supply Systems: Where public utilities are not provided:
1. On site water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems;
2. New or replacement on site sewage treatment systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into floodwaters and they shall not be subject to impairment or contamination during times of flooding. Any sewage
treatment system designed in accordance with the State's current Statewide standards for on site sewage treatment systems shall be determined to
be in compliance with this chapter. (Prior Code § 20-94-9)
11-94-10: MANUFACTURED HOMES AND PARKS; TRAVEL TRAILERS AND TRAVEL VEHICLES:
A. New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing manufactured home parks shall be subject to the provisions placed on subdivisions by
section 11-94-8 of this chapter and other applicable provisions of this chapter.
B. 1. The placement of new or replacement manufactured homes in existing manufactured home parks or on individual lots of record that are located in the
A1-30, AH and AE on the City's FIRM Map will be treated as a new structure and may be placed only if elevated in compliance with subsection 11-94-
7B1a of this chapter.
2. All manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement shall be
in addition to applicable State or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
C. Travel trailers and travel vehicles that do not meet the exemption criteria specified in subsection C1 of this section shall be subject to the provisions of
this chapter and as specifically spelled out in subsections C3 and C4 of this section.
1. Travel trailers and travel vehicles are exempt from the provisions of this chapter if they are placed in any of the areas listed in subsection C2 of this
section; and further, that they meet the following criteria:
a. Have current licenses required for highway use.
b. Are highway ready, meaning on wheels or with an internal jacking system.
c. Are attached to the site only with quick disconnect type utilities commonly used in campgrounds and trailer parks.
d. The travel trailer/travel vehicle does not have permanent structural type additions attached to it.
e. The travel trailer or travel vehicle and associated use must be permissible in any pre-existing, underlying zoning use district.
2. The following areas are exempted for placement of travel/recreational vehicles:
a. Individual lots or parcels of record.
b. Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds.
c. Existing condominium type associations.
3. Travel trailers and travel vehicles exempted in subsection C1 of this section lose this exemption when development occurs on the parcel exceeding
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a structural addition to the travel trailer/travel vehicle or an accessory structure such as a garage or storage
building. The travel trailer/travel vehicle and all additions and accessory structures shall then be treated as a new structure and shall be subject to
the elevation/floodproofing requirements and the use of land restrictions specified in sections 11-94-6 and 11-94-8 of this chapter.
4. New commercial travel trailer or travel vehicle parks or campgrounds and new residential type subdivisions and condominium associations and the
expansion of any existing similar use exceeding five (5) units or dwelling sites shall be subject to the following:
a. Any new or replacement travel trailer or travel vehicle will be allowed in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District, provided said trailer or vehicle and
its contents are placed on fill above the regulatory flood protection elevation and proper elevated road access to the site exists in accordance with
section 11-94-9 of this chapter. No fill placed in the floodway to meet the requirements of this chapter shall increase flood stages of the 100-year or
regional flood.
b. All new or replacement travel trailers or travel vehicles not meeting the criteria of subsection C4a of this section may, as an alternative, be allowed
as a conditional use if in accordance with the following provisions and the provisions of section 11-94-13 of this chapter. The applicant shall submit
an emergency plan for the safe evacuation of all vehicles and people during the 100-year flood. Said plan shall be prepared by a registered
engineer or other qualified individual and shall demonstrate that adequate time and personnel exist to carry out the evacuation. All attendant
sewage and water facilities for new or replacement travel trailers or other recreational vehicles shall be protected or constructed so as to not be
impaired or contaminated during times of flooding in accordance with subsection 11-94-9C of this chapter. (Prior Code § 20-94-10)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 482/497
11-94-11: ADMINISTRATION:
A. Zoning Administrator: The Zoning Administrator shall administer and enforce this chapter. If the Zoning Administrator finds a violation of the provisions
of this chapter, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the person responsible for such violation in accordance with the procedures stated in section 11-
94-15 of this chapter. (Prior Code § 20-94-11)
B. Administrative Permit Required: An administrative permit issued by the Zoning Administrator in conformity with the provisions of this chapter shall be
secured prior to the erection, addition, or alteration of any building, structure, or portion thereof; prior to the use or change of use of a building, structure
or land; prior to the change or extension of a nonconforming use; and prior to the placement of fill, excavation of materials, or the storage of materials
or equipment within the floodplain.
C. Application For Permit And Fee: An administrative permit shall be applied for from the Zoning Administrator in accordance with section 11-8-2 of this
title. Said application shall be made in duplicate and shall include the following where applicable: plans in duplicate drawn to scale, showing the nature,
location, dimensions, and elevations of the lot; existing or proposed structures, fill, or storage of materials; and the location of the foregoing in relation
to the stream channel.
D. Determination: Within ten (10) days after the application for an administrative permit, the City Engineer shall determine whether the change,
modification, or alteration conforms to the requirements of all applicable City and State regulations and ordinances. This time limit for determination of
acceptability shall be automatically extended should referral to, or permit from, another governmental jurisdiction be required. The applicant shall be
advised in writing of the City Engineer's determination and findings, and if acceptable, an administrative permit shall be granted.
E. Security:
1. Upon approval of an administrative permit, the City shall be provided with financial security prior to the issuing of building permits or initiation of work
on the proposed improvements or development. Said security shall guarantee conformance and compliance with the conditions of the use permit and
the codes and ordinances of the City.
2. The financial security shall be in the amount of the City Engineer's and/or City building official's estimated costs of labor and materials for the
proposed improvements or development.
3. The City shall hold the security until completion of the proposed improvements or development, at which time, a certificate of occupancy indicating
compliance with the administrative permit and codes and ordinances of the City may be issued by the City building official and said security released.
The applicant shall be required to submit certification by a registered professional engineer, registered architect, or registered land surveyor that the
finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Floodproofing measures shall be certified by
a registered professional engineer or registered architect. (Prior Code § 20-94-11; amd. 2018 Code)
F. Compliance With Provisions: No new structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be located, extended, converted or structurally
altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter.
Within the Floodway, Flood Fringe, and General Floodplain Districts, all uses not listed as permitted uses or conditional uses in sections 11-94-6 and
11-94-7, respectively, of this chapter, shall be prohibited. In addition, a caution is provided here that:
1. New manufactured homes, replacement manufactured homes and certain travel trailers and travel vehicles are subject to the general provisions of
this chapter and specifically section 11-94-10 of this chapter.
2. Modifications, additions, structural alterations or repair after damage to existing nonconforming structures and nonconforming uses of structures or
land are regulated by the general provisions of this chapter and specifically, section 11-94-15 of this chapter.
3. As built elevations for elevated or floodproofed structures shall be certified by ground surveys and floodproofing techniques shall be designed and
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as specified in the general provisions of this chapter and specifically as stated in this
section.
G. Certificate Of Zoning Compliance For A New, Altered Or Nonconforming Use: It shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or permit the use or occupancy of any
building or premises or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, altered, or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of
zoning compliance shall have been issued by the Zoning Administrator stating that the use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this
chapter.
H. Construction And Use As Provided On Applications, Plans, Permits, Variances And Certificates Of Zoning Compliance: Permits, conditional use
permits, or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of approved plans and applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and
construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Any use, arrangement, or construction
at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter, and punishable as provided by section 11-94-15 of this chapter.
I. Certification: The applicant shall be required to submit certification by a registered professional engineer, registered architect, or registered land surveyor
that the finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Floodproofing measures shall be
certified by a registered professional engineer or registered architect.
J. Record Of First Floor Elevation: The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new
structures and alterations or additions to existing structures in the floodplain. The Zoning Administrator shall also maintain a record of the elevation to
which structures or alterations and additions to structures are floodproofed. (Prior Code § 20-94-11)
11-94-12: AMENDMENTS AND VARIANCES:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 483/497
A. In addition to the procedures and requirements for amendments and variances as established in chapters 3 and 6 of this title, the Commissioner of
Natural Resources shall be given, at minimum, a ten (10) day notice of any public hearing, and a review and written report must be obtained from the
Minnesota Department of Natural Resources and any other governmental body or commission having jurisdiction for such changes, additions or
modifications affecting an FP Floodplain Overlay District. The Commissioner of Natural Resources shall be advised in writing of all decisions made
regarding variances and amendments.
B. No variance or amendment shall have the effect of allowing a prohibited use within an FP District, permit a lesser degree of flood protection than the
established flood protection elevation, and/or permit standards lower than those required under applicable State law.
C. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant for a variance that:
1. The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance.
Construction below the 100-year or regional flood level increases risks to life and property.
2. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions. The City shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including
justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its annual or biannual report submitted to the Administrator of the National Flood
Insurance Program. (Prior Code § 20-94-12)
11-94-13: CONDITIONAL USES:
In addition to requirements established for a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by chapter 4 of this title, the City
Engineer shall determine whether the proposed conditional use location is within a floodway or flood fringe area. Upon such determination, the applicable
conditions, provisions and restrictions shall be imposed. The Commissioner of Natural Resources shall be given, at minimum, ten (10) days' notice of the
required public hearing and shall be advised in writing of decisions made concerning any conditional use. (Prior Code § 20-94-13; amd. 2018 Code)
A. Procedures And Standards For Evaluating Proposed Conditional Uses:
1. Information Required: Subject to other requirements which may be imposed by this chapter, upon receipt of an application for a conditional use
permit for a use within the Floodplain District, the applicant shall be required to furnish such of the following information as is deemed necessary for
the determination of the regulatory flood protection elevation and whether the proposed use is in the Floodway or the Flood Fringe:
a. A typical valley cross section showing the channel of the stream, elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the channel, cross sectional areas
to be occupied by the proposed development, and high water information.
b. Plan (surface view) at a scale deemed acceptable to the City showing the nature, locations, dimensions, and elevation of the lot; contours of the
ground; fill; storage of materials; floodproofing measures; the arrangement of all proposed and existing structures on the site; locations and
elevations of streets; existing and proposed utilities septic tanks or water wells; existing land uses and vegetation upstream and downstream; soil
type, and the relationship of the above to the location of the channel.
c. Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line of the stream for at least five hundred feet (500') in either direction from the
proposed development. (Prior Code § 20-94-13)
2. Supplementary Considerations: In acting upon the conditional use application, the City Council shall consider all relevant factors specified in chapter
4 of this title in addition to: (Prior Code § 20-94-13; amd. 2018 Code)
a. The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments.
b. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or downstream to the injury of others or they may block bridges, culverts, or other
hydraulic structures.
c. The water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions.
d. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
e. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community.
f. The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.
g. The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use.
h. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
i. The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and Floodplain Management Program for the area.
j. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.
k. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site.
l. Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this chapter. (Prior Code § 20-94-13)
B. Conditions Attached To Conditional Use Permits: Upon consideration of the factors listed in subsection A of this section and the purposes of this
chapter, the City Council may attach such conditions to the granting of conditional use permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this
chapter. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following: (Prior Code § 20-94-13; amd. 2018 Code)
1. Modification of waste treatment and water supply facilities.
2. Limitations on period of use, occupancy, and operation.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 484/497
3. Limitation of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
4. Requirements for construction of channel modifications, compensatory storage, dikes, levees, and other protective measures.
5. Floodproofing measures, in accordance with the State Building Code and this chapter. The applicant shall submit a plan or document certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection elevation and
associated flood factors for the particular area. (Prior Code § 20-94-13)
11-94-14: NONCONFORMITIES:
See chapter 15, "Nonconformities", of this title. (Prior Code § 20-94-14)
11-94-15: PENALTY:
See chapter 10, "Administration - Enforcement And Penalty", of this title. (Prior Code § 20-94-15)
11-94-16: AMENDMENTS:
A. The floodplain designation on the Official Zoning Map shall not be removed from floodplain areas unless it can be shown that the designation is in error
or that the area has been filled to or above the elevation of the regional flood and is contiguous to lands outside the floodplain. Special exceptions to
this rule may be allowed by the Commissioner of Natural Resources if determined that, through other measures, lands are adequately protected for the
intended use.
B. All amendments to this chapter, including amendments to the Official Zoning Map, shall be submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of Natural
Resources prior to adoption. Changes in the Official Zoning Map shall meet the FEMA's Technical Conditions and Criteria and must receive prior FEMA
approval before adoption. The Commissioner of Natural Resources shall be given ten (10) days' written notice of all hearings to consider an
amendment to this chapter, and said notice shall include a draft of the title amendment or technical study under consideration. (Prior Code § 20-94-16)
Chapter 95
WSRR WILD AND SCENIC RECREATIONAL RIVER DISTRICT
11-95-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the WSRR Wild and Scenic Recreational River District is to protect and preserve the scenic, recreational, natural and historical values of
the Mississippi River in the City by carefully controlling development of this river corridor consistent with the State Wild and Scenic River Act and
Minnesota Rules 6105.0010 to 6105.0250 and 6105.0800 to 6105.0960. (Prior Code § 20-95-1)
11-95-2: DESIGNATION OF DISTRICT:
In order to preserve and protect the Mississippi River and its adjacent land which possess scenic, recreational, natural and historical values, the
Mississippi River in the City has been given a recreational river classification, and lands adjacent to the river are hereby designated by land use districts,
the boundaries of which are based upon the Mississippi River Management Plan, Minnesota Rules 6105.0800 to 6105.0960.
The boundaries of the Mississippi River WSRR Wild and Scenic Recreational River District are shown on the Otsego Zoning Map which is made part of
this title. In case of conflict between the map and the property descriptions and boundaries in Minnesota Rules, Parts 6105.0910 and 6105.0950, the latter
shall prevail. (Prior Code § 20-95-2)
11-95-3: DISTRICT APPLICATION:
The WSRR Wild and Scenic Recreational River District shall be applied to and superimposed as an overlay upon all zoning districts as contained herein
as existing or amended by the zoning ordinance text and official zoning map. The regulations and requirements imposed by the WSRR District shall be in
addition to those established for the base zoning districts which jointly apply. Under the joint application of standards, the more restrictive requirements
shall apply and any person contemplating development in the WSRR or Wild and Scenic River District should review the base district requirements with
the Zoning Administrator to determine those which will apply. (Prior Code § 20-95-3)
11-95-4: SUBSTANDARD LOTS:
Any lot of record established on or before August 1, 1978, that does not meet the dimensional requirements of this chapter may be allowed as a building
site subject to approval of a conditional use permit; provided, that:
A. The use is allowed in the WSRR District and base zoning district.
B. If two (2) or more contiguous lots were under common ownership on August 1, 1978, any individual lot that does not meet the minimum lot area or lot
width requirements of this chapter shall not be considered as a separate lot of record for purposes of sale or development if the total lot area or lot
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 485/497
width of two (2) or more abutting lots under common ownership is less than sixty percent (60%) of the minimum lot area or lot width requirements of
this chapter, and the nonconforming lot shall be combined with the abutting lot(s) under the same ownership so that the combination of lots will equal
one or more lots, each meeting the lot requirements of this chapter to the greatest extent practical.
C. The lot is at least twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in area.
D. The proposed use shall comply with all applicable setback requirements of the WSRR District and base zoning district.
E. Sewage treatment is provided as required by title 8, chapter 3 of this Code. (Prior Code § 20-95-4)
11-95-5: PERMITTED USES:
The permitted uses shall be subject to other more restrictive limitations which may be imposed by this title. The following relate to permitted uses in the
WSRR District:
A. Within the WSRR District within Sections 10, 11, 13, 14, and 15, Township 121 North, Range 24 West and Sections 7 and 18, Township 121 North,
Range 23 West, (Subdistrict A), the following are permitted uses:
1. Agricultural uses.
2. Essential services.
3. Forestry uses.
4. Governmental campgrounds, subject to management plan specifications.
5. Governmental resource management for improving fish and wildlife habitat; wildlife management areas; nature areas; accessory roads.
6. Other governmental open space recreational uses, subject to management plan specifications.
7. Private roads and minor public streets.
8. Public accesses, road access type with boat launching facilities subject to management plan specifications.
9. Public accesses, trail access type, subject to management plan specifications.
10. Sewage treatment systems.
11. Signs approved by Federal, State, or local government which are necessary for public health and safety and signs indicating areas that are
available or not available for public use.
12. Signs not visible from the river that are not specified in the above entry.
13. Single-family residential uses.
14. Temporary docks.
If the base zoning is more restrictive, those more restrictive provisions apply. All uses not listed as permitted or conditional uses shall not be allowed.
B. Within the WSRR District west of State Highway 101 within Sections 14, 23, 26, and Government Lot 1 and the East 1/2 of the East 1/2 of the Southeast
1/4 of Section 15, Township 121 North, Range 23 West (Subdistrict B), the following are permitted uses: (Prior Code § 20-95-5)
1. Those permitted and accessory use designations as defined and allowed in the base zoning districts set forth on the Otsego Zoning Map, as
amended and classified as B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, I-1, I-2, I-3, INS and PUD, established by chapter 50 of this title. These land use districts and uses are
in conformance with the criteria for urban river class standards in Minnesota Rules parts 6120.3100 and 6120.3200. (Prior Code § 20-95-5; amd.
2018 Code)
C. Within the WSRR District within Sections 10, 14, 15, 16, 17, 23, 25, 26, and 36, Township 121 North, Range 23 West not listed within subsection B of
this section, and excluding that part of Government lots 1 and 2 of Section 14, Government lot 1 of Section 23, and the southeast quarter of Section 15,
Township 121 North, Range 23 West, lying beyond 300 feet of the ordinary high water level of the Mississippi River (Subdistrict C), the following are
permitted uses: (Prior Code § 20-95-5)
1. Those permitted and accessory use designations as defined and allowed in the base zoning districts set forth on the Otsego Zoning Map, as
amended and classified as A-1, A-2, R-C, R-1, R-2 and PUD as established by chapter 50 of this title. These land use districts and uses are in
conformance with the criteria for urban river class standards in Minnesota Rules parts 6120.3100 and 6120.3200. (Prior Code § 20-95-5; amd. 2018
Code)
11-95-6: CONDITIONAL USES:
An application for a conditional use shall be subject to the standards and criteria and evaluation procedures specified in chapter 4 of this title and subject
to other more restrictive limitations which may be imposed by this title. The following uses may be allowed as a conditional use in the WSRR District:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 486/497
A. Within the WSRR District within Sections 10, 11, 13, 14, and 15, Township 121 North, Range 24 West and Sections 7 and 18, Township 121 North,
Range 23 West, (Subdistrict A), the following are conditional uses:
1. Private campgrounds, subject to management plan specifications.
2. Other private open space recreational uses, subject to management plan specifications.
3. Public roads, subject to the provisions in section 11-95-14 of this chapter.
4. Underground mining that does not involve surface excavation in the land use district.
5. Utility transmission power lines and pipelines subject to the provisions of section 11-95-13 of this chapter.
If the base zoning is more restrictive, those more restrictive provisions apply. All uses not listed as permitted or conditional uses shall not be allowed.
B. Within the WSRR District west of State Highway 101 within Sections 14, 23, 26, and Government Lot 1 and the East 1/2 of the East 1/2 of the Southeast
1/4 of Section 15, Township 121 North, Range 23 West (Subdistrict B), the following are conditional uses: (Prior Code § 20-95-6)
1. Those conditional and interim use designations as defined and allowed in the base zoning districts set forth on the Otsego Zoning Map, as amended
and classified as B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, I-1, I-2, I-3, INS and PUD, established by chapter 50 of this title. These land use districts and uses are in
conformance with the criteria for urban river class standards in Minnesota Rules, parts 6120.3100 and 6120.3200. (Prior Code § 20-95-6; amd. 2018
Code)
C. Within the WSRR District within Sections 10, 14, 15, 16, 17, 23, 25, 26, and 36, Township 121 North, Range 23 West not listed in subsection B of this
section, and excluding that part of Government lots 1 and 2 of Section 14, Government lot 1 of Section 23, and the southeast quarter of Section 15,
Township 121 North, Range 23 West, lying beyond 300 feet of the ordinary high water level of the Mississippi River (Subdistrict C), the following are
conditional uses: (Prior Code § 20-95-6)
1. Those conditional and interim use designations as defined and allowed in the base zoning districts set forth on the Otsego Zoning Map, as amended
and classified as A-1, A-2, R-C, R-1, R-2 and PUD as established by chapter 50 of this title. These land use districts and uses are in conformance
with the criteria for urban river class standards in Minnesota Rules parts 6120.3100 and 6120.3200. (Prior Code § 20-95-6; amd. 2018 Code)
D. Structures associated with permitted or conditional uses, located upon slopes greater than twelve percent (12%); provided, that:
1. The structure is screened from view of the river and adjacent shorelands in a manner judged acceptable by the City.
2. An adequate septic system and well can be established on the site and which, if the use is approved, shall be subject to applicable provisions of this
Code.
3. Appropriate erosion control measures are undertaken as determined necessary by the City.
4. If applicable, vegetative and/or clear cutting permits are obtained for the proposed use in accordance with sections 11-95-10 and 11-95-11 of this
chapter.
5. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied. (Prior Code § 20-95-6)
11-95-7: RECREATIONAL RIVER LAND USE SUBDISTRICTS; STANDARDS, LOT DIMENSIONS, SETBACKS AND
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE REQUIREMENTS:
A. The following areas of the City are covered by this section:
1. All areas of the Wild and Scenic Recreational River District within the City. (Prior Code § 20-95-7)
B. If more restrictive provisions or performance standards are set forth in any underlying zoning district as delineated on the Otsego Zoning Map, as
amended, those more restrictive standards shall apply. For purposes of this section, zoning districts shall be defined as established by section 11-50-1
of this title. (Prior Code § 20-95-7; amd. 2018 Code)
C. The WSRR District within Sections 10, 11, 13, 14, and 15, Township 121 North, Range 24 West and Sections 7 and 18, Township 121 North, Range 23
West, (Subdistrict A) shall conform to the provisions of Minnesota Rules parts 6105.0010 to 6105.0250 and the following standards. Where these
standards conflict with the standards of the base zoning districts, the more restrictive standard shall prevail.
1. Lot Requirements:
a. Lot area: Not less than two and one-half (21/2) acres.
b. Lot width at the water line and building line: Two hundred feet (200').
2. Principal Structure Setbacks:
a. Setback from ordinary high water level of Mississippi River: One hundred feet (100').
b. Bluffline: Thirty feet (30').
c. Front yard:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 487/497
Road Class
Setbacks
From Centerline
Setbacks From
Right-Of-Way Lines
State/Federal highway 130 feet 65 feet
County road 130 feet 65 feet
Local road 65 feet 35 feet
Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more roads or highways which bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall project
beyond the front yard line of either road.
d. Side yards: Ten feet (10').
e. Rear yard: Fifty feet (50').
3. Accessory Structure Setbacks: Accessory structure setbacks as regulated by section 11-18-2 of this title, and the following additional structure
setbacks:
a. Setback from ordinary high water level of Mississippi River: One hundred feet (100').
b. Bluffline: Thirty feet (30').
D. The WSRR District west of State Highway 101 within Sections 14, 23, 26, and Government Lot 1 and the East 1/2 of the East 1/2 of the Southeast 1/4 of
Section 15, Township 121 North, Range 23 West (Subdistrict B) shall conform to the provisions and administrative procedures of Minnesota Rules
parts 6105.0010 to 6105.0090; 6105.0100, subparts 1 and 2; urban river class standards in 6120.3100, 6120.3200, and 6120.3300, subpart 2b;
6120.3300, subparts 7 to 12; 6120.3800; and 6105.0110 to 6105.0250 with the following exceptions to the provisions of these parts. Where these
standards conflict with the standards of the base zoning districts, the more restrictive standard shall prevail.
1. Lot Requirements:
Nonsewered Sewered
Lot area:
Riparian 1 acre 20,000 sq . ft.
Nonriparian 1 acre 15,000 sq . ft.
Lot width at the water line and building line 150 feet 75 feet
2. Principal Structure Setbacks:
Nonsewered Sewered
a. Setback from ordinary high water level of Mississippi River 100 feet 75 feet
b. Bluffline 30 feet 30 feet
c. Front yard:
Road Class
Setbacks
From Centerline
Setbacks From
Right-Of-Way Lines
State/Federal highway 130 feet 65 feet
County road 130 feet 65 feet
Local road 65 feet 35 feet
Where a lot is located at the intersection of 2 or more roads or highways which bound 2 or more sides of the lot, no building shall project beyond
the front yard line of either road.
Nonsewered Sewered
d. Side yards 10 feet 10 feet
e. Rear yard 50 feet 30 feet
3. Accessory Structure Setbacks: Accessory structure setbacks as regulated by section 11-18-2 of this title, and the following additional structure
setbacks:
Nonsewered Sewered
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 488/497
Setback from ordinary high water level of Mississippi River 100 feet 75 feet
Bluffline 30 feet 30 feet
4. Impervious Surface Requirements: Impervious surface coverage requirements in Minnesota Rules, part 6120.3300, subpart 11B, may be varied
without a variance if all of the following criteria and standards are met:
a. All structures and impervious surfaces are located on slopes less than twelve percent (12%). The physical alteration of slopes shall not be
permitted for the purpose of overcoming this limitation.
b. The site development is designed, implemented, and maintained using the most applicable combination of comprehensive practices that prevent
flooding, pollutant, erosion and sedimentation problems consistent with Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas, Best Management Practices for
Minnesota, Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, October 1989, or as amended, which is incorporated by reference, available at the State Law
Library and not subject to frequent change.
c. A site development, maintenance, and inspection plan incorporating the comprehensive practices in subsection D4b of this section, is submitted
and approved by the City prior to the issuance of an impervious surfacing permit and the plan is implemented. (Prior Code § 20-95-6)
d. An impervious surfacing permit is granted by the City which imposes the conditions of section 11-95-12 of this chapter. The City may impose
additional conditions if determined necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
E. The WSRR District within Sections 10, 14, 15, 16, 17, 23, 25, 26 and 36, Township 121 North, Range 23 West not listed in subsection D of this section
and excluding that part of Government Lots 1 and 2 of Section 14, Government Lot 1 of Section 23, and the southeast quarter of Section 15, Township
121 North, Range 23 West, lying beyond three hundred (300) feet of the ordinary high water level of the Mississippi River (Subdistrict C) shall conform
to the provisions and administrative procedures listed in subsection D of this section with the following exceptions to the provisions of those parts.
Where these standards conflict with the standards of the base zoning districts, the more restrictive standard shall prevail.
1. Lot Requirements:
Nonsewered Sewered
Lot area 21/2 acres 21/2 acres
Lot width at the water line and building line 150 feet 75 feet
2. Principal Structure Setbacks:
Nonsewered Sewered
a. Setback from ordinary high water level of Otsego Creek and Mississippi River 100 feet 75 feet
b. Bluffline 30 feet 30 feet
c. Front yard:
Road Class
Setbacks
From Centerline
Setbacks From
Right-Of-Way Lines
State/Federal highway 130 feet 65 feet
County road 130 feet 65 feet
Local road 65 feet 35 feet
Where a lot is located at the intersection of 2 or more roads or highways which bound 2 or more sides of the lot, no building shall project beyond
the front yard line of either road.
Nonsewered Sewered
d. Side yards 10 feet 10 feet
e. Rear yard 50 feet 30 feet
3. Accessory Structure Setbacks: Accessory structure setbacks as regulated by section 11-18-2 of this title, and the following additional structure
setbacks:
Nonsewered Sewered
Setback from ordinary high water level of Otsego Creek and Mississippi River 100 feet 75 feet
Bluffline 30 feet 30 feet
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 489/497
4. Impervious Surface Requirements: Maximum total lot area covered by impervious surface shall be twenty five percent (25%) and not subject to
variability. (Prior Code § 20-95-7)
11-95-8: BUILDING HEIGHT:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in the WSRR District:
A. The maximum height of principal structures shall not exceed thirty five feet (35').
B. The maximum height of accessory structures shall not exceed thirty five feet (35'). (Prior Code § 20-95-8)
11-95-9: ADDITIONAL STRUCTURE AND USE STANDARDS:
A. Placement Of Structures: Structures shall not be located on slopes greater than twelve percent (12%) except by conditional use permit as provided in
subsection 11-95-6D of this chapter.
B. Maximum Density: The maximum density in the WSRR District shall not exceed one dwelling unit per lot.
C. Multiple Unit Dwelling Structures: Subdivisions of duplexes, triplexes, and quads shall also meet the following standards:
1. Each building must be set back at least two hundred feet (200') from the ordinary high water level;
2. Each building must have common sewage treatment and water systems in one location and serve all dwelling units in the building; and
3. Watercraft docking facilities for each lot must be centralized in one location and serve all dwelling units in the building.
D. Stormwater Management: Subject to other more restrictive limitations which may be imposed by this title or other provisions of this Code, the following
general and specific standards shall apply:
1. General Standards:
a. When possible, existing natural drainageways, wetlands, and vegetated soil surfaces shall be used to convey, store, filter, and retain stormwater
runoff before discharge to public waters.
b. Development shall be planned and conducted in a manner that will minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities, erosion potential, and
reduce and delay runoff volumes. Disturbed areas must be stabilized and protected as soon as possible and facilities or methods used to retain
sediment on the site.
c. When development density, topographic features, and soil and vegetation conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle stormwater runoff
using natural features and vegetation, various types of constructed facilities such as diversions, settling basins, skimming devices, dikes,
waterways, and ponds may be used. Preference shall be given to designs using surface drainage, vegetation, and infiltration rather than buried
pipes and humanmade materials and facilities.
2. Specific Standards:
a. When constructed facilities are used for stormwater management, documentation shall be provided by a qualified individual that they are designed
and installed consistent with the field office technical guide of the local Soil and Water Conservation Districts.
b. New constructed stormwater outfalls to public waters shall provide for filtering or settling of suspended solids and skimming of surface debris
before discharge.
E. Special Provisions For Commercial, Industrial, Public/Semipublic, Agricultural, Forestry And Extractive Uses And Mining Of Metallic Minerals And Peat:
1. Standards For Commercial, Industrial, Public And Semipublic Uses:
a. Surface water oriented commercial uses and industrial, public, or semipublic uses with similar needs to have access to and use of public waters
may be located on parcels or lots with frontage on public waters. Subject to other more restrictive limitations which may be imposed by this title,
those uses with water oriented needs shall meet the following standards:
(1) In addition to meeting impervious coverage limits, setbacks, and other zoning standards in this title, the uses shall be designed to incorporate
topographic and vegetative screening of parking areas and structures;
(2) Uses that require short term watercraft mooring for patrons must centralize these facilities and design them to avoid obstructions of navigation
and to be the minimum size necessary to meet the need; and
(3) Uses that depend on patrons arriving by watercraft may use signs and lighting to convey needed information to the public, subject to the
following general standards:
(A) No advertising signs or supporting facilities for signs may be placed in or upon public waters. Signs conveying information or safety
messages may be placed in or on public waters by a public authority or under a permit issued by the County Sheriff;
(B) Signs may be placed, when necessary, within the shore impact zone if they are designed and sized to be the minimum necessary to convey
needed information. They shall only convey the location and name of the establishment and the general types of goods or services available.
The signs shall not contain other detailed information such as product brands and prices, shall not be located higher than ten feet (10') above
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 490/497
the ground, and shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in size. If illuminated by artificial lights, the lights shall be shielded or directed to
prevent illumination out across public waters; and
(C) Other outside lighting may be located within the shore impact zone or over public waters if it is used primarily to illuminate potential safety
hazards and is shielded or otherwise directed to prevent direct illumination out across public waters. This does not preclude use of navigational
lights.
b. Uses without water oriented needs must be located on lots or parcels without public waters frontage, or, if located on lots or parcels with public
waters frontage, must either be set back double the normal ordinary high water level setback or be substantially screened from view from the water
by vegetation or topography, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.
2. Agriculture Use Standards:
a. General cultivation farming, grazing, nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting are permitted uses if steep slopes
and shore and bluff impact zones are maintained in permanent vegetation or operated under an approved conservation plan (resource
management systems) consistent with the field office technical guides of the local Soil and Water Conservation Districts or the Natural Resources
Conservation Service, as provided by a qualified individual or agency.
b. The shore impact zone for parcels with permitted agricultural land uses is equal to a line parallel to and fifty feet (50') from the ordinary high water
level. The bluff impact zone is equal to the bluff and land located within twenty feet (20') from a bluffline.
c. Animal feedlots shall meet the requirements of this title, as well as the following standards:
(1) New feedlots shall not be located in the WSRR District; and
(2) Modifications or expansions to existing feedlots that are located within three hundred feet (300') of the ordinary high water level or within the
bluff impact zone are allowed if they do not further encroach into the existing ordinary high water level setback or encroach on bluff impact
zones.
d. Use of fertilizer, pesticides, or animal wastes within the WSRR District shall be done in such a way as to minimize impact on the shore impact
zone or public water by proper application or use of earth or vegetation.
3. Forest Management Standards:
a. The harvesting of timber and associated reforestation must be conducted consistent with the provisions of the Minnesota Nonpoint Source
Pollution Assessment-Forestry and the provisions of Water Quality in Forest Management "Best Management Practices in Minnesota".
b. Use of fertilizer, pesticides, or animal wastes within the WSRR District shall be done in such a way as to minimize impact on the shore impact
zone or public water by proper application or use of earth or vegetation.
4. Extractive Use Standards:
a. Site Development And Restoration Plan: An extractive use site development and restoration plan shall be developed, approved, and followed over
the course of operation of the site. The plan shall address dust, noise, possible pollutant discharges, hours and duration of operation, and
anticipated vegetation and topographic alterations. It must also identify actions to be taken during operation to mitigate adverse environmental
impacts, particularly erosion, and shall clearly explain how the site will be rehabilitated after extractive activities end.
b. Setbacks For Processing Machinery: Processing machinery shall be located consistent with setback standards for structures from the ordinary
high water level and from blufflines.
5. Mining Of Metallic Minerals And Peat: Mining of metallic minerals and peat, as defined in Minnesota Statutes sections 93.44 to 93.51, shall be a
permitted use provided the provisions of Minnesota Statutes sections 93.44 to 93.51 are satisfied. (Prior Code § 20-95-9)
11-95-10: VEGETATIVE CUTTING:
Selective cutting of trees in excess of four inches (4") in diameter at four feet (4') in height within the WSRR District and within one hundred feet (100') of
the ordinary high water level and twenty feet (20') landward of the bluff line shall be subject to the following:
A. Clear cutting, except for any authorized public services such as roads and essential services, shall not be permitted. Clear cutting for essential services,
such as telephone lines, substations, and related structures, shall require a special permit issued by the City Council in accordance with chapter 33 of
this title.
B. Cutting is spaced in several cutting operations and a continuous tree cover is maintained, uninterrupted by large openings. In cases where the existing
tree cover has been interrupted by large openings in the past, selective cutting may be performed so as to maintain a continuous tree cover in the
remaining wooded areas.
C. The above cutting provisions shall not be deemed to prevent:
1. The removal of diseased or insect infested trees, or of rotten or damaged trees that present safety hazards.
2. Pruning understory vegetation, shrubs, plants, bushes, grasses, or from harvesting crops, or cutting suppressed trees or trees less than four inches
(4") in diameter at four feet (4') in height.
D. Except in cases where vegetative cutting has been approved as part of a subdivision or other development, any person proposing vegetative cutting
shall apply to the City for a vegetative cutting permit. Application forms for the permit shall be provided by the Zoning Administrator and require the
following information:
1. The name and address of applicant.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 491/497
2. The name and address of the owner of the land.
3. The address and legal description of the land involved.
4. The purpose of the vegetative cutting.
5. A description of the type and amount of vegetation to be cut.
6. The highway, street, or streets, or other public ways in the City upon and along which any material is to be hauled or carried.
7. An estimate of the time required to complete the vegetative cutting.
8. A site plan showing the proposed cutting area.
9. A plan or statement demonstrating that the activity will in no way jeopardize the public health, safety and welfare.
10. A statement that the applicant will comply with all conditions prescribed by the City. (Prior Code § 20-95-10)
11-95-11: CLEAR CUTTING RESTRICTIONS:
Clear cutting within the WSRR District shall be subject to the following standards and criteria:
A. Clear cutting shall not be used as a cutting method where soil, slope, or other watershed conditions are fragile and subject to injury.
B. Clear cutting shall be conducted only where clear cut blocks, patches, or strips are, in all cases, shaped and blended with the natural terrain.
C. The size of clear cut blocks, patches, or strips shall be kept at the minimum necessary.
D. Where feasible, all clear cuts shall be conducted between September 15 and May 15. If natural regeneration will not result in adequate vegetative
cover, areas in which clear cutting is conducted shall be replanted to prevent erosion and to maintain the aesthetic quality of the area. Where feasible,
replanting shall be performed in the same spring or the following spring.
E. Except in cases where clear cutting has been approved as part of a subdivision or other development, any person proposing clear cutting shall apply to
the City for a clear cutting permit. Application forms for the permit shall be provided by the Zoning Administrator and require the following information:
1. The name and address of applicant.
2. The name and address of the owner of the land.
3. The address and legal description of the land involved.
4. The purpose of the clear cutting.
5. A description of the type and amount of clear cutting to be conducted.
6. The highway, street, or streets, or other public ways in the City upon and along which any material is to be hauled or carried.
7. An estimate of the time required to complete the vegetative cutting.
8. A site plan showing the proposed cutting area.
9. A plan or statement demonstrating that the activity will in no way jeopardize the public health, safety and welfare.
10. A statement that the applicant will comply with all conditions prescribed by the City. (Prior Code § 20-95-11)
11-95-12: GRADING AND FILLING:
Any grading and filling conducted within the WSRR District shall require a permit and shall comply with the following:
A. The provisions of chapters 23 and/or 24 of this title are satisfactorily met.
B. Grading and filling of the natural topography which is not accessory to a permitted or conditional use shall not be allowed.
C. Grading and filling of the natural topography which is accessory to a permitted or conditional use shall not be conducted without a grading and filling
permit from the zoning authority.
D. Grading and filling of the natural topography which is accessory to a permitted or conditional use shall be performed in a manner which minimizes earth
moving, erosion, tree clearing and the destruction of natural amenities.
E. Grading and filling of the natural topography shall also meet the following standards:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 492/497
1. The smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for as short a time as feasible.
2. Temporary ground cover such as mulch is used and permanent ground cover such as sod is planted.
3. Methods to prevent erosion and to trap sediment are employed.
4. Fill is established to accepted engineering standards. (Prior Code § 20-95-12)
F. Excavation of material from, or filling in the river, or construction of any permanent structures or navigational obstructions therein is prohibited, unless
authorized by a permit from the Commissioner of Natural Resources pursuant to Minnesota Statutes section 103G.245. (Prior Code § 20-95-12; amd.
2018 Code)
G. Draining or filling of wetlands as defined by this title shall be expressly prohibited. (Prior Code § 20-95-12)
11-95-13: UTILITY TRANSMISSION LINES:
All utility transmission crossings of land within the WSRR District shall require a conditional use permit. The construction of such transmission services
shall be subject to the standards and criteria of Minnesota Rules parts 6105.0170 and 6105.0180. (Prior Code § 20-95-13)
11-95-14: PUBLIC ROADS:
In addition to such permits as may be required by Minnesota Statutes section 103G.245, a conditional use permit shall be required for any construction or
reconstruction of new public roads within the WSRR District. Such construction or reconstruction shall be subject to the standards and criteria of
Minnesota Rules 6105.0190 and 6105.0200. A conditional use permit shall not be required for marginal access streets which are intended to serve
primarily as an access to abutting properties. (Prior Code § 20-95-14)
11-95-15: LAND SUITABILITY:
No land shall be subdivided which is determined by the City or the Commissioner of Natural Resources to be unsuitable by reason of flooding, inadequate
drainage, soil and rock formation with severe limitations for development, severe erosion potential, unfavorable topography, inadequate water supply or
sewage treatment capabilities or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety, or welfare of the future residents of the proposed subdivision or
the City of Otsego. (Prior Code § 20-95-15; amd. 2018 Code)
11-95-16: NONCONFORMING USES:
All uses in existence prior to the effective date of enactment of the Wild and Scenic Recreational River District ordinance which are lawfully permitted uses
within the Wild and Scenic Recreational River District, but do not meet the minimum lot area, setbacks or other dimensional requirements of this title shall
be allowed to continue subject to the following conditions and exceptions:
A. Any structural alteration or addition to a nonconforming use which will increase the substandard dimensions shall not be allowed.
B. Substandard signs shall be gradually eliminated over a period of time, not to exceed five (5) years from the date of enactment or amendment of the Wild
and Scenic Recreational River ordinance. (Prior Code § 20-95-16)
11-95-17: SEWAGE TREATMENT:
A. General Provisions:
1. Any premises intended for human occupancy must be provided with an adequate method of sewage treatment.
2. Publicly owned sewer systems must be used where available.
3. Where public systems are not available, all private sewage treatment systems must meet or exceed applicable rules of the Minnesota Department of
Health, the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, specifically chapter 7080 for individual sewage treatment systems, and any other applicable City
standards.
B. Setbacks: On site sewage treatment system setbacks from the ordinary high water level of the Mississippi River and Otsego Creek must be a minimum
of seventy five feet (75').
C. Nonconforming Sewage Treatment Systems: A nonconforming sewage treatment system not meeting the requirements of applicable rules of the
Minnesota Department of Health, the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, specifically chapter 7080 for individual sewage treatment systems, and any
other applicable local government standards shall be brought into conformity or discontinued within five (5) years of the date of enactment of the Wild
and Scenic Recreational River District ordinance. (Prior Code § 20-95-17)
11-95-18: WATER SUPPLY:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 493/497
Any public or private supply of water for domestic purposes must meet or exceed standards for water quality of the Minnesota Department of Health and
the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency and administrative procedures of this title. Private wells must be located, constructed, maintained, and sealed in
accordance with or in a more thorough manner than the Water Well Construction Code of the Minnesota Department of Health. (Prior Code § 20-95-18)
11-95-19: PLATS:
Copies of all plats within the Wild and Scenic Recreational River District shall be forwarded to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten (10) days
of approval by the City. Approval of a plat which is inconsistent with this section is permissible only if the detrimental impact of the inconsistency is more
than overcome by other protective characteristics. (Prior Code § 20-95-19; amd. 2018 Code)
11-95-20: PLANNED CLUSTER OR UNIT DEVELOPMENT:
A planned cluster development or planned unit development may be allowed only when the proposed clustering provides a better means of preserving
agricultural land, open space, woods, scenic views, wetlands, and other features of the natural environment than traditional subdivision development.
Smaller lot sizes may be allowed as exceptions to this title for planned cluster or unit developments, provided: (Prior Code § 20-95-20)
A. Preliminary plans are approved by the Commissioner of Natural Resources prior to their enactment by the City Council. (Prior Code § 20-95-20; amd.
2018 Code)
B. Central sewage facilities are installed which meet the standards, criteria, rules or regulations of the Minnesota Department of Health and the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency.
C. Open space is preserved. This may be accomplished through the use of restrictive deed covenants, public dedications, granting of scenic easements,
or other equally effective and permanent methods.
D. There is not more than one centralized boat launching facility for each cluster.
E. The only uses that shall be allowed within the development are those allowed in sections 11-95-5 and 11-95-6 of this chapter for the applicable
geographic subdistrict.
F. For planned cluster or unit developments within the WSRR District in Sections 10, 14, 15, 16, 17, 23, 25, 26, and 36, Township 121 North, Range 23
West, (Subdistricts B and C), the provisions of section 11-92-17 of this title shall be satisfied.
G. Under the joint application of standards, the more restrictive provisions of this title shall apply. (Prior Code § 20-95-20)
11-95-21: VARIANCES:
The grant of a variance requires the presence of the following conditions:
A. The strict enforcement of the land use controls will result in unnecessary hardship.
B. Granting of the variance is not contrary to the purpose and intent of this chapter and is consistent with the Minnesota Rules parts 6105.0010 to
6105.0250 and 6105.0800 to 6105.0960.
C. There are exceptional circumstances unique to the subject property which were not created by the landowner.
D. Granting of the variance will not allow any use which is neither a permitted or conditional use in the land use district in which the subject property is
located.
E. Granting of the variance will not alter the essential character of the locality.
F. Exception: Where a setback pattern from the ordinary high water level has already been established on both sides of a proposed building site, the
setback of the proposed structure may be allowed to conform to that pattern. This subsection shall apply only to lots which do not meet the minimum lot
width requirements of this title. (Prior Code § 20-95-21)
11-95-22: NOTICES OF PROPOSED ZONING AMENDMENTS, CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS, VARIANCES AND
INCONSISTENT PLATS:
A. The City Zoning Administrator shall submit to the Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of any application for a zoning amendment including
proposed changes to district lines, conditional use permits, variances, and plats which are inconsistent with this title for certification. A copy of the
notice of any public hearing, or where a public hearing is not required, a copy of the application for zoning amendments, variances and inconsistent
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 494/497
plats shall be sent so as to be received by the Commissioner of Natural Resources at least thirty (30) days prior to such hearing or meeting to consider
such action. The notice of application shall include a copy of the proposed ordinances or amendment, or a copy of the proposed inconsistent plat or a
description of the requested variances.
B. The City Zoning Administrator shall notify the Commissioner of Natural Resources of its final decision on the proposed action within ten (10) days of the
decision.
C. The ordinance, variance, or inconsistent plat becomes effective upon the happening of any of the following events, whichever first occurs:
1. The final decision taken by the City has previously received certification of approval from the Commissioner of Natural Resources.
2. The City receives certification of approval after its final decision.
3. Thirty (30) days have elapsed from the day the Commissioner of Natural Resources received notice of the final decision, and the City has received
from the Commissioner neither certification of approval nor notice of nonapproval.
4. The Commissioner of Natural Resources certifies his approval within thirty (30) days after conducting a public hearing.
D. In case the Commissioner of Natural Resources gives notice of nonapproval of an ordinance, variance, or inconsistent plat, either the applicant nor the
Zoning Administrator may, within thirty (30) days of said notice, file with the Commissioner a demand for hearing. If the demand for hearing is not made
within thirty (30) days, the notice of nonapproval becomes final.
1. The hearing shall be held within sixty (60) days of the demand and after at least two (2) weeks' published notice.
2. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Minnesota Statutes section 103G.311, subdivisions 2, 6 and 7.
3. The Commissioner of Natural Resources shall either certify his approval or disapproval of the proposed action within thirty (30) days of the hearing.
E. A copy of all notices of any public hearings, or where a public hearing is not required, a copy of the application to consider issuance of the conditional
use permit shall be received by the Commissioner of Natural Resources at least thirty (30) days prior to such hearings or meetings to consider
issuance of a conditional use permit. A copy of the decision shall be forwarded to the Commissioner within ten (10) days of such action. (Prior Code
§ 20-95-22; amd. 2018 Code)
Chapter 96
HPS HERITAGE PRESERVATION SITES
11-96-1: FINDINGS AND PURPOSES:
The Otsego City Council finds that the historical, archaeological, engineering and cultural heritage of the City is among its most important assets and that
preservation, protection, perpetuation and use of areas, places, buildings, structures, and other objects that have historic, aesthetic or community interest
or value benefits the health, prosperity, education and welfare of the community. The purposes of this chapter are to:
A. Safeguard the heritage of the City by preserving sites and structures which reflect elements of the City's cultural, social, economic, political, visual or
architectural history.
B. Promote the preservation and continued use of historic sites and structures for the education and general welfare of the people of the City.
C. Foster civic pride in the beauty and notable accomplishments of the past.
D. Stabilize and improve City property values. (Prior Code § 20-96-1)
11-96-2: STATUTE AUTHORITY:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the provisions of Minnesota Statutes section 471.193. (Prior Code § 20-96-2)
11-96-3: ESTABLISHMENT OF HERITAGE PRESERVATION COMMISSION:
The City Council shall appoint an advisory commission to be known as the Otsego Heritage Preservation Commission. Membership qualification, terms
and bylaws of such commission shall be established by City Council resolution. Commission members must be persons with demonstrated interest and
expertise in historic preservation and a majority of the members must reside within the City of Otsego. The Heritage Preservation Commission shall
include, if available, a member of the Wright County Historical Society. (Prior Code § 20-96-3)
11-96-4: POWERS AND DUTIES OF HERITAGE PRESERVATION COMMISSION:
A. The Heritage Preservation Commission may recommend to the City Council, after review and recommendation by the City Planning Commission, that
certain property eligible for designation as a heritage preservation site be acquired by gift, negotiation or by eminent domain as provided in Minnesota
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 495/497
Statutes chapter 117.
B. The Heritage Preservation Commission, upon approval by the City Council, shall have the following powers and duties:
1. To conduct a continuing survey of all areas, places, buildings, structures or similar objects in the City which the commission, on the basis of
information available or presented to it, has reason to believe are or will be eligible for designation as heritage preservation sites.
2. To work for the continuing education of the citizens of Otsego with respect to the historic and architectural heritage of the City. It shall keep current
and public a register of designated heritage preservation sites and areas.
3. To accept the services on a permanent or part time basis of technical experts and such other persons as may be required to perform its duties.
4. To solicit gifts and contributions to be made to the City and to assist in the preparation of applications for grant funds to be made to the City for the
purpose of heritage preservation.
5. The Heritage Preservation Commission shall make no application to the National Register or to the Minnesota Historical Society for the designation
of a historic site or district without the consent of the City Council. (Prior Code § 20-96-4)
11-96-5: DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC SITES:
A. Site Application: Heritage preservation sites shall be applied to and superimposed upon all zoning districts contained herein as existing or amended by
the zoning ordinance text and official zoning map. The regulations and requirements imposed by a heritage preservation site designation shall be in
addition to those established for the base zoning districts which jointly apply. Under the joint application of standards, the most restrictive requirements
shall apply.
B. Reports: The City Council may direct the City staff to prepare studies which catalog buildings, land, areas, districts, or other objects to be considered for
designation as a heritage preservation site. The Zoning Administrator shall instruct the appropriate staff persons to prepare technical reports where
applicable, and provide general assistance in preparing a recommendation on the action to the City Council.
C. Criteria: The Heritage Preservation Commission shall recommend to the Planning Commission that an area, building district, or object be designated a
heritage preservation site upon determining that such site meets one or more of the following criteria:
1. It has character, interest or value as part of the development heritage or cultural characteristics of the City, State of Minnesota or the United States;
2. Its location as the site of a significant historic event;
3. It has yielded, or is likely to yield, information important in prehistory or history;
4. It is associated with a person or persons who significantly contributed to the culture and development of the City;
5. It embodies distinctive characteristics of an architectural style, period, form or treatment;
6. It represents the work of an architect or master builder whose individual work has influenced the development of the City;
7. It embodies elements of architectural design, detail, materials, or craftsmanship which represent a significant architectural innovation; or
8. Its unique location or singular physical characteristics represent an established and familiar visual feature of a neighborhood, community, or the City.
D. Communications With Minnesota Historical Society: A copy of the Heritage Preservation Commission's proposed designation of a heritage preservation
site, including boundaries, and a program for the preservation of a heritage preservation site shall be sent to the Minnesota Historical Society in
accordance with Minnesota Statutes section 471.193, subdivision 6.
E. Findings And Recommendations: The Heritage Preservation Commission shall make findings as to whether a proposed heritage preservation site is
eligible for heritage preservation as determined by the criteria specified in subsection C of this section. If the Heritage Preservation Commission
determines the site meets the criteria in subsection C of this section, it shall forward its findings to the Planning Commission with its recommendation
that the site be designated for heritage preservation and its proposed program for the preservation of the site.
F. Planning Commission Recommendation: The Heritage Preservation Commission shall advise the Planning Commission of the proposed designation of
a heritage preservation site, including boundaries, and a program for the preservation of a heritage preservation site.
The Planning Commission shall recommend approval, rejection or modification of the proposed designation to the City Council. Such recommendation
shall be based upon, but not be limited to, the following factors:
1. The provisions of subsection 11-4-2F of this title.
2. Any other planning consideration which may be relevant to the proposed designation upon the surrounding neighborhood.
3. Any other planning consideration which may be relevant to the proposed designation. The Heritage Preservation Commission may take such
modifications, changes, and alterations concern in the proposed designation as it deems necessary in consideration of the recommendation and
opinion of the Planning Commission.
G. Hearings: Prior to the Planning Commission recommending to the City Council any building, district, or object for designation as a heritage preservation
site, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed designation. Prior to such hearing, the Planning Commission shall cause to
be published in a newspaper of general circulation notice of the hearing at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. Notice of the hearing
shall be sent to all property owners within three hundred fifty feet (350') of the proposed heritage preservation site in platted areas and shall be sent to
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 496/497
all property owners within five hundred feet (500') of the proposed heritage preservation site in nonplatted areas. A copy of the notice and a list of the
property owners and addresses to which the notice was sent shall be attested and made part of the records of the proceeding.
H. City Council Designation: The City Council shall consider the recommendation of the Heritage Preservation Commission and Planning Commission that
a site be designated for heritage preservation, and may, by ordinance, designate a heritage preservation site. If deemed necessary, the City Council
shall have the authority to hold an additional public hearing when considering the designation of a heritage preservation site. (Prior Code § 20-96-5)
11-96-6: SITE ALTERATION PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required; Application: A heritage preservation site alteration permit is required to do any of the following in, on, or to a heritage preservation site
in the City:
1. Remodel, alter, or repair in any kind or manner, including a change of color, that will alter the exterior appearance of a historic building, site, or
landmark.
2. Erect a building or any structure.
3. Erect signs.
4. Move from or to any building.
5. Demolish any building in whole or in part. This does not apply to structures required to be demolished in accordance with Minnesota Statutes
chapter 463.
6. Alter or remove a land form in whole or in part.
The application for a site alteration permit shall be accompanied by detailed plans including a site plan, building elevations and design details, and
materials necessary to evaluate the request. The City Council shall make the determination whether to approve or disapprove the permit.
B. Technical Reports: The Zoning Administrator shall instruct the appropriate staff persons to prepare technical reports where applicable, and provide
general assistance in preparing a recommendation on the action to the City Council.
C. Heritage Preservation Commission Recommendation: The Heritage Preservation Commission shall review each application and make its
recommendation to the City Council relative to the request for a heritage preservation site alteration permit.
D. Planning Commission Recommendation: If it is determined that the requested site alteration permit may have land use related implications, the permit
application shall be subject to review and recommendation by the Planning Commission. In such case, the Planning Commission shall recommend
approval, rejection or modification of the permit to the City Council. Such recommendation shall be based upon, but not limited to, the criteria specified
in subsection E of this section.
E. Criteria For Site Alteration Permit: The City Council shall approve, disapprove, and/or impose conditions on a heritage preservation site alteration permit
after consideration of the Heritage Preservation Commission's program for preservation and the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation,
as revised and if applicable, the recommendation of the Planning Commission.
F. Findings: The City Council shall make findings as to whether a site alteration permit application should be approved or disapproved, or conditions
imposed, as determined by the criteria specified in subsection E of this section.
G. Hearing: Prior to the City Council making its decision regarding an application for a site alteration permit for a heritage preservation site, the City
Council shall hold a public hearing on the application. Prior to such hearing, the City Council shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation notice of the hearing at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be sent to all property owners within
three hundred fifty feet (350') of the site of the proposed heritage preservation alteration in platted areas and shall be sent to all property owners within
five hundred feet (500') of the site of the proposed heritage preservation alteration in nonplatted areas. A copy of the notice and a list of the property
owners and addresses to which the notice was sent shall be attested and made part of the records of the proceeding.
H. Limitations: If, within sixty (60) days from the filing of a site alteration permit application, the Heritage Preservation Commission has not made a
recommendation of approval or disapproval to the City Council, the application shall be forwarded to the City Council for approval or disapproval of the
permit without the Heritage Preservation Commission's recommendations. (Prior Code § 20-96-6)
11-96-7: EMERGENCY REPAIR:
In emergency situations where immediate repair is needed to protect the safety of the structure and its inhabitants, the building official shall have the
authority to enforce the Otsego Building Code and may approve the repair without prior Heritage Preservation Commission or City Council action. (Prior
Code § 20-96-7; amd. 2018 Code)
11-96-8: REPOSITORY FOR DOCUMENTS:
The Office of the City Clerk is designated as the repository for at least one copy of all studies, reports, recommendations and programs required under this
chapter. (Prior Code § 20-96-8)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1069 497/497
11-96-9: RECORDING HERITAGE PRESERVATION SITES:
The Office of the City Clerk shall record the designation of buildings, lands or areas as heritage preservation sites with the Wright County Recorder or the
Wright County Registrar of Titles, unless the County Recorder or Registrar of Titles refuses to record such designation, and shall transmit a copy of the
recording document to the Building Department. (Prior Code § 20-96-9)