TABLE OF CONTENTS
Title I - General Provisions
Chapter 10; General Provisions
Title III - Administration
Chapter 30 - City Council
Chapter 31 - City Officials
Chapter 32 - City Organizations
Chapter 33 - Emergency Management
Chapter 35 - Finances
Title V - Public Works
Chapter 50 - General Provisions
Chapter 51 - Sewers
Chapter 52 - Electric Utility
Chapter 53 - Garbage and Refuse
Chapter 54 - Water
TitleVII - Traffic Code
Chapter70 - ATVs and Recreational Vehicles
Chapter 71 - Motor Vehicle and Traffic Regulations
Chapter 72 - Parking Regulations
Chapter 73 - Traffic Schedules
Title IX - General Regulations
Chapter 90 - Fire Prevention and Protection
Chapter 91 - Right-of-Way Management
Chapter 92 - Health and Safety; Nuisances
Chapter 93 - Animals
Chapter 94 - Abandoned Vehicles
Chapter 95 - Parks and Recreation
Chapter 96 - Streets and Sidewalks
Title XI - Business Regulations
Chapter 110 - General Provisions
Chapter 111 - Peddlers and Solicitors
Chapter 112 - Adult Use License
Chapter 113 - Telecommunications
Chapter 114 - [reserved for future use]
Chapter 115 - Gambling
Chapter 116 - Alcoholic Beverages
Chapter 117 - Amusements
Title XIII - General Offenses
Chapter 130 - General Offenses
Title XV - Land Usage
Chapter 150 - Building Code and Plumbing Code
Chapter 151 - Subdivision Regulations
Chapter 152 - Zoning Code
Index
Appendix Table of Contents
Appendix A – Fine & Fee Schedule
Appendix B – Official Zoning Map
Appendix C - Application Forms
Table of Special Ordinances
I. Franchises
II. Annexations
III. Zoning Map Changes
IV. Street Name Changes
V. Street Vacations
VI. Bonds
VII. Moratoriums
VIII. Special Assessments
IX. Miscellaneous
1
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter
10. GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
10.01 Title of code
10.02 Rules of interpretation
10.03 Application to future ordinances
10.04 Captions
10.05 Definitions
10.06 Severability
10.07 Reference to other sections
10.08 Reference to offices
10.09 Errors and omissions
10.10 Official time
10.11 Reasonable time
10.12 Ordinances repealed
10.13 Ordinances unaffected
10.14 Effective date of ordinances
10.15 Repeal or modification of ordinance
10.16 Ordinances which amend or supplement code
10.17 Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights, and liabilities
10.18 Copies of code
10.19 Adoption of statutes and rules by reference
10.20 Revocation of licenses
10.21 Enforcement
10.98 Supplemental administrative penalties
10.99 General penalty
' 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
(A) All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city, as revised, codified, rearranged,
renumbered, and consolidated into component codes, titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and
designated as the “city code,” for which designation “code of ordinances,” “codified ordinances,” or “code”
may be substituted. Code title, chapter, and section headings do not constitute any part of the law as
contained in the code.
Olivia - General Provisions
2
(B) (1) All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to the components of the code unless
otherwise specified.
(2) Any component code may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the “Traffic Code.”
Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation “ ' ” followed by the number, such as “' 10.01.”
' 10.02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
(A) Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the same rules of
construction, definition, and application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the
interpretation of state law.
(B) Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all ordinances of this city shall be by the
following rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the
context of the same ordinance:
(1) AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written Aand/or,@ whenever the
context requires.
(2) Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions, or ordinance requires an act to be done
which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the
performance of the act by an authorized agent or deputy.
(3) Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed
to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the
plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if applicable.
(4) General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited to
the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
' 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted
which amend or supplement this code unless otherwise specifically provided.
' 10.04 CAPTIONS.
Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and section numbers are employed
for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
General Provisions
3
' 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
(A) General rule.
(1) Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or ordinary and usual sense.
(2) Technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be
understood according to their technical import.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CITY. The area within the corporate boundaries of the City of Olivia as presently established or as
amended by ordinance, annexation, or other legal actions at a future time. The term CITY when used in
this code may also be used to refer to the City Council and its authorized representatives.
CODE, THIS CODE, or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This city code as modified by
amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections.
COUNTY. Renville County, Minnesota.
MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
MONTH. A calendar month.
OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an
oath, and in those cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and
AFFIRMED. All terms shall mean a pledge taken by the person and administered by an individual
authorized by state law.
OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission, or department of this city unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
PERSON. Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons, firm, corporation, partnership,
trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms
PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
Olivia - General Provisions
4
SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. A person’s name as distinctively written by that person.
Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
STATE. The State of Minnesota.
SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in the chapter
analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the
subject matter of the heading. Not all chapters have subchapters.
WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
' 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to any person or circumstance is
held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.
' 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
Whenever in one section, reference is made to another section hereof, that reference shall extend and
apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the
subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
' 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer, or employee of
this city exercising the powers, duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
' 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any words; the omission of any word
or words necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which
no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or words supplied, omitted, or
substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as
though the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall be made or
permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of the error.
General Provisions
5
' 10.10 OFFICIAL TIME.
The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws, shall be the official time within
this city for the transaction of all city business.
' 10.11 REASONABLE TIME.
(A) In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable time or requires
reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is
necessary for a prompt performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
(B) The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall be computed by excluding the
first day and including the last. If the last day is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.
' 10.12 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
(A) This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the provisions of a general nature
pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and embraced.
(B) All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code shall be deemed repealed from
and after the effective date of this code.
' 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to subjects not
embraced in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.
' 10.14 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall take effect from and after the
due publication thereof, unless otherwise expressly provided.
' 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
(A) Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or modified by a subsequent
ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the
Olivia - General Provisions
6
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect to it,
unless otherwise expressly provided.
(B) No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted, created, given, secured, or
accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but
may be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force unless it is
otherwise expressly provided.
(C) When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision shall be itself repealed, the
repeal shall not be construed to revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.
' 10.16 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
(A) If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or section of this code, the chapter or
section shall be specifically repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.
(B) Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new chapter or section shall
indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In
addition to this indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title shall be
shown in concise form above the ordinance.
' 10.17 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS, AND LIABILITIES.
(A) All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of this code shall be
prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
(B) This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties incurred, or proceedings begun
prior to the effective date of this code.
(C) The liabilities, proceedings, and rights are continued; punishments, penalties, or forfeitures shall
be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted.
(D) In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-way, contracts
entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment, or vacation of any highway, and the
election of corporate officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
' 10.18 COPIES OF CODE.
The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City Administrator for public inspection.
The City Administrator shall provide a copy for sale for a reasonable charge.
General Provisions
7
' 10.19 ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES BY REFERENCE.
It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this code, all future amendments to any state
or federal rules and statutes adopted by reference in this code or referenced in this code are hereby adopted
by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this code was adopted, unless there is
clear intention expressed in the code to the contrary.
' 10.20 REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
Violation by a licensee of any ordinance prescribing conditions or requirements relative to licenses
held by the licensee shall be grounds for revocation of the license.
(1957 Code, ' 1200:02)
' 10.21 ENFORCEMENT.
(A) Any Licensed Peace Officer of the city's Police Department shall have the authority to enforce any
provision of this code.
(B) As permitted by M.S. ' 626.862, as it may be amended from time to time, the City Administrator
shall have the authority to administer and enforce this code. In addition, under that statutory authority,
certain individuals designated within the code or by the Administrator or City Council shall have the
authority to administer and enforce the provisions specified. All and any person or persons designated may
issue a citation in lieu of arrest or continued detention to enforce any provision of the code.
(C) The City Administrator and any city official or employee designated by this code who has the
responsibility to perform a duty under this code may with the permission of a licensee of a business or
owner of any property or resident of a dwelling, or other person in control of any premises, inspect or
otherwise enter any property to enforce compliance with this code.
(D) If the licensee, owner, resident, or other person in control of a premises objects to the inspection of
or entrance to the property, the City Administrator, Peace Officer, or any employee or official charged with
the duty of enforcing the provisions of this code may, upon a showing that probable cause exists for the
issuance of a valid search warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction, petition and obtain a search
warrant before conducting the inspection or otherwise entering the property. This
Olivia - General Provisions
8
warrant shall be only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to protect the health, safety
and welfare of the people are being complied with and to enforce these provisions only, and no criminal
charges shall be made as a result of the warrant. No warrant shall be issued unless there be probable cause
to issue the warrant. Probable cause occurs if the search is reasonable. Probable cause does not depend on
specific knowledge of the condition of a particular property.
(E) Every licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of property within the city shall permit at
reasonable times inspections of or entrance to the property by the City Administrator or any other
authorized city officer or employee only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to protect
the health, safety and welfare of the people are being complied with and to enforce these provisions.
Unreasonable refusal to permit the inspection of or entrance to the property shall be grounds for termination
of any and all permits, licenses or city service to the property. Mailed notice shall be given to the licensee,
owner, resident or other person in control of the property, stating the grounds for the termination, and the
licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of the property shall be given an opportunity to appear
before the City Administrator to object to the termination before it occurs, subject to appeal of the
Administrator's decision to the City Council at a regularly scheduled or special meeting.
(F) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the city to enter private property
in urgent emergency situations where there is an imminent danger in order to protect the public health,
safety and welfare.
' 10.98 SUPPLEMENTAL ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.
(A) In addition to those administrative penalties established in this code and the enforcement powers
granted in ' 10.21, the City Council is authorized to create by resolution, adopted by a majority of the
members of the Council, supplemental administrative penalties.
(B) These administrative penalty procedures in this section are intended to provide the public and the
city with an informal, cost effective and expeditious alternative to traditional criminal charges for violations
of certain provisions of this code. The procedures are intended to be voluntary on the part of those who
have been charged with those offenses.
(C) Administrative penalties for violations of various provisions of the code, other than those penalties
established in the code or in statutes that are adopted by reference, may be established from time to time by
ordinance of a majority of the members of the City Council. In order to be effective, an administrative
penalty for a particular violation must be established before the violation occurred.
(D) In the discretion of the peace officer, City Administrator, or other person giving notice of an
alleged violation of a provision of this code, in a written notice of an alleged violation, sent by first class
mail to the person who is alleged to have violated the code, the person giving notice may request the
payment of a voluntary administrative penalty for the violation directly to the City Finance Officer or other
officer established by the city within 14 days of the notice of the violation. In the sole discretion of the
person giving the notice of the alleged violation, the time for payment may be extended an additional 14
General Provisions
9
days, whether or not requested by the person to whom the notice has been given. In addition to the
administrative penalty, the person giving notice may request in the notice to the alleged violator to adopt a
compliance plan to correct the situation resulting in the alleged violation and may provide that if the alleged
violator corrects the situation resulting in the alleged violation within the time specified in the notice, that
the payment of the administrative penalty will be waived.
(E) At any time before the payment of the administrative penalty is due, the person who has been
given notice of an alleged violation may request to appear before the City Council to contest the request for
payment of the penalty. After a hearing before the Council, the Council may determine to withdraw the
request for payment or to renew the request for payment. Because the payment of the administrative penalty
is voluntary, there shall be no appeal from the decision of the Council.
(F) At any time after the date the payment of the administrative penalty is due, if the administrative
penalty remains unpaid or the situation creating the alleged violation remains uncorrected, the city, through
its attorney, may bring criminal charges in accordance with state law and this code. Likewise, the city, in its
discretion, may bring criminal charges in the first instance, rather than requesting the payment of an
administrative penalty, even if a penalty for the particular violation has been established by Council
ordinance. If the administrative penalty is paid, or if any requested correction of the situation resulting in
the violation is completed, no criminal charges shall be initiated by the city for the alleged violation.
' 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
(A) Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this code for which another penalty
is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be
imposed for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically
adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $1,000, or
both.
(B) Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this code, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense
which is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
a. An alleged misdemeanor violation must be treated as a petty misdemeanor if either the
peace officer, by so indicating on the citation or tab charge, or the prosecuting attorney
believes that it is in the interest of justice that the defendant not be imprisoned if convicted
and certifies that belief to the court at or before the time of arraignment or pretrial hearing.
The defendant's consent to the certification is not required.
(C) In either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of prosecution may be
added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or
continues.
(D) The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any official duty imposed by this code
shall not subject the officer or employee to the penalty imposed for a violation.
1
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
Chapter
30. CITY COUNCIL
31. CITY OFFICIALS
32. CITY ORGANIZATIONS
33. EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
35. FINANCES
Olivia - Administration
2
3
CHAPTER 30: CITY COUNCIL
Section
Meetings
30.01 Meeting times and place
30.02 Presiding officers
30.03 Quorum
30.04 Order of business
30.05 Role of the Mayor
30.06 Council member remarks
30.07 Writing requirements
30.08 Questions
30.09 Committees
30.10 Ordinances
30.11 Petitions
30.12 Non-member attendance and speech
30.13 All meetings public
30.14 Preservation of order
30.15 Suspension of rules of this subchapter
30.16 Robert=s Rules of Order
30.17 Adjournments
30.18 Manner of voting
30.19 Minutes
30.20 Changes to Appendix A: Fee Schedule
Miscellaneous
30.30 City employee personnel policies
30.31 City Vehicles
Olivia - Administration
4
MEETINGS
' 30.01 MEETING TIMES AND PLACE.
(A) Regular meetings. Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held at least once each month, at
a date, time and place as established by the City Council. Any regular meeting falling upon a holiday shall
be held on the next following business day at the same time and place. All meetings, including special and
adjourned meetings, shall be held in the city hall, unless the City Council decides otherwise at a prior
meeting, or unless meeting in the city hall is impossible.
(B) Special meetings. The Mayor or any 2 members of the City Council may call a special meeting of
the City Council upon at least 24-hours= written notice to each member of the City Council. This notice
shall be delivered personally to each member or shall be left at the member's usual place of residence with
some responsible person. Pursuant to M.S. Ch. 13D, as it may be amended from time to time, written
notice of any special meeting shall be posted giving the date, time, place and purpose of the meeting at least
3 days before the meeting. Written notice shall be mailed at least 3 days before the meeting to anyone who
has filed a written request for notice of special meetings. In calculating the 3 days, if the last day falls on a
Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the next regular business day shall be counted as the third day.
(C) Emergency meetings. Notice of emergency meetings shall be given as required by M.S. Ch. 13D,
as it may be amended from time to time. An emergency meeting is a meeting defined by M.S. Ch. 13D, as
it may be amended from time to time.
(D) Annual meeting. At the first regular City Council meeting in January of each year, the City
Council shall:
(1) Designate the depositories of city funds;
(2) Designate the official newspaper;
(3) Choose one of the Council Members as Acting Mayor, who shall perform the duties of the
Mayor during the disability or absence of the Mayor from the city or, in case of a vacancy in the office of
Mayor, until a successor has been appointed and qualifies;
(4) Appoint officers and employees and members of departments, boards, commissions and
committees as may be necessary;
(5) Establish and appoint Council Members to those committees as are deemed appropriate for
the efficient and orderly management of the city.
City Council
5
(E) Public meetings. All City Council meetings, including special, emergency and adjourned
meetings and meetings of City Council committees, as well as meetings of City Commissions and Boards,
shall be conducted in accordance with the Minnesota Open Meeting Law, M.S. Ch. 13D, as it may be
amended from time to time.
' 30.02 PRESIDING OFFICERS.
The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Council. In the absence of the Mayor, the Acting Mayor
shall preside. In the absence of both, the remaining members shall elect one of their number a temporary
Chairperson. The Acting Mayor or temporary Chairperson, when occupying the place of the Mayor, shall
have the same privileges as other members.
(1957 Code, ' 100:02)
' 30.03 QUORUM.
At all meetings of the City Council, a majority of the Council members elected shall constitute a
quorum to do business, but a minority may adjourn from day to day and may compel the attendance of
absentees, by a fine in an amount set by Council from time to time for each offense, unless a reasonable
excuse be offered.
(1957 Code, ' 100:03)
' 30.04 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
(A) At the hour appointed for meeting, the members shall be called to order by the Mayor, and in his
or her absence by the Acting Mayor, and in the absence of both by the Administrator. The Administrator
shall call the roll, note the absentees, and announce whether a quorum be present. In the absence of the
Administrator, the Mayor shall appoint a secretary for that meeting.
(B) Upon the appearance of a quorum, the Council shall proceed to business which shall be conducted
in the following order:
(1) Call to order;
(2) Roll call;
(3) Reading of the minutes of the last meeting, which, if no correction be offered, shall stand
approved;
(4) Presentation of petitions, memorials, and remonstrances;
(5) Reports of standing committees;
Olivia - Administration
6
(6) Reports of special committees;
(7) Reports of officials;
(8) Motions and communications;
(9) Introduction of ordinances;
(10) Presentation of claims;
(11) Unfinished business;
(12) Special order of business;
(13) Motions and resolutions; and
(14) Adjournment.
(1957 Code, ' 100:04)
' 30.05 ROLE OF THE MAYOR.
The Mayor shall preserve order and decorum and shall decide questions of order subject to an appeal to
the Council. The Mayor may make motions, second motions, or speak on any question, provided, however,
that in order to do so, upon demand of any one Council member, he or she shall vacate the chair and
designate a trustee to preside temporarily. The Mayor shall be entitled to vote like other members of the
Council.
(1957 Code, ' 100:05)
' 30.06 COUNCIL MEMBER REMARKS.
(A) Discussion.
(1) Every member, previous to his or her speaking, shall arise and address the Chairperson and
shall not proceed until he or she has been recognized by the chair.
(2) He or she shall not indulge in personalities and shall confine his or her remarks to the matter
under debate.
(1957 Code, ' 100:06)
(B) Limitation on remarks. No member shall speak more than twice on any question, nor more than 5
minutes each time without unanimous consent of the Council.
(1957 Code, ' 100:07)
City Council
7
(C) Point of order. A member called to order shall immediately suspend his or her remarks until the
point of order is decided by the chair.
(1957 Code, ' 100:08)
' 30.07 WRITING REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Resolutions all in writing. All resolutions shall be in writing.
(1957 Code, ' 100:09)
(B) Motions reduced to writing. Every motion shall be reduced to writing if the chair or any member
requires it. A motion then made and seconded, shall be stated by the Chairperson or being written shall be
read by the Administrator, and may be withdrawn before decision or amendment, or any disposition thereof
has been made, or a vote taken thereon. The following motions need not be reduced to writing: to adjourn,
postpone, reconsider, commit, lay on the table, or to act on the previous question.
(1957 Code, ' 100:10)
' 30.08 QUESTIONS.
(A) Motions during debate. When a question is under debate, no motion shall be entertained, unless to
adjourn, to lay on the table, or to act on the previous question, to postpone, to commit, or to amend, which
several motions shall have precedence in the order in which they are named, and the first three shall be
decided without debate.
(1957 Code, ' 100:11)
(B) Division. Any question shall be divided at the request of any member when the question will
allow thereof.
(1957 Code, ' 100:12)
(C) Voting.
(1) When a question is put by the chair, every member present shall vote unless for special
reasons the Council shall excuse him or her; but if interested he or she shall not vote.
(2) In doubtful cases the chair may direct or a member may call for a division.
(3) The yeas and nays shall be called upon a requisition of the chair or any member, in which case
the names of the members are required to be recorded in the minutes.
(1957 Code, ' 100:13)
(D) Order of questions. All questions shall be put in the order in which they are moved, except in case
of privileged questions.
(1957 Code, ' 100:14)
Olivia - Administration
8
(E) Previous question. The previous question shall be put in these words: AShall the question now be
put?@ It shall be admitted on demand of any two members, and until decided shall preclude all amendments
and debate of the main question.
(1957 Code, ' 100:15)
' 30.09 COMMITTEES.
All committees including standing committees shall be appointed by the chair, unless expressly
ordered by the Council.
(1957 Code, ' 100:16)
' 30.10 ORDINANCES.
After an ordinance shall have passed, a complete and accurate copy as amended shall be made by the
Administrator and shall be signed by the Mayor or in his or her absence by the Acting Mayor, and deposited
with the Administrator, who shall attest, seal, number, file, publish, and record or place the same
permanently in the ordinance book. Entry of the complete ordinance as amended directly into the ordinance
book and original signatures and seal thereon shall be in compliance with this section. The affidavit of
publication shall be permanently inserted in the ordinance book after each ordinance.
(1957 Code, ' 100:17)
' 30.11 PETITIONS.
Petitions and other papers addressed to the Council shall be read by the Administrator upon
presentation of the same to the Council.
(1957 Code, ' 100:18)
' 30.12 NON-MEMBER ATTENDANCE AND SPEECH.
No person, other than the Mayor and other members of the Council, shall be admitted within the bar of
the Council, except city officers. No person other than a member shall address the Council except with the
consent of the members present or by a vote of a majority of the members present.
(1957 Code, ' 100:19)
' 30.13 ALL MEETINGS PUBLIC.
All sessions of the Council shall be public, except as those provided in ' 30.01.
(1957 Code, ' 100:20)
City Council
9
' 30.14 PRESERVATION OF ORDER.
The Police Chief shall attend meetings of the Council when requested to do so by the Mayor and
preserve order in the room.
(1957 Code, ' 100:21)
' 30.15 SUSPENSION OF RULES OF THIS SUBCHAPTER.
These rules, or any of them, may be temporarily suspended by consent of a majority of all Council
members, and shall not be repealed, altered, or amended by concurrence of a majority of the whole Council,
and upon notice given at some preceding meeting.
(1957 Code, ' 100:22)
' 30.16 ROBERT'S RULES OF ORDER.
(A) Generally. In all points not covered by these rules, the Council shall be governed on its procedure
by Robert's Rules of Order.
(1957 Code, ' 100:23)
(B) Purpose of rules. Foregoing rules are adopted to facilitate the transaction of Council business and
functions. They should not be permitted to defeat or hinder the plainly expressed intent and desire of the
Council. Informal compliance and substantial performance shall be sufficient under the foregoing rules in
the absence of objection seasonably taken. Objection is hereby declared not to have been seasonably taken
as to procedural matters provided for herein if a Council member present at a meeting fails to object during
the meeting and request compliance with these rules, and the objection shall not be seasonably taken by an
absent member later than the next regular meeting after the proceedings to which objection is made.
(1957 Code, ' 100:24)
' 30.17 ADJOURNMENTS.
The Council may at any time by a majority vote of those present adjourn from time to time to specific
date and hour whether or not a quorum is present.
(1957 Code, ' 100:25)
Olivia - Administration
10
' 30.18 MANNER OF VOTING.
Votes of the members on any business coming before the Council may be by voice vote, standing vote,
or in the other manner of voting as may signify the intention of the members, provided, however, that upon
request of any one member of the Council the vote shall be taken by secret written ballot. Any affirmative
or negative vote by a member shall be entered in the minutes at his or her request. Aye and nay vote shall
be taken upon any motion at the request of one member and the results entered in the minutes. Every
member shall vote in that case unless the Council by majority vote shall excuse a member from voting.
(1957 Code, ' 100:27)
' 30.19 MINUTES.
Minutes of the meeting shall be kept by the Clerk. They shall be signed by the Clerk, and shall
constitute an official record of the Council proceedings. Upon approval of the minutes at a subsequent
meeting of the Council, the Mayor shall sign the minutes. Lack of the Mayor's signature or Council
approval shall not invalidate the minutes as official records. In the event the Clerk shall fail or decline to
amend or change his or her minutes, upon informal request, at the time they are submitted for approval the
Council may by motion carried by majority vote amend the minutes. The amending motion shall become a
part of the minutes of the subsequent meeting.
(1957 Code, ' 100:28)
' 30.20 CHANGES TO APPENDIX A: FEE SCHEDULE.
The City Council may from time to time, by Resolution, make changes to the amounts of the fines
and fees established in “Appendix A: Fee Schedule” of this Code.
MISCELLANEOUS
' 30.30 CITY EMPLOYEE PERSONNEL POLICIES.
The City Administrator is authorized to establish polices within the context of state and federal law and
upon the advice and consent of City Council. Such polices were established in 2005. An employee
handbook was designed to answer questions pertaining to employment practices, responsibilities as an
employee, and benefits received. The handbook is not a contract and does not constitute the terms of an
employment contract. Information and provisions contained in the handbook may changed from time to
time, upon consent of the City Council and notification of employees.
City Council
11
' 30.31 CITY VEHICLES.
(A) Purpose.
(1) This policy will provide uniform criteria for all city departments and operation in the
acquisition and replacement of vehicles. The city is dedicated to managing its resources in a fiscally
responsible manner. Therefore, a specific need should be demonstrated before a new vehicle is added to
the city=s equipment list, and every existing vehicle should be utilized to its greatest economic extent prior
to replacement. The acquisition of additional vehicles to the city=s overall operation and their replacement
should be only as necessary to allow the city to provide the services and perform the duties and
responsibilities which are expected by the public with budgetary constraints.
(2) The many varied aspects of public service provided by the city require the use of different
types of vehicles. The type of vehicle acquired shall be that which is determined to be appropriate, cost
effective, and in the best interest of the city for that vehicle=s function. Vehicle acquisitions shall be
justified in writing by the department head and approved by the City Administrator subject to budgetary
constraints.
(B) Vehicle replacement policy.
(1) Minimum replacement standards. City acquired vehicles should not be programmed or
budgeted for replacement until they meet minimum replacement standards for the particular vehicle
category, but vehicles should not be replaced just because they meet the minimum replacement standards.
Any deviations for early replacement must be justified in writing by the department head and approved by
the City Administrator.
(2) Replacement evaluation process.
(a) Any vehicle which is proposed for replacement shall have a standard vehicle evaluation
form completed with a written recommendation by the appropriate department head outlining the
justification for its replacement.
(b) When applicable, the department head will establish the replacement year when the
replacement schedule is based on usage, and also determine all other miscellaneous equipment replacement
schedules based on usage, manufacturer=s recommendations, and condition of equipment.
(c) Replacement exceptions may be made based on mechanical reliability, financial
considerations, safety, and vehicle availability as recommended by the department head and approved by
the City Administrator.
(d) All vehicle purchases, replacements, and reassignments must be coordinated between the
department head and City Administrator. Next, the City Administrator will update and distribute all
additions and revisions to the 5-year replacement schedule to the Council at the beginning of the capitol
improvements planning process and after the final budget is approved.
Olivia - Administration
12
(3) Disposition of used vehicles. Before a vehicle is removed from the city=s equipment list, the
department head and City Administrator shall review all current vehicles of similar type and determine if it
would be economically beneficial to switch with another existing vehicle before disposal. They will also
determine the most economical method and time of disposal. Vehicles scheduled to be replaced may be
retained by the city, for use in another capacity (e.g., replaced squad car being used as an administration
vehicle) upon approval of the City Administrator.
(C) City use of personal vehicles; mileage, reimbursement.
(1) All employees of the city will be paid mileage for use of their personal vehicles and
reimbursed for all related legal parking costs while conducting official city business. The mileage rate will
be as set by the City Council. Employees are encouraged to use available city vehicles whenever possible
while conducting official city business.
(2) Normal personal commuting mileage from home to work or work to home is not
reimbursable.
(D) Vehicle identification; city logo. All city vehicles shall be licensed and marked in accordance with
state law and as appropriate for vehicle=s specific use as follows:
(1) All administrative transportation vehicles shall have the city=s name and vehicle number
prominently displayed on side door panels. The city=s official logo will be applied when it is beneficial to
have it displayed to the public as determined by the department head.
(2) All Public Works and Park Maintenance specialty type vehicles shall have the city name,
logo, and vehicle number prominently displayed on the side door panel or other highly visible location.
(3) Marked police squad/patrol cars shall be marked as dictated by state law.
(4) Fire Department vehicles shall display the city=s name, vehicle number and shall contain
lettering identifying it as a fire response emergency vehicle prominently displayed on the side door panels
or other highly visible location.
(E) Responsibility. The City Administrator is responsible for the enforcement of this policy.
Department heads may not deviate from the policy unless they have written approval from the City
Administrator.
(B passed 1-5-2002)
Editor=s note:
This policy was passed by motion on 1-5-2002
City Officials
13
CHAPTER 31: CITY OFFICIALS
Section
Mayor and Council Members
31.01 Salaries and benefits
Other Officials
31.15 City Administrator
31.16 Superintendent of Public Works
31.17 Liquor Store Manager
31.18 Airport Manager
31.19 Fire Chief
31.20 Subordinate positions
MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS
' 31.01 SALARIES AND BENEFITS.
(A) Compensation of Mayor and Council - Regular and Special meetings.
(1) Mayor. The salary of the Mayor shall be $4,750.00 per year, plus $75.00 for each special, or
emergency council meeting attended.
(2) Council Members. The salary for each Council Member shall be $3,365.00 per year, plus
$75.00 for each special, or emergency council meeting attended.
(3) Payroll Frequency. Elected officials shall be paid and reimbursed on the same frequency as
established by payroll policies for regular city employees.
(B) Reimbursements and Benefits.
(1) The Mayor and Council Members shall be reimbursed for necessary disbursements and
expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
Olivia - Administration
14
(2) The Mayor and Council Members shall be reimbursed a sum of $50.00 to attend approved
conferences, seminars or other out-of-town meetings plus travel expenses reimbursed in accordance with
established IRS schedules.
(3) Should the Mayor or Council Members opt to participate in the Public Employee Retirement
Association (PERA) defined contribution retirement plan, the City shall contribute to towards that
individual’s retirement account.
(C) Effective Date. This ordinance shall become effective after passage and publication, as of January
1, 2017.
(Ord. 2016-06, passed 10-03-2016, amending Ord. 272, passed 10-17-2002)
OTHER OFFICIALS
' 31.15 CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
(A) Establishment. The position of City Administrator is hereby established.
(B) Purpose. The Council hereby delegates to the City Administrator general supervisory control over
all departments and employees with managerial operational authority and responsibilities during the time as
the Council is not in regular or special session.
(C) Responsibilities, duties, and limitations. The City Administrator shall have the responsibilities,
duties, and limitations as the Council may, from time to time, establish in a job description. He or she shall
fulfill all job requirements as adopted by the Council. He or she shall also perform the other duties as may
be required of him or her by ordinance, resolution, or statutes adopted by the City of Olivia, the State of
Minnesota, or the United States of America. The Council may rescind, modify, or reverse action taken by
the City Administrator.
(Ord. 196, passed 2-6-1984)
' 31.16 SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.
(A) Establishment. The position of Superintendent of Public Works is hereby established.
(B) Purpose. The Council hereby delegates to the Superintendent of Public Works general
supervisory control over the Park and Street Departments.
(C) Responsibilities, duties, and limitations. The Superintendent of Public Works shall have the
responsibilities, duties, and limitations as the Council may, from time to time, establish in a job description.
He or she shall fulfill all job requirements as adopted by the Council. He or she shall report to the City
City Officials
15
Administrator during the time as the Council is not in regular or special session. The Council may rescind,
modify, or revise action taken by the Superintendent of Public Works.
(Ord. 196, passed 2-6-1984)
' 31.17 LIQUOR STORE MANAGER.
(A) Establishment. The position of Liquor Store Manager is hereby established.
(B) Purpose. The Council hereby delegates to the Liquor Store Manager general supervisory and
managerial control over the Liquor Store.
(C) Responsibilities, duties, and limitations. The Liquor Store Manager shall have the responsibilities,
duties, and limitations as the Council may, from time to time, establish in a job description. He or she shall
fulfill all job requirements as adopted by the Council. He or she shall report to the City Administrator
during the time as the Council is not in regular or special session. He or she shall also perform the other
duties as may be required of him or her by ordinance, resolution, or statutes adopted by the City of Olivia,
the State of Minnesota, or the United States of America. The Council may rescind, modify, or reverse
action taken by the Liquor Store Manager.
(Ord. 196, passed 2-6-1984)
' 31.18 AIRPORT MANAGER.
(A) Establishment. The position of Airport Manager is hereby established.
(B) Purpose. The Council hereby delegates to the Airport Manager general supervisory and
managerial control over the airport.
(C) Responsibilities, duties, and limitations. The Airport Manager shall have the responsibilities,
duties, and limitations as the Council may, from time to time, establish in a job description. He or she shall
fulfill all job requirements as adopted by the Council; State of Minnesota, Division of Aeronautics; and the
United States of America, Federal Aviation Administration. He or she shall report to the City
Administrator during the time as the Council is not in regular or special session. The Council may rescind,
modify, or reverse action taken by the Airport Manager.
(Ord. 196, passed 2-6-1984)
' 31.19 FIRE CHIEF.
(A) Establishment. The position of Fire Chief is hereby established.
(B) Purpose. The Council hereby delegates to the Fire Chief general supervisory control over the Fire
Department.
Olivia - Administration
16
(C) Responsibilities, duties, and limitations. The Fire Chief shall have the responsibilities, duties, and
limitations as the Council may, from time to time, establish in a job description. He or she shall fulfill all
job requirements as adopted by the Council. He or she shall report to the City Administrator during the
time as the Council is not in regular or special session. The Council may rescind, modify, or reverse action
taken by the Fire Chief.
(Ord. 196, passed 2-6-1984)
' 31.20 SUBORDINATE POSITIONS.
The Council may, from time to time, establish or remove by resolution subordinate positions to
supervisory and/or managerial positions.
(Ord. 196, passed 2-6-1984)
17
CHAPTER 32: CITY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Library Board
32.01 Establishment
Public Utilities Commission
32.10 Establishment
32.11 Membership
32.12 Terms
32.13 Duties and powers
32.14 Rules
32.15 Effective date
Fire Department
32.20 Establishment
Police Department
32.35 Establishment
32.36 Appointment and removal
32.37 Personnel
32.38 Compensation
32.39 Duties of Police Chief
32.40 General duties of Police Department members
32.41 Department rules
32.42 Department property
32.43 Uniform regulation
32.44 Citizenship required
32.45 Physical examination
32.46 Suspension or removal
32.47 Emergency police appointments
32.48 Effective date
18
Planning Commission
32.60 Planning Commission
Parks and Recreation Commission
32.70 Establishment, purpose, organization and governance
LIBRARY BOARD
' 32.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
(A) There is hereby established, within the City of Olivia, a Public Library to be governed by a Library
Board consisting of 9 members to be appointed for 3-year terms by the Mayor with the approval of the City
Council. No Library Board member may serve more than 2 consecutive 3-year terms.
(B) The Public Library and the Library Board shall be governed by the terms of M.S. Ch. 134, as it
may be amended from time to time, and shall have the powers, duties, obligations, and responsibilities
conferred by that chapter.
(C) All past actions and agreements of the Library Board are hereby ratified to the extent that the
actions and agreements comply with the governing laws of the State of Minnesota and the ordinances of the
City of Olivia.
(D) The Library Board is authorized to accept gifts, bequests, or grants to be used for Public Library
purposes.
(Ord. 215, passed 10-5-1987)
PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
' 32.10 ESTABLISHMENT.
A Public Utilities Commission is hereby established.
(Ord. 201, passed 10-1-1984)
' 32.11 MEMBERSHIP.
(A) The Commission shall be composed of 5 members appointed by the City Council, and subject to
removal by a majority vote of the City Council.
City Organizations
19
(B) The Commission membership may also include the following ex-officio non-voting members: 1
member of the City Council, with the Council member serving for a term the duration of which shall be
established by the City Council at the time of appointment, but in no event for a term longer than the
elected term as a member of the City Council; the City Administrator; and the Superintendent of Public
Works.
(Ord. 201, passed 10-1-1984)
' 32.12 TERMS.
The term of office shall be 5 years. Appointees shall hold their offices until their successor is
appointed and qualified. The initial appointments after passage of '' 32.10-.14 shall be: 1 appointment for
a 1-year term; 1 appointment for a 2-year term; 1 appointment for a 3-year term; 1 appointment for a 4-year
term; and 1-appointment for a full 5-year term.
(Ord. 201, passed 10-1-1984)
' 32.13 DUTIES AND POWERS.
(A) To make recommendations to the Council on the operation of the electric, water, wastewater, and
storm water sections, and the capital utility reserve;
(B) To recommend to the Council reasonable rates and charges for the commodities and services
furnished by the above sections; and
(C) To review and make recommendations to the Council on all agreements entered into with other
agencies as they relate to the above sections.
(Ord. 201, passed 10-1-1984)
' 32.14 RULES.
The Commission shall adopt rules for its own proceedings. It shall annually choose a President and
Secretary from among its members. No member of the Commission shall receive a salary.
(Ord. 201, passed 10-1-1984)
Cross-reference:
Utility Corporate Reserve Account, see ' 35.01
' 32.15 EFFECTIVE DATE.
Sections 32.10-.14 shall be published once in the official city newspaper, and shall be in full force and
effect upon publication.
(Ord. 201, passed 10-1-1984)
Olivia - Administration
20
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.20 ESTABLISHMENT.
(A) Establishment. There is hereby established a Fire and Rescue Department in the City of
Olivia, which shall be known as the Olivia Fire and Rescue Department.
(B) Purpose. The general object, purpose, and plan of the Department shall be the extinguishment
of fire, and the protection of life and property.
(C) Organization and Governance. The Olivia Fire and Rescue Department shall consist of a Fire
Chief, who shall be the chief executive officer, and such subordinate members as the City Council shall
appoint as needed. Fire and Rescue Department members shall be subject to the City’s personnel
policy provisions. Department members shall follow the department’s operational provisions
contained within the department Standard Operating Guidelines and Standard Operating Procedures, as
approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 288, passed 11-6-2006, amended by Ord. 2018-05, passed 05-07-2018)
(D) Technical Rescue Team.
(1) The Fire and Rescue Department may establish a Technical Rescue Team (also known as
TRT).
(2) In order to become a member of the TRT, and individual must be a member in good standing
of a local fire department, and the individual must be approved by the City Council. Non-Olivia Fire
Department members of the TRT will be part of the TRT for TRT purposes only. Members of the TRT
are “paid on call” status, and shall be paid at the same rate as regular fire call pay. Olivia Fire Relief
Association Retirement Benefits will not be provided to non-Olivia TRT members. TRT members
shall be insured the same as all Olivia Fire and Rescue Department members.
(3) The Olivia Fire and Rescue Department Captains and Chiefs will be in charge of all fire and
TRT scenes. TRT members shall abide by the City of Olivia Personnel Policy like all other Fire and
Rescue Department members. TRT members shall follow the TRT’s operational provisions contained
within the TRT Standard Operating Guidelines and Procedures, as approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 2019-02, passed 03-04-2019)
POLICE DEPARTMENT
' 32.35 ESTABLISHMENT.
There is hereby established a Department of Police in the City of Olivia which shall hereafter be
known as the Olivia Police Department.
(Ord. 161, passed 6-27-1977)
City Organizations
21
' 32.36 APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL.
Each member of the Olivia Police Department shall be appointed by the City Council, and may be
removed by the City Council.
(Ord. 161, passed 6-27-1977)
' 32.37 PERSONNEL.
The Olivia Police Department shall consist of the Police Chief, who shall be the chief executive officer
of the Department, and the subordinate police officers as shall be prescribed by ordinance or resolution.
(Ord. 161, passed 6-27-1977)
' 32.38 COMPENSATION.
Personnel of the Olivia Police Department will receive the compensation as shall be determined by the
City Council.
(Ord. 161, passed 6-27-1977)
' 32.39 DUTIES OF POLICE CHIEF.
The Police Chief shall have direct control and management of all members of the Police Department
and shall be responsible for the lawful exercise of the duties of the personnel, subject to the laws of the
State of Minnesota, the ordinances of the City of Olivia, and orders of the City Administrator. The Chief
shall be responsible for the maintenance of order, the enforcement of laws, ordinances, and regulations of
the city, the prevention of crime, and the protection of life and property. He or she shall maintain discipline
so as to secure complete efficiency in the Department. In case of the absence or disability of the Chief, the
Chief with approval of the City Administrator shall designate a police officer to be Acting Chief, and the
Acting Chief shall perform the duties and exercise the power and authority of the Chief, but shall be
entitled to no additional salary therefor. In the event of the absence or disability of the Chief and City
Administrator, the Acting City Administrator shall designate a police officer to be the Acting Chief.
(Ord. 161, passed 6-27-1977)
' 32.40 GENERAL DUTIES OF POLICE DEPARTMENT MEMBERS.
(A) The Police Chief and each police officer shall perform the duties as may be required by law,
ordinance, or city regulation and the other duties as may be imposed by the City Administrator.
(B) Each member of the Department shall give the assistance as is necessary or as may be directed by
the City Administrator to any other city department.
(Ord. 161, passed 6-27-1977)
Olivia - Administration
22
' 32.41 DEPARTMENT RULES.
The Police Chief shall promulgate, subject to approval of the City Council, rules and regulations for
the operation of the Department, and for the discipline, equipment, and uniforms of the police officers,
fixing their duties and prescribing penalties for violation of any rules and regulations. The City
Administrator shall be responsible for the maintaining and enforcement of those departmental rules and
regulations.
(Ord. 161, passed 6-27-1977)
' 32.42 DEPARTMENT PROPERTY.
The Police Chief shall have custody, care, and control of the police property and equipment of the
Police Department, subject to the direction of the City Administrator. The Police Chief shall conduct
periodic surveys of the property and equipment, arrange for the salvaging of discarded or impaired items,
and submit recommendations as to future needs.
(Ord. 161, passed 6-27-1977)
' 32.43 UNIFORM REGULATION.
(A) Each member of the Police Department shall wear a suitable badge, to be furnished by the city,
and every member of the Police Department shall, while on duty, wear a uniform which shall comply with
department rules and regulations pertaining to uniforms.
(B) The Chief may issue written orders authorizing the performance of specific duties while not in
uniform.
(C) Whenever any member shall terminate membership in the Department he or she shall immediately
deliver his or her badge and all other property issued by the city and in his or her possession to the City
Administrator, or Police Chief and all sums due the member shall be withheld pending the final settlement.
(Ord. 161, passed 6-27-1977)
' 32.44 CITIZENSHIP REQUIRED.
Each candidate for any position in the Police Department must have been a citizen of the United States
for at least 5 years prior to the date of appointment.
(Ord. 161, passed 6-27-1977)
' 32.45 PHYSICAL EXAMINATION.
Prior to appointment as a member of the Police Department, each applicant must file on a form to be
City Organizations
23
furnished by the city a signed, written report by a physician licensed to practice medicine and surgery in
Minnesota, stating that a complete and thorough physical examination made by him or her within 30 days
prior to the filing of the application for the position discloses that the applicant is sound in all respects and
physically qualified for the exacting requirements of police duty.
(Ord. 161, passed 6-27-1977)
' 32.46 SUSPENSION OR REMOVAL.
(A) Each member of the Department shall be subject to suspension without pay for a period of not
exceeding 30 days, and also to demotion or removal from office or employment for misconduct,
incompetency, inefficiency, cowardice, or failure to perform duties, or to observe the rules and regulations
of the Department, subject to the right of appeal of the aggrieved party in a manner prescribed by law.
(B) The action shall be taken by the City Administrator in the case of the Police Chief, or by the Police
Chief in the case of other members of the Department in all cases of suspension.
(C) In cases of removal, the action shall be taken by the City Council.
(Ord. 161, passed 6-27-1977)
' 32.47 EMERGENCY POLICE APPOINTMENTS.
(A) In case of riot or other emergency as defined by the City Council, the Council or City
Administrator or Police Chief may appoint for a specified time as many special police officers as may be
necessary for the maintenance of law and order.
(B) During the appointment, the special police officers shall possess only those powers and perform
only those duties as shall be specifically assigned by the Police Chief.
(C) All appointments as special police officer shall expire upon determination of the City Council that
the riot or other emergency has ceased to exist.
(Ord. 161, passed 6-27-1977)
' 32.48 EFFECTIVE DATE.
Sections 32.35 et seq. shall take force and effect from and after its publication according to law.
(Ord. 161, passed 6-27-1977)
Olivia - Administration
24
PLANNING COMMISSION
' 32.60 PLANNING COMMISSION.
For provisions regarding the Planning Commission, see Chapter 152.
PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
§ 32.70 ESTABLISHMENT
(A) Establishment. There is hereby established a Parks and Recreation Commission in the City of
Olivia, which shall be known as the Parks & Recreation Commission or “Park Board.”
(B) Purpose. The general object, purpose and plan of the Parks and Recreation Commission shall
be to oversee and manage the numerous activities associated with park and recreational facility
planning, maintenance and improvement, trail and sidewalk planning and development, support the
establishment of a diverse offering of recreational opportunities for residents and visitors, and other
efforts to enhance and benefit the general welfare of the community. The Parks and Recreation
Commission shall serve as an advisory board to the City’s Parks Department and the City Council in
regards to matters associated with its duties and purposes as provided for in this section, or as otherwise
assigned by the City Council.
(C) Organization and Governance. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall be organized in
accordance with the by-laws of the Parks and Recreation Commission which shall be adopted by the
City Council.
(Ord. 2014-01, passed 2-3-2014)
25
CHAPTER 33: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
33.01 Policy and purpose
33.02 Definitions
33.03 Establishment of emergency management organization
33.04 Powers and duties of Director
33.05 Local emergencies
33.06 Emergency regulations
33.07 Emergency management a government function
33.08 Participation in labor disputes or politics
33.99 Penalty
' 33.01 POLICY AND PURPOSE.
Because of the existing possibility of the occurrence of disasters of unprecedented size and destruction
resulting from fire, flood, tornado, blizzard, destructive winds, or other natural causes, or from sabotage,
hostile action, or from hazardous material mishaps of catastrophic measure; and in order to insure that
preparations of this city will be adequate to deal with those disasters, and generally, to provide for the
common defense and to protect the public peace, health, and safety, and to preserve the lives and property
of the people of this city, it is hereby found and declared to be necessary:
(A) To establish a city emergency management organization responsible for city planning and
preparation for emergency government operations in time of disasters;
(B) To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during emergencies and disasters;
(C) To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between this city and other political subdivisions of this
state and of other states with respect to the carrying out of emergency-preparedness functions; and
(D) To comply with the provisions of M.S. ' 12.25, as it may be amended from time to time, which
requires that each political subdivision of the state shall establish a local organization for emergency
management.
Olivia - Administration
26
' 33.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
DISASTER. A situation which creates an immediate and serious impairment to the health and safety
of any person, or a situation which has resulted in or is likely to result in catastrophic loss to property, and
for which traditional sources of relief and assistance within the affected area are unable to repair or prevent
the injury or loss.
EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances that calls for immediate action to
prevent a disaster from developing or occurring.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. The preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency
functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize,
and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters caused by fire, flood, tornado, and other acts of
nature, or from sabotage, hostile action, or from industrial hazardous material mishaps. These functions
include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, emergency medical services, engineering,
warning services, communications, radiological, and chemical, evacuation, congregate care, emergency
transportation, existing or properly assigned functions of plant protection, temporary restoration of public
utility services and other functions related to civil protection, together with all other activities necessary or
incidental for carrying out the foregoing functions. EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT includes those
activities sometimes referred to as civil defense functions.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES. The total personnel resources engaged in city-level
emergency management functions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or any rule or order
thereunder. This includes personnel from city departments, authorized volunteers, and private
organizations and agencies.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION. The staff responsible for coordinating
city-level planning and preparation for disaster response. This organization provides city liaison and
coordination with federal, state, and local jurisdictions relative to disaster preparedness activities and
assures implementation of federal and state program requirements.
' 33.03 ESTABLISHMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION.
There is hereby created within the city government an emergency management organization which
shall be under the supervision and control of the City Emergency Management Director, called the Director.
The Director shall be appointed by the Mayor with approval of the City Council for an indefinite term and
may be removed by him or her at any time. The Director shall serve with a salary
Emergency Management
27
as established by the City Council and shall be paid his or her necessary expenses. The Director shall have
direct responsibility for the organization, administration, and operation of the emergency preparedness
organization, subject to the direction and control of the Mayor.
' 33.04 POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.
(A) The Director, with the consent of the Mayor, shall represent the city on any regional or state
conference for emergency management. The Director shall develop proposed mutual aid agreements with
other political subdivisions of the state for reciprocal emergency management aid and assistance in an
emergency too great to be dealt with unassisted, and shall present these agreements to the Council for its
action. These arrangements shall be consistent with the State Emergency Plan.
(B) The Director shall make studies and surveys of the human resources, industries, resources, and
facilities of the city as deemed necessary to determine their adequacy for emergency management and to
plan for their most efficient use in time of an emergency or disaster. The Director shall establish the
economic stabilization systems and measures, service staffs, boards, and sub-boards required, in accordance
with state and federal plans and directions subject to the approval of the Mayor.
(C) The Director shall prepare a comprehensive emergency plan for the emergency preparedness of the
city and shall present the plan to the Council for its approval. When the Council has approved the plan, it
shall be the duty of all city agencies and all emergency preparedness forces of the city to perform the duties
and functions assigned by the plan as approved. The plan may be modified in like manner from time to
time. The Director shall coordinate the emergency management activities of the city to the end that they
shall be consistent and fully integrated with the emergency plans of the federal government and the state
and correlated with emergency plans of the county and other political subdivisions within the state.
(D) In accordance with the State and City Emergency Plan, the Director shall institute training
programs, public information programs and conduct practice warning alerts and emergency exercises as
may be necessary to assure prompt and effective operation of the City Emergency Plan when a disaster
occurs.
(E) The Director shall utilize the personnel, services, equipment, supplies, and facilities of existing
departments and agencies of the city to the maximum extent practicable. The officers and personnel of all
city departments and agencies shall, to the maximum extent practicable, cooperate with and extend services
and facilities to the city's emergency management organization and to the Governor upon request. The head
of each department or agency in cooperation with the Director shall be responsible for the planning and
programming of those emergency activities as will involve the utilization of the facilities of the department
or agency.
Olivia - Administration
28
(F) (1) The Director shall, in cooperation with those city departments and agencies affected, assist in
the organizing, recruiting, and training of emergency management personnel, which may be required on a
volunteer basis to carry out the emergency plans of the city and state.
(2) To the extent that emergency personnel are recruited to augment a regular city department or
agency for emergencies, they shall be assigned to the departments or agencies and shall be under the
administration and control of the department or agency.
(G) Consistent with the state emergency services law, the Director shall coordinate the activity of
municipal emergency management organizations within the city and assist in establishing and conducting
training programs as required to assure emergency operational capability in the several services as provided
by M.S. ' 12.25, as it may be amended from time to time.
(H) The Director shall carry out all orders, rules, and regulations issued by the Governor with
reference to emergency management.
(I) The Director shall prepare and submit reports on emergency preparedness activities when
requested by the Mayor.
' 33.05 LOCAL EMERGENCIES.
(A) A local emergency may be declared only by the Mayor or his or her legal successor. It shall not be
continued for a period in excess of 3 days except by or with the consent of the Council. Any order or
proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local emergency shall be given prompt and general
publicity and shall be filed in the office of the City Administrator.
(B) A declaration of a local emergency shall invoke necessary portions of the response and recovery
aspects of applicable local or inter-jurisdictional disaster plans, and may authorize aid and assistance
thereunder.
(C) No jurisdictional agency or official may declare a local emergency unless expressly authorized by
the agreement under which the agency functions. However, an inter-jurisdictional disaster agency shall
provide aid and services in accordance with the agreement under which it functions.
Penalty, see ' 33.99
' 33.06 EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.
(A) Whenever necessary, to meet a declared emergency or to prepare for an emergency for which
adequate regulations have not been adopted by the Governor or the Council, the Council may by resolution
promulgate regulations, consistent with applicable federal or state law or regulation,
Emergency Management
29
respecting: the conduct of persons and the use of property during emergencies; the repair, maintenance,
and safeguarding of essential public services, emergency health, fire, and safety regulations, drills or
practice periods required for preliminary training, and all other matters which are required to protect public
safety, health, and welfare in declared emergencies.
(B) (1) Every resolution of emergency regulations shall be in writing; shall be dated; shall refer to the
particular emergency to which it pertains, if so limited, and shall be filed in the office of the City
Administrator.
(2) A copy shall be kept posted and available for public inspection during business hours.
(3) Notice of the existence of these regulations and their availability for inspection at the City
Administrator's office shall be conspicuously posted at the front of the City Hall or other headquarters of
the city or at other places in the affected area as the Council shall designate in the resolution.
(4) By resolution, the Council may modify or rescind a regulation.
(C) The Council may rescind any regulation by resolution at any time. If not sooner rescinded, every
regulation shall expire at the end of 30 days after its effective date or at the end of the emergency to which
it relates, whichever comes first. Any resolution, rule, or regulation inconsistent with an emergency
regulation promulgated by the Council shall be suspended during the period of time and to the extent
conflict exists.
(D) (1) During a declared emergency, the city is, under the provisions of M.S. ' 12.31, as it may be
amended from time to time and notwithstanding any statutory or Charter provision to the contrary,
empowered, through its Council, acting within or without the corporate limits of the city, to enter into
contracts and incur obligations necessary to combat the disaster by protecting the health and safety of
persons and property and providing emergency assistance to the victims of a disaster.
(2) The city may exercise these powers in the light of the exigencies of the disaster without
compliance with the time-consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law pertaining to the
performance of public work, entering rental equipment agreements, purchase of supplies and materials,
limitations upon tax levies, and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds, including, but not
limited to, publication of resolutions, publication of calls for bids, provisions of personnel laws and rules,
provisions relating to low bids, and requirement for bids.
Penalty, see ' 33.99
Olivia - Administration
30
' 33.07 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT A GOVERNMENT FUNCTION.
(A) All functions and activities relating to emergency management are hereby declared to be
governmental functions.
(B) The provisions of this section shall not affect the right of any person to receive benefits to which
he or she would otherwise be entitled under this resolution or under the worker's compensation law, or
under any pension law, nor the right of any person to receive any benefits or compensation under any act of
Congress.
' 33.08 PARTICIPATION IN LABOR DISPUTES OR POLITICS.
The emergency management organization shall not participate in any form of political activity, nor
shall it be employed directly or indirectly for political purposes, nor shall it be employed in a labor dispute.
' 33.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any regulation adopted thereunder relating to
acts, omissions, or conduct other than official acts of city employees or officers is guilty of a misdemeanor.
Cross-reference:
General penalty, see ' 10.99
31
CHAPTER 35: FINANCES
Section
35.01 Utility Capital Reserve Account
35.02 Financial audit
35.03 Bad debt write-off
35.04 Finance charge on miscellaneous billing statements
35.05 Fees for emergency protection and fire services under fire service contracts
' 35.01 UTILITY CAPITAL RESERVE ACCOUNT.
(A) Establishment. Commencing on the first day of the first month after the effective date of the
ordinance creating this section each purchaser of any 1 or combination of utilities from the city shall pay, in
addition to all other fees, taxes, and charges otherwise authorized by the city a Utility Capital Reserve
Account Fee (RAF). A purchaser is obligated to pay an RAF for each physical location for there which is a
separate postal mailing address. Notwithstanding the forgoing, a purchaser is not obligated to pay more
than 1 RAF for any premises for which there is a single postal mailing address.
(B) Monthly fee. Unless and until such time as the Capital Reserve Account fee may be modified by
further ordinance, the fee shall be $4.50 per month. Reserve Account fees shall be included on the monthly
utility bill. Payment shall be due and payable in full upon receipt of the bill. All fees are charges against
the respective property owners, lessees an occupants and are due on the due date specified by the city for
the respective account, and shall be delinquent 21 days thereafter. Late fees established by the city Council
for other utilities shall apply to RAF. It is the duty of the city to endeavor to promptly collect delinquent
fees, and in all cases where satisfactory arrangements for payments have not been made, all such delinquent
fees shall be forwarded to the City Administrator who shall prepare and send a past due notice to the
customer. Such action may be optional or subsequent to taking legal action to collect delinquent accounts.
(C) Capital Reserve Account. All Utility Reserve Account fees collected by the city shall be deposited
into a separate Utility Reserve Account or alternatively maintained in other accounts in the city in such a
manner that the balance in the Reserve Account is readily ascertainable.
(D) Reserve Account Fund use. Withdrawals and/or distributions for the Reserve Account shall be
approved by the Council by resolution for use by the city to pay for or to defray the city=s share of costs
associated with the repair (other than in the normal course of maintenance,) replacement, improvement, or
extensions of the city=s water distribution, sanitary sewer, and storm sewer systems.
Olivia - Administration
32
(E) Effective date. This section shall be effective 2-1-2006 and a 1-time publication being the 26 day
of January 2006, in the official newspaper.
(Ord. 283, passed 1-26-2006)
Cross-reference:
For Public Utility Commission, see '' 32.10 et seq.
' 35.02 FINANCIAL AUDIT.
The following policy statements are hereby adopted by the City Council.
(A) An auditing firm having at least 1 certified public accountant on staff will be retained by the city
for a period of 4 years to perform auditing and accounting services for the city beginning in the year 1989.
(B) The minimum contents of the annual audit report to be prepared by the auditing firm will be as
follows:
(1) Combined balance sheet - all funds.
(2) Combined statement of revenues, expenditures, and changes in fund balance - all funds.
(3) Combined statement of revenues, expenditures, and changes in retained earnings - all
proprietary funds.
(4) Combined statement of cash flows - all proprietary funds.
(5) Combined schedule of indebtedness.
(6) In addition, the following supplementary information will be included:
(a) Management letter.
(b) Combining, individual fund, and account group financial statements.
(c) Auditors comments on compliance.
(d) Schedule of EDA revenues and expenditures.
(e) Taxable valuations, tax levies, and rates for the past 5 years.
(f) Combined schedule of indebtedness.
(g) Schedule of debt service requirements.
(h) Schedule of sources and uses of funds of the TIF districts.
Finances
33
(C) In addition to performing the auditing task and preparing financial statements, the auditing firm
will be required to present their audit report to the City Council prior to June 1 of the year following the
year of the audit. The firm will also be required to provide accounting consulting services to City Staff at a
set rate established in the 4-year contract.
(D) Upon the termination of the City Administrator, whether through retirement, voluntary termination
or forced termination, the city may use the services of the State Auditor=s Office or another CPA firm other
than the one under contract to perform the auditing and preparation of the financial statements for the year
during which the City Administrator left office. If this interrupts the performance of a 4-year contract the
city may have with a private certified public accounting firm, their contract will be extended for 1
additional year.
(Res. 88-26, passed 8-2-1988)
' 35.03 BAD DEBT WRITE-OFF.
(A) General. The City Council has found it necessary to establish a bad debt write-off policy for
utility customers which have either discontinued a residence and/or a business in the city.
(B) Determination of bad debts. Prior to establishing an account as a bad debt the following must take
place.
(1) The customer must have left the city or filed bankruptcy proceedings.
(2) The City Administrator must have attempted to notify the customer that has left the city that a
utility account in their names is left unpaid and they have 30 days to make it current.
(3) After the 30-day limit expires the names and amounts of the remaining accounts will be given
to the City Council for permission for write off and submission to a collection agency for further collection
procedures.
(4) The Council must make a motion and duly pass it before any account may be written off or
turned over to a collection agency.
(5) After the City Council approved the determination of the bad debt accounts the City
Administrator will make the necessary accounting entries as described below to write-off the bad debts, he
or she will also submit the accounts to the city=s collection agency for further collection.
Olivia - Administration
34
(C) Selection of a collection agency. The City Administrator will submit proposals for collection
agencies to the Council for their review. The proposal will be for a 5-year period allowing the city to stay
with the agency for 5 years unless the agency deviates from the collection cost and processes they submitted
on their proposal. The city reserves the right to renew an agreement with a collection agency after a 5-year
period without taking new proposals.
(D) Write-off procedures. The following accounting entries will be taken to write-off the bad debts
once they are approved by the City Council:
(1) The accounts are first entered as a credit to accounts receivable in each of the utility funds and
debit to cash, in order to remove them from the receivable account.
(2) The accounts are next entered as bad debt expenses to individual utility funds by crediting
cash and debiting bad debt expense in each fund.
(3) If the city receives payments on the bad debts after the above entries are made, the accounting
entry to be made would be in the general fund only and would be a debit to general fund cash and credit to
recovery of bad debts.
(Res. 88-7 passed 1-19-1988)
' 35.04 FINANCE CHARGE ON MISCELLANEOUS BILLING STATEMENTS.
Terms: Net 30 days. Accounts not paid in 30 days are subject to a finance charge of 1.5% per month
(annual rate of 18%), $.50 minimum charge.
Editor=s note:
This policy was adopted by the City Council at its regular meeting on April 16, 1990 and was effective
May 1-1990
§ 35.05 FEES FOR EMERGENCY PROTECTION AND FIRE SERVICES UNDER FIRE
SERVICE CONTRACTS.
(A) Purposes and intent. This ordinance is adopted for the purpose of authorizing the City of Olivia to
charge for fire service as authorized by Minn. Stat. §§ 366.011, 366.012, and 415.01.
(B) Definitions.
(1) “Fire service” means any deployment of firefighting personnel and/or equipment to extinguish
a fire or perform any preventative measure in an effort to protect equipment, life, or property in an area
threatened by fire. It also includes the deployment of firefighting personnel and/or equipment to provide
fire suppression, rescue, extrication, and any other services related to fire and rescue as may occasionally
occur.
(2) “Fire service charge” means the charge imposed by the City for receiving fire service.
(3) “Motor vehicle” means any self-propelled vehicle designed and originally manufactured to
operate primarily upon public roads and highways, and not operated exclusively upon railroad tracks. It
Finances
35
includes semi-trailers. It does not include snowmobiles, manufactured homes, all-terrain vehicles, or park
trailers.
(4) “Fire protection contract” means a contract between the City and a town or other city for the
City to provide fire service.
(5) “Mutual aid agreement” means an agreement between the City and a town or other city for the
City’s fire department to provide assistance to the fire department of a town or other city.
(C) Parties affected.
(1) Owners of property within the City who receive fire service.
(2) Anyone who receives fire service as a result of a motor vehicle accident or fire within the
City.
(3) Owners of property in towns or cities to which the City provides fire service pursuant to a fire
protection contract.
(D) Billing and collection.
(1) Parties requesting and receiving fire services will be billed directly by the City of Olivia
within 30 days of the fire service. Additionally, if the party receiving fire services did not request services
but a fire or other situation exists which, at the discretion of the fire department personnel in charge
requires fire service, the party will be charged and billed. All parties will be billed whether or not the fire
service is covered by insurance. Any billable amount of the fire charge not covered by a party’s insurance
remains a debt of the party receiving the fire service.
(2) Parties billed for fire service will have 30 days to pay. If the fire service charge is not paid by
that time, it will be considered delinquent and the City will send a notice of delinquency.
(3) If the fire service charge remains unpaid for 30 days after this notice of delinquency is sent,
the City will use all practical and reasonable legal means to collect the fire service charge. The party
receiving fire service shall be liable for all collection costs incurred by the City including, but not limited
to, reasonable attorney fees and court costs.
(4) If the fire service charge remains unpaid for 30 days after the notice of delinquency is sent, the
City Council may also, on or before October 15 of each year, certify the unpaid fire service charge to the
county auditor in which the recipient of the services owns real property for collection with taxes. The
county auditor is responsible for remitting to the city all charges collected on behalf of the city. The City
must give the property owner notice of its intent to certify the unpaid fire service charge by September 15.
(5) False alarms will be billed as a fire call.
(E) Mutual aid agreement.
(A) When the City fire department provides fire service to another fire department pursuant to a
Mutual Aid Agreement, the billing will be determined by the Mutual Aid Agreement.
(F) Billing procedure for fire protection contracts with towns or other cities.
(A) When the City fire department provides fire service to another fire department pursuant to a
Fire Protection Contract, the billing will be determined by the Contract.
Olivia - Administration
36
(G) Application of collections to budget.
(A) All collected fire charges will be city funds and used to offset the expenses of the City fire
department in providing fire services.
(H) Effective date. The ordinance shall become effective upon passage and publication.
(Ord. 2018-08, passed 09-24-2018)
1
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter
70. SNOWMOBILES, ATVs AND RECREATIONAL
VEHICLES
71. MOTOR VEHICLE AND TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
72. PARKING REGULATIONS
73. TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Olivia - Traffic Code
2
3
CHAPTER 70: SNOWMOBILES, ATVS, AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Snowmobiles
70.001 Intent
70.002 Speed; Operation of Snowmobiles
70.003 Snowmobiles
70.004 Single file traffic only
70.005 Rigid tow-bar requirement
70.006 Unlawful operation; Defenses
70.007 Penalties
All-Terrain Vehicles
70.010 Declaration; Definition; Intent
70.011 Operators’ Requirements
70.012 Operators’ Permits
70.013 Permissible purposes of ATV operation
70.014 Speed; Prohibited locations of operation of ATVs
70.015 Single file traffic only
70.016 Unlawful operation; Defenses
70.017 Penalties
Recreational Vehicles
70.020 Purpose and intent
70.021 Definition
70.022 Operation requirements
70.023 Street crossings
70.024 Hours of operation
70.025 Minimum equipment requirements
70.026 Designation of public areas for use
70.027 Motorized golf carts
Bicycles
4
70.040 Generally
70.041 Carrying packages or extra persons
70.042 Hitching to vehicle
70.043 Riding in business district
70.044 Speed limit
70.045 Lights
General Provisions
5
SNOWMOBILES
' 70.001 INTENT.
The laws of the State of Minnesota as set forth in Minnesota Statutes Section 84.81 through Section
84.928 and Chapter 169 are adopted in full. The definition of "snowmobile" for purposes of this Code
shall be the same as those set forth in Minnesota Statutes Section 84.81.
' 70.002 SPEED; OPERATION OF SNOWMOBILES.
The following regulations shall apply to the operation of all snowmobiles operated within the City of
Olivia:
(A) Speed. Unless posted otherwise, no snowmobile shall be operated at a speed in excess of 20 miles
per hour on the streets. Speed in alleys shall not exceed 10 miles per hour.
(B) Operation of snowmobiles. It shall be unlawful to operate a snowmobile in the City of Olivia upon
any streets, avenues, sidewalks, boulevards, parks, golf course, parking lots, alleys, school grounds, airport
property or other public or private property except as provided in this section.
' 70.003 SNOWMOBILES.
When the operation is in compliance with all other provisions of this Code, snowmobiles may be
operated:
(A) Between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on streets, alleys, and specially designated routes in
the City of Olivia and on private property with the owner’s permission, given specifically to the operator of
the snowmobile.
(B) Between 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. only for purposes of leaving a business establishment or
residence at which the operator was located at 10:00 p.m., and proceeding directly to the operator’s
residence by the most direct street route or proceeding from the operator’s residence directly out of town.
(C) Between 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. only for purposes of traveling on the boulevard on the south
side of Trunk Highway 212 between the intersection of Trunk Highway 71 South and Super-America or
unless allowed under paragraph (B) above.
(D) Between 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. only for the purposes of traveling on the Trunk Highway 71
South boulevard, provided that written permission is granted from the adjoining property owner(s). If
Olivia - Traffic Code
6
approval is granted by the property owner(s), proper signage is required indicating a trail has been created.
If said trail is not permitted by the adjourning property owner(s), snowmobile operators shall use existing
City streets at Trunk Highway 71 South and Ash Avenue.
' 70.004 SINGLE FILE TRAFFIC ONLY.
Snowmobiles traveling in the same direction must travel single-file. It shall be unlawful for two or
more snowmobiles to travel abreast on any City street.
' 70.005 RIGID TOW-BAR REQUIREMENT.
It shall be unlawful for any snowmobile to tow a sled, wagon, toboggan, skier or any other object or
person except by means of a rigid tow bar affixed to the rear of the snowmobile.
' 70.006 UNLAWFUL OPERATION; DEFENSES.
It shall be unlawful for the registered owner of a snowmobile to operate or allow to be operated, a
snowmobile contrary to this Code or governing State law.
The registered owner of the snowmobile may not be prosecuted and punished if:
(A) The snowmobile was reported as stolen to the Commissioner of Natural Resources or a law
enforcement agency at the time the alleged unlawful conduct occurred;
(B) The registered owner demonstrates that the snowmobile either was stolen or was not in use at the
time of the alleged unlawful conduct;
(C) The registered owner furnishes to law enforcement officers, upon request, the identity of the
person in actual physical control of the snowmobile at the time of such lawful conduct.
This section shall not apply to any person who rents or leases snowmobiles if such person keeps a
record of the name and address of the person or persons renting or leasing the snowmobile, the registration
number thereof, the departure date and time and the time of return.
The prosecution of the owner of a snowmobile under this section shall not operate to limit or bar the
prosecution of the snowmobile operator for violations of this ordinance or applicable Minnesota statutes.
' 70.007 PENALTIES.
Unless otherwise provided, a violation of this ordinance shall be a misdemeanor, subject to the
maximum penalties provided by law for misdemeanors.
General Provisions
7
(A) A violation of Section 70.002 (Speed), shall be a petty misdemeanor, subject to the
penalties provided by law for petty misdemeanors.
(B) A violation of any other section of this ordinance shall be a misdemeanor, subject to the penalties
provided for misdemeanors.
(C) Sections 70.001 through 70.007 shall not apply to, law enforcement agencies, and fire and rescue
personnel while in the performance of their official duties.
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
' 70.010 DECLARATION; DEFINITION; INTENT.
The laws of the State of Minnesota as set forth in Minnesota Statutes Section 84.81 through Section
84.928 and Chapter 169 are adopted in full. The definition of "all-terrain vehicle" (hereafter “ATV”) for
purposes of this Code shall be the same as those set forth in Minnesota Statutes Section 84.92. It is the
intent of this section to allow for the limited use of ATVs within the City for purposed described herein.
' 70.011 OPERATORS OF ATVS.
When the operation is in compliance with all other provisions of this Code, ATVs may be operated by
persons:
(A) 18 years of age or older;
(B) with a driver’s license that is valid with the State of Minnesota; and
(C) with a valid operator’s permit issued by the City.
' 70.012 OPERATORS’ PERMITS.
(A) The operator of an ATV must apply annually for an operators’ permit, which may be issued by the
City of Olivia upon the following conditions:
(1) Permit applications must be made on a form approved by Resolution of the City Council.
Application forms shall be available at the City Office.
(2) At the time the application is submitted, the applicant shall:
(a) Provide proof of insurance complying with the requirements of Minnesota Statutes
Olivia - Traffic Code
8
section 65B.48, subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to time.
(b) Pay the permit fee.
(c) Provide all other information as may be required by Resolution of the City Council.
(B) The City Council shall establish and may from time to time modify the permit fee amount by
Resolution.
(C) No person shall operate an ATV on public property within the City of Olivia without a valid
operators’ permit from the City of Olivia.
(D) Upon approval of an application, the City shall issue a sticker or plate, which shall be displayed
upon the designated location of the ATV.
(E) Operators’ permits shall be issued for a period of one year, and may be renewed annually by
complying with the requirements of this section. Permits may be denied or revoked by the Chief of Police,
in his or her discretion, upon proof of a conviction of any of Sections 70.010 through 70.018, by other
evidence of abuse of the privileges of this section, or when an operator no longer has a valid driver’s
license. A permitee may appeal such revocation or denial to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal at
the City Office no later than 14 days after receiving notice or the denial or revocation.
' 70.013 PERMISSIBLE PURPOSES OF ATV OPERATION.
When the operation is in compliance with all other provisions of this Code, and the operator uses all
proper safety equipment as required by State law, ATVs may be operated:
(A) For traveling from the operator’s place of employment, or the operator’s residence, and
proceeding directly to the operator’s residence or place of employment by the most direct street route, or
for traveling to or from the operator’s place of employment, or the operator’s residence and proceeding
directly out of town; or
(B) For utility purposes when the operator is traveling to work locations utilizing the most direct route
on City streets during daylight hours for purposes of:
(1) mowing and fertilizing lawns;
(2) spraying weeds;
(3) other uses, when used as the power unit.
(C) For the purposes of plowing or blowing snow only, ATVs may be used on streets, alleys, and
sidewalks within 24 hours of the snowfall.
General Provisions
9
(D) Paragraphs (B) and (C) of this section shall apply only when specially designed equipment is
mounted on, or towed by, the ATV utilizing a rigid hitch system, or the ATV is used as the power unit on
the job site. An ATV may be driven to a refueling station for purposes of refueling when the ATV is
otherwise being operated for purposes permissible in paragraphs (A), (B), and (C) of this section. The
ATV must be registered and equipped according to State law and this Code.
' 70.014 SPEED; PROHIBITED LOCATIONS OF OPERATION OF ATVS.
The following regulations shall apply to the operation of all ATVs operated within the City of Olivia:
(A) Speed. Unless posted otherwise, no ATV shall be operated at a speed in excess of 20 miles per
hour on the streets. Speed in alleys shall not exceed 10 miles per hour.
(B) Prohibited locations of operation of ATVs. It shall be unlawful to operate an ATV in the City of
Olivia upon any sidewalks, boulevards, parks, golf course, grounds, airport property, the Central Business
District, or any other public or private property except as provided in Sections 70.010 through 70.018.
(1) Central Business District. For purposes of this section, the Central Business District is
defined as the area identified as the Central Business District in Chapter 152 of this Code, and so
identified on the official zoning map of the City of Olivia.
' 70.015 SINGLE FILE TRAFFIC ONLY.
ATVs traveling in the same direction must travel single-file. It shall be unlawful for two or more
ATVs to travel abreast on any City street.
' 70.016 UNLAWFUL OPERATION; DEFENSES.
(A) (1) It shall be unlawful for the registered owner of an ATV to operate or allow to be operated, an
ATV contrary to this Code or governing State law.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an ATV contrary to this Code or State law.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an ATV without the following equipment:
(a) A standard muffler, which is properly attached and functioning to reduce engine noise to
the minimum necessary for operation. Muffler “cut-outs”, by-passes, straight pipes, and the like
are prohibited.
(b) Properly operating braking systems and lighting systems including brake lights,
headlights and tail lights, if originally equipped.
Olivia - Traffic Code
10
(c) A safety mechanism or “dead man” throttle in operating condition, if originally equipped.
(B) The registered owner of the ATV may not be prosecuted and punished if:
(1) The ATV was reported as stolen to the Commissioner of Natural Resources or a law
enforcement agency at the time the alleged unlawful conduct occurred;
(2) The registered owner demonstrates that the ATV either was stolen or was not in use at the
time of the alleged unlawful conduct;
(3) The registered owner furnishes to law enforcement officers, upon request, the identity of the
person in actual physical control of the ATV at the time of such unlawful conduct.
(C) The prosecution of the owner of an ATV under this section shall not operate to limit or bar the
prosecution of the ATV operator for violations of this ordinance or applicable Minnesota statutes.
' 70.017 PENALTIES.
Unless otherwise provided, a violation of this ordinance shall be a misdemeanor, subject to the
maximum penalties provided by law for misdemeanors.
(A) A violation of Section 70.014 (Speed), shall be a petty misdemeanor, subject to the
penalties provided by law for petty misdemeanors.
(B) A violation of any other section of this ordinance shall be a misdemeanor, subject to the penalties
provided for misdemeanors.
(C) Sections 70.010 through 70.017 shall not apply to, law enforcement agencies, and fire and rescue
personnel while in the performance of their official duties.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
' 70.020 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
(A) (1) The purpose of this subchapter is to provide reasonable regulations for the use of recreational
motor vehicles on public and private property in the city.
(2) This subchapter is not intended to allow what the Minnesota Statutes and Rules prohibit nor
to prohibit what the Minnesota Statutes and Rules expressly allow.
(B) This subchapter is intended to ensure the public safety and prevent a public nuisance.
General Provisions
11
' 70.021 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle and any vehicle propelled or
drawn by a self-propelled vehicle used for recreational purposes other than a snowmobile, all-terrain
vehicle, or golf cart including, but not limited to trail bikes, off-highway motorcycles, as defined by M.S.
' 84.787, subd. 7, as it may be amended from time to time, or motorized scooters, go-carts, hovercraft, or
any motor vehicle licensed for highway operation which is being used for off-road recreational purposes.
' 70.022 OPERATION REQUIREMENTS.
It is unlawful for any person to operate a recreational motor vehicle:
(A) On private property of another without specific written permission of the owner of the property.
Written permission may be given by a posted notice of any kind or description, so long as it specifies the
kind of vehicles allowed, that the owner, occupant or lessee allows, such as by saying ARecreational
Vehicles Allowed,@ ATrail Bikes Allowed,@ or words substantially similar;
(B) On publicly-owned land, including school, park property, playgrounds, recreation areas and golf
courses, except where permitted by this chapter;
(C) In a manner so as to create a loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which disturbs, annoys, or
interferes with the peace and quiet of other persons, and which noise is in excess of that permitted by Minn.
Stat. section 169.69, 169.693, or Minnesota Rules part 7030.1000 through 7030.60 as these statutes and
rules may be amended from time to time;
(D) On a public sidewalk or walkway provided or used for pedestrian travel;
(E) At any place while under the influence of intoxicating liquor, narcotics, or mood-altering drugs;
(F) At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under all the surrounding circumstances;
(G) At any place in a careless, reckless, or negligent manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger
any person or property or to cause injury or damage thereto;
(H) To intentionally drive, chase, run over or kill any animal, wild or domestic;
(I) By halting any recreational motor vehicle carelessly or heedlessly in disregard of the rights or the
safety of others or in a manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property or in
excess of 20 miles per hour on publicly-owned lands; or
Olivia - Traffic Code
12
(J) Within 150 feet of any public recreational area or gathering of people. This provision does not
apply to the occasional use of recreational motor vehicles on private property for the purpose of loading or
unloading it from a trailer or for mechanically checking it.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 70.023 STREET CROSSINGS.
No person under 14 years of age operating the vehicles regulated herein shall make a direct crossing of
any street, highway or public right-of-way.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 70.024 HOURS OF OPERATION.
Hours for use are 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 70.025 MINIMUM EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Standard mufflers shall be properly attached and in constant operation to reduce the noise of
operation of the motor to the minimum necessary for operation. No person shall use a muffler cutout,
by-pass, straight pipe or similar device on a recreational motor vehicle motor. The exhaust system shall not
emit or produce a sharp popping or crackling sound.
(B) Brakes shall be adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold under any conditions of
operation.
(C) At least 1 clear lamp shall be attached to the front with sufficient intensity to reveal persons and
vehicles at a distance of at least 100 feet ahead during the hours of darkness under normal atmospheric
conditions. The head lamp shall be so that glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of an oncoming
vehicle operator. It shall also be equipped with at least 1 red tail lamp having a minimum candlepower of
sufficient intensity to exhibit a red light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear during the
hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions. This equipment shall be required and shall be in
operating condition when the vehicle is operated between the hours of 1/2 hour after sunset and 1/2 hour
before sunrise, or at times of reduced visibility.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 70.026 DESIGNATION OF PUBLIC AREAS FOR USE.
(A) The Council may designate areas for use of recreational motor vehicles by approval of a majority
of the members of the City Council. The areas designated may be changed from time to time by the City
Council. Any area designated shall be published in the official newspaper of the city in a conspicuous
General Provisions
13
place after the approval. If an area is changed, the change shall be published in like manner in the official
newspaper of the city. An up-to-date map of any designated park areas open for recreational motor vehicle
use shall be kept on file in the office of the City Administrator, who shall provide on request a copy of the
map together with the applicable rules, regulations and this chapter to each person requesting the
information from the city.
(B) Unless designated by the City Council as an area for recreational motor vehicles, the use on city
park property shall be unlawful. Further, the use of city parks designated by the City Council shall be in
accordance with all of the applicable provisions of this chapter.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 70.027 MOTORIZED GOLF CART PERMITS.
(A) For the purpose of this section, and section 70.028, the term MOTORIZED GOLF CART shall
mean any passenger conveyance commonly recognized as a golf cart, with 4 wheels, 4 low pressure tires,
and that is powered by electricity or a gas engine with an engine displacement of less than 800 cubic
centimeters and total dry weight less than 800 pounds.
(1) No person shall operate a motorized golf cart on streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public
property in the City of Olivia without obtaining a permit for the golf cart as provided herein.
(2) Every application for a golf cart permit shall be made on a form supplied by the city and shall
contain the following information:
(a) The name and address of the applicant and owner of the golf cart;
(b) The nature of the applicant's physical handicap, if any;
(c) Model name, make, and year and number of the motorized golf cart;
(d) Other information as the city may require.
(3) The annual permit fee shall be in an amount set by Council from time to time. (See Appendix
A).
(4) Permits are for the golf cart. Permits and shall be granted for a period not to exceed 1 year.
All golf cart permits shall expire on December 31 of the year issued, and may be renewed annually,
beginning January 1 of each year.
(5) No permit shall be granted or renewed unless the following conditions are met:
(a) The applicant must demonstrate that he or she currently has valid driving privileges
within the State of Minnesota;
Olivia - Traffic Code
14
(b) The applicant may be required to submit a certificate signed by a physician that the
applicant is able to safely operate a motorized golf cart on the roadways designated;
(c) The applicant must provide evidence of liability insurance in compliance with the
provisions of Minnesota Statutes concerning insurance coverage for the golf cart, and agree to provide
updated insurance information to the City, if any;
(d) The applicant has not had his or her driver's license revoked as the result of criminal
proceedings.
(6) Motorized golf carts shall display the permit stickers issued by the City.
(7) City Council may suspend or revoke a permit granted hereunder upon a finding that the holder
thereof has violated any of the provisions of this section or Minn. Stat. Ch. 169, as it may be amended from
time to time, or if there is evidence that the permit holder cannot safely operate the motorized golf cart on
the designated roadways.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 70.028 MOTORIZED GOLF CART OPERATION
(A) (1) Motorized golf carts may only be operated on city streets and alleys, not on state or federal
highways, except to cross at regular intersections.
(2) Motorized golf carts may only be operated from sunrise to sunset. They shall not be operated
in inclement weather conditions or at any time when there is insufficient light to clearly see persons and
vehicles on the roadway at a distance of 500 feet.
(3) Motorized golf carts shall display the slow-moving vehicle emblem provided for in Minn.
Stat. section 169.522, as it may be amended from time to time, when operated on designated roadways.
(4) Motorized golf carts shall be equipped with a wing-style rear view mirror, if originally
equipped, to provide the driver with adequate vision from behind.
(5) Every person operating a motorized golf cart under permit on designated roadways has all the
rights and duties applicable to the driver of any other vehicle under the provisions of Minn. Stat. Ch. 169,
as it may be amended from time to time, except when these provisions cannot reasonably be applied to
motorized golf carts.
(6) The number of occupants in the golf cart may not exceed the design occupant load.
(B) (1) No person shall operate a golf cart without driving privileges that are valid within the State of
Minnesota.
General Provisions
15
(2) The owner of the golf cart shall become familiar with the status of the driving privileges of
any person that he or she intends to allow to operate his or her golf cart, prior to such operation.
(3) It shall be unlawful for the owner of a golf cart to operate or allow to be operated, a golf cart
contrary to this Code or governing State law.
(C) The owner of the golf cart may not be prosecuted and punished under section (B)(2) or (3) if:
(1) The golf cart was reported as stolen to the appropriate law enforcement agency at the time the
alleged unlawful conduct occurred;
(2) The golf cart owner demonstrates that the golf cart either was stolen or was not in use at the
time of the alleged unlawful conduct; or
(3) The golf cart owner furnishes to law enforcement officers, upon request, the identity of the
person in actual physical control of the golf cart at the time of such unlawful conduct.
(4) The prosecution of the owner of a golf cart under this section shall not operate to limit or bar
the prosecution of the golf cart operator for violations of this ordinance or applicable Minnesota statutes.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
BICYCLES
' 70.040 GENERALLY.
Every person riding a bicycle upon the streets or alleys of Olivia shall have all the rights and duties of
a driver of a vehicle, except as to provisions of ordinances which by their nature cannot have application to
bicycles, and shall have the bicycle equipped with the lamps, reflectors, brakes, and other equipment as
may be required by state law.
(1957 Code, ' 700:01) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 70.041 CARRYING PACKAGES OR EXTRA PERSONS.
No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at 1 time than the number for which it is designed and
equipped, nor shall any person operating a bicycle carry any package, bundle, or article which prevents the
driver from keeping at least 1 hand upon the handle bars.
(1957 Code, ' 700:02) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 70.042 HITCHING TO VEHICLE.
Olivia - Traffic Code
16
No person riding or operating a bicycle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon
a street or alley.
(1957 Code, ' 700:03) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 70.043 RIDING IN BUSINESS DISTRICT.
(A) No person shall operate or ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district. Persons
riding on bicycles upon a street or alley shall not ride more than 2 abreast.
(B) Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, the person shall yield the right-of-way
to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing the pedestrian.
(1957 Code, ' 700:04) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 70.044 SPEED LIMIT.
No person shall ride or propel any bicycle at a greater speed than at the rate of 15 mph upon or along
the streets within the business portion of the city.
(1957 Code, ' 700:05) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 70.045 LIGHTS.
Every bicycle propelled, ridden, or operated on the streets, alleys, or sidewalks within the City of
Olivia during the period from 30 minutes after sunset to 30 minutes before sunrise and at any other time
when there is not sufficient light to render discernible any person on the streets, sidewalks, or alleys at a
distance of 200 feet shall be equipped with a lighted lamp on the front of the bicycle visible under normal
atmospheric conditions from a distance of at least 500 feet in front of the bicycle, and shall also be
equipped with lamp on the rear, exhibiting red light visible under like conditions from a distance of at least
500 feet to the rear of the bicycle or a red reflector visible 300 feet from the rear.
(1957 Code, ' 700:06) Penalty, see ' 10.99
General Provisions
17
Olivia - Traffic Code
18
CHAPTER 71: MOTOR VEHICLE AND TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
71.001 Definitions
71.01 Unreasonable acceleration unlawful
71.02 Driving rules; careful driving
71.03 Maximum speeds
71.04 Blocking or impeding traffic
71.05 Speed on bridges
71.06 U-turns
71.07 Position for parking
71.08 Camping purposes
71.09 Brakes used in parking
71.10 Display for sales purposes
71.11 Through streets
71.12 Signs, signals, and markings; obedience to
71.13 Unauthorized signs
71.14 Damage to signs
71.15 Pedestrians
71.16 Turn and backing signal
71.17 Yielding way on signal
71.18 Approaching bus loading or unloading
71.19 Pedestrians at crosswalks
71.20 Drive to right of center
71.21 Passing and overtaking
71.22 Turning
71.23 Hitching rides
71.24 Night parking lights
71.25 Use of dimmers
71.26 Mufflers
71.27 Careless driving
71.28 Emergency and street work vehicles; application
71.29 Emergency vehicles; proceeding at traffic signs
71.30 Street workers and vehicles
71.31 Yielding right-of-way
71.32 Following emergency vehicles
71.33 Driving over fire hose
71.34 Officers to direct traffic; authority of peace officers
General Provisions
19
71.35 Control of parking and stopping
71.36 Refuse on streets and alleys
71.37 Funeral procession
71.38 Defective or unsafe equipment
71.39 Passengers or load interfering with driver
71.40 Driver=s license
71.41 Wagons; animals
71.42 Hitchhiking
71.43 Owner=s consent to drive vehicle
71.44 Required equipment
71.45 Driving on sidewalk or into procession
' 71.001 DEFINITIONS.
Unless the language or context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended, all words and
phrases in this ordinance shall be given the meaning as defined for them by M.S. Ch. 169.
(1957 Code, ' 730:46)
' 71.01 UNREASONABLE ACCELERATION UNLAWFUL.
(A) No person shall start or accelerate any motor vehicle with an unnecessary exhibition of speed on
any public or private way within the City of Olivia. Prima facie evidence of the unnecessary exhibition of
speed shall be squealing or screeching sounds emitted by the tires or the throwing of sand or gravel by the
tires of the vehicle; or the swerving of the rear of the automobile from side to side.
(B) Any violation of this section shall constitute a petty misdemeanor, as defined in the Minnesota
Statutes.
(Ord. 147, passed 4-16-1973) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.02 DRIVING RULES; CAREFUL DRIVING.
(A) No person shall drive a vehicle in the City of Olivia at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing.
(B) In every event speed shall be so restricted as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person,
vehicle, or other conveyance on or entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and the
duty of all persons to use due care.
(1957 Code, ' 730:01) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Olivia - Traffic Code
20
' 71.03 MAXIMUM SPEEDS.
No person shall drive a vehicle within the City of Olivia at a rate of speed in excess of 30 mph;
provided, however, that at any place within the city where a higher or lower speed limit has been duly and
lawfully set and indicated with appropriate traffic devices, no person shall drive a vehicle at a rate in
excess of the rate so set.
(1957 Code, ' 730:02) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.04 BLOCKING OR IMPEDING TRAFFIC.
No person shall halt or drive a vehicle at a slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable
movement of traffic except when halting or reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance
with law.
(1957 Code, ' 730:03) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.05 SPEED ON BRIDGES.
No person shall drive over a bridge at a speed greater than the maximum speed which can be
maintained with safety to the bridge or at a rate of speed greater than that posted as the maximum speed by
the Commissioner of Highways.
(1957 Code, ' 730:04) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.06 U-TURNS.
No person shall turn a vehicle so as to reverse its direction on any trunk highway in the City of Olivia.
(1957 Code, ' 730:05) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.07 POSITION FOR PARKING.
Except where angle parking is indicated by appropriate signs or markings, each vehicle parked upon a
street where there is a curb shall be stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels parallel with and within
12 inches of the right-hand curb. If there be no curb, then the vehicles shall be parked parallel with the
edge and as far to the right in the street or alley as may be practicable. No vehicle shall be stopped with its
left side to the curb.
(1957 Code, ' 730:06) Penalty, see ' 10.99
General Provisions
21
' 71.08 CAMPING PURPOSES.
No person shall, for camping purposes, leave or park a house trailer on any street or alley in the city.
(1957 Code, ' 730:09) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.09 BRAKES USED IN PARKING.
No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without
effectively setting the brake thereon and turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway.
(1957 Code, ' 730:10) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.10 DISPLAY FOR SALES PURPOSES.
No person shall park any vehicle on any street for the purpose of displaying it for sale.
(1957 Code, ' 730:11) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.11 THROUGH STREETS.
Every driver of a vehicle shall bring the vehicle to a full stop before entering any through street or stop
intersection which has been properly designated and posted as such.
(1957 Code, ' 730:12) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.12 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND MARKINGS; OBEDIENCE TO.
(A) All signs, signals, and markings placed by the city shall conform to the standards prescribed by
the Minnesota Department of Transportation and whenever so required by law shall be so placed only with
the express approval and authorization from the Commissioner.
(B) No person shall disobey the instructions of an official traffic-control device placed within the City
of Olivia by the Minnesota Department of Transportation or the city unless at the time otherwise directed
by a police officer.
(1957 Code, ' 730:13) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Olivia - Traffic Code
22
' 71.13 UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS.
No person shall place, maintain, or display any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device imitating,
resembling or hiding an official traffic-control device, or railroad sign or signal, and no person shall place,
or maintain, or display any red light or red sign, signal, or lighting device in a way as to interfere with the
effectiveness or efficiency of any highway traffic-control device or signal or device used in the operation
of a railroad.
(1957 Code, ' 730:14) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.14 DAMAGE TO SIGNS.
No person shall alter, deface, injure, knock down, or remove any official traffic-control device or
railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any other part thereof.
(1957 Code, ' 730:15) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.15 PEDESTRIANS.
Pedestrians crossing any street, at the intersections thereof with another street shall pass over the
portion of the street as is included within the lines of the sidewalk, projected, and not diagonally.
(1957 Code, ' 730:16) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.16 TURN AND BACKING SIGNAL.
No person in control of a vehicle shall turn or back same without proper signal by hand or authorized
signal device having been given.
(1957 Code, ' 730:17) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.17 YIELDING WAY ON SIGNAL.
Every person in charge of a vehicle shall pull to the right side of the street or road when signaled from
a vehicle behind desiring to pass.
(1957 Code, ' 730:18) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.18 APPROACHING BUS LOADING OR UNLOADING.
Every person in charge of any vehicle upon any street approaching any bus which has stopped or is
about to stop for the purpose of taking on or discharging passengers shall not approach nearer than 10 feet
from the bus until the bus shall have taken or discharged its passengers and has again started.
(1957 Code, ' 730:19) Penalty, see ' 10.99
General Provisions
23
' 71.19 PEDESTRIANS AT CROSSWALKS.
Vehicles shall not stop on the crosswalk so as to interfere with the passage of pedestrians.
(1957 Code, ' 730:20) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.20 DRIVE TO RIGHT OF CENTER.
Every person using any vehicle on any street in the City of Olivia, shall operate, drive, or ride the
vehicle on the portion to the right of the center of the street. A vehicle shall keep as near the right-hand
curb as practicable except when passing another vehicle. Vehicles moving slowly shall keep close as
possible to the curb on the right, allowing more swiftly moving vehicles free passage to their left.
(1957 Code, ' 730:21) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.21 PASSING AND OVERTAKING.
A vehicle meeting another going in the opposite direction shall pass on the right. A vehicle overtaking
another shall pass on the left side of the overtaken vehicle and not pull over to the right until entirely clear
of it.
(1957 Code, ' 730:22) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.22 TURNING.
(A) A vehicle turning into another street to the right shall turn the corner as near to the right-hand curb
as possible.
(B) A vehicle when turning to the left to enter an intersecting street shall not turn until it shall have
passed beyond the center of the intersecting street.
(C) No vehicle shall be turned around upon any street except at a street intersection.
(D) No person shall leave an automobile unattended on a street while the engine is running.
(1957 Code, ' 730:23) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.23 HITCHING RIDES.
No one shall ride or jump upon any vehicle without the consent of the driver, and no person when
riding shall allow any part of the body to protrude beyond the limits of the vehicle, nor shall any person
hitch a ride on to any vehicle whatsoever.
(1957 Code, ' 730:24) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.24 NIGHT PARKING LIGHTS.
Olivia - Traffic Code
24
No vehicle shall be left standing in a street or alley at night without light or lights so displayed as to be
visible from the rear or the front.
(1957 Code, ' 730:25) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.25 USE OF DIMMERS.
Every vehicle shall use only low beam headlamps when driving upon the principal and well lighted
streets of the city, and also when meeting another vehicle at any place within the limits of the city.
(1957 Code, ' 730:26) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.26 MUFFLERS.
Every motor vehicle or motorcycle shall use a muffler which shall be sufficient to deaden the sound of
the exhaust and the muffler shall not be disconnected or cut out while the motor vehicle or motor cycle is
being operated upon any street or avenue within the City of Olivia.
(1957 Code, ' 730:27) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.27 CARELESS DRIVING.
No person shall operate or halt any vehicle in the City of Olivia, carelessly or heedlessly in disregard
of the rights or the safety of others, or in a manner so as to endanger, or be likely to endanger any person or
property.
(1957 Code, ' 730:28) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.28 EMERGENCY AND STREET WORK VEHICLES; APPLICATION.
The provisions of '' 70.060 et seq. shall apply to drivers of all vehicles whether owned by the state,
any county, city, town, district, or any other political subdivision of the state, except authorized emergency
vehicles and vehicles engaged in work upon streets or alleys.
(1957 Code, ' 730:29) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.29 EMERGENCY VEHICLES; PROCEEDING AT TRAFFIC SIGNS.
The driver of any authorized emergency vehicle operated in response to any emergency call or in the
immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, sounding siren and displaying at least 1 red
light to the front, shall not be subject to speed limitations of '' 70.060 et seq., and upon
General Provisions
25
approaching a red or stop signal or any stop sign, shall slow down as necessary for safety but may proceed
past the sign or signal after sounding siren and displaying red lights. These provisions does not relieve the
driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of persons
using the street, nor does it protect the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the consequence of
a reckless disregard of the safety of others.
(1957 Code, ' 730:30) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.30 STREET WORKERS AND VEHICLES.
Sections 70.060 et seq. shall not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles, and other equipment while
actually engaged in work upon the roadway of a street or alley, but shall apply to the persons and vehicles
when traveling to or from the work.
(1957 Code, ' 730:31) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.31 YIELDING RIGHT-OF-WAY.
Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle, with red light and siren warnings,
as required by law, the driver of each other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive
to a position parallel to and as close as possible to the right-hand curb or edge of the highway clear of any
intersection, and shall stop and remain in this position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed,
except when otherwise directed by a police officer.
(1957 Code, ' 730:32) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.32 FOLLOWING EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
No driver of any vehicle, other than one on official business, shall follow any fire apparatus or other
emergency vehicle traveling in response to a fire alarm or other emergency call closer than 500 feet, or
drive into or park the vehicle within the block where the fire apparatus or other emergency vehicle has
stepped in answer to a fire alarm.
(1957 Code, ' 730:33) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.33 DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.
No person shall drive any vehicle over any unprotected hose of a Fire Department when laid down on
any street, private driveway, or alley, to be used at any fire alarm or fire, without the consent of the Fire
Department official in command.
(1957 Code, ' 730:34) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Olivia - Traffic Code
26
' 71.34 OFFICERS TO DIRECT TRAFFIC; AUTHORITY OF PEACE OFFICERS.
(A) All officers of the City of Olivia, having powers of peace officers, are hereby authorized to direct,
control, and regulate traffic.
(B) No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction given in the
directing, controlling, or regulating of traffic by any officer of the city having powers of peace officers.
(1957 Code, ' 730:35) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.35 CONTROL OF PARKING AND STOPPING.
No person shall stop or park a vehicle on a street or alley when directed or ordered to proceed by any
peace officer invested by law with authority to direct, control, or regulate traffic.
(1957 Code, ' 730:36) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.36 REFUSE ON STREETS OR ALLEYS.
(A) No person shall throw or deposit upon any street or alley in the city any glass bottle, glass, nails,
tacks, wire, cans, or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal, or vehicle upon the highway.
(B) Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street or alley shall remove any glass
or other injurious substance dropped from the vehicle.
(1957 Code, ' 730:37) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.37 FUNERAL PROCESSION.
(A) Funeral processions may identify themselves by using regular lights on all cars and by keeping all
cars in close formation.
(B) Drivers of all other vehicles, except emergency vehicles, shall yield the right-of-way.
(1957 Code, ' 730:38) Penalty, see ' 10.99
General Provisions
27
' 71.38 DEFECTIVE OR UNSAFE EQUIPMENT.
No person shall drive and no owner shall cause or knowingly permit to be driven on any street or alley
in the city any vehicle or combination of vehicles, which is in an unsafe condition as to endanger any
person, or which does not contain those parts or is not at all times equipped with proper brakes and the
lamps and other equipment in proper condition and adjustment as required by the laws of the State of
Minnesota, or which is equipped in violation of the laws.
(1957 Code, ' 730:39) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.39 PASSENGERS OR LOAD INTERFERING WITH DRIVER.
No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded or when there are in the front seat the number of
person, exceeding 3, as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to
interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
(1957 Code, ' 730:40) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.40 DRIVER=S LICENSE.
No person shall drive or operate a vehicle upon any street or alley in the city unless he or she has in his
or her possession a driver's license issued to him or her in accordance with the laws of the State of
Minnesota.
(1957 Code, ' 730:41) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.41 WAGONS; ANIMALS.
Every person riding an animal or driving any animal drawing a vehicle upon a street or alley shall be
subject to the provisions of '' 71.01 et seq. applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those provisions
which by their nature can have no application.
(1957 Code, ' 730:42) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.42 HITCHHIKING.
No person shall stand in a street or alley for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any
private vehicle.
(1957 Code, ' 730:43) Penalty, see ' 10.99
28
' 71.43 OWNER'S CONSENT TO DRIVE VEHICLE.
No person shall drive a motor vehicle belonging to another without the owner's consent.
(1957 Code, ' 730:44) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.44 REQUIRED EQUIPMENT.
No vehicle shall be used upon any street in the city without lighting equipment, a windshield wiper, a
rear vision mirror, a horn or other warning device, front and rear bumpers, and brakes as required by M.S.
Ch. 169. Lamps shall be lighted at all times when any such vehicle is operated upon the streets of the city
from a half hour after sunset to a 1/2 hour before sunrise, and at any other time when there is not sufficient
light to render persons and vehicles clearly discernible 500 feet ahead upon the street, except that when a
vehicle is parked upon the street during those hours, parking lights shall be lighted.
(1957 Code, ' 730:45) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.45 DRIVING ON SIDEWALK OR INTO PROCESSION.
No person shall ride or drive any animal, carriage, or other vehicle upon or over any sidewalk or
through any funeral, parade, or military or civic procession within the limits of the City of Olivia.
(1957 Code, ' 510:10) Penalty, see ' 10.99
29
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
72.01 Trailer parking
72.02 Snow emergencies
72.03 Parking and loitering
72.04 Truck parking
Parking Time Limits
72.15 Parking limited
72.16 Trucks and the like
72.17 Double parking
72.18 Sales trucks
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 72.01 TRAILER PARKING.
(A) Parking of trailers limited.
(1) Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
MOTOR HOME, TRAILER, and RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Any of the following:
(a) MOTOR HOME. A motor vehicle designed to provide temporary or permanent human
shelter as a result of the presence of cooking facilities or other devices typically found in a residence.
(b) RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A boat, snowmobile, pick-up truck camper, ATV, topper
or fish house.
Olivia - Traffic Code
30
(c) TRAILER. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be
drawn by a motor vehicle upon a street or highway, except motor vehicles and semi-trailers.
(d) CONSTRUCTION TRAILER. A trailer designed to be used by contractors to hold
materials and/or tools for construction projects;
(e) OTHER. School bus.
(2) Unlawful act. It is unlawful for any person to leave or park a motor home, trailer, or
recreational vehicle on or within the limits of any street, alley or right-of-way for a continuous period in
excess of 8 hours. Parking within 1 block of the original place shall constitute parking in the same place.
(3) Exceptions. This section shall not apply to the following situations:
(a) Construction. A construction trailer parked on a street, alley, or right-of-way adjacent to
the property in or on which the owner of the trailer is performing a construction related project.
(b) Guest parking. Residents can apply for a permit for guests to leave or park a motor
home, trailer, or recreation vehicle in front of their residential property from April 1 through October 1 for
no more than 72 hours. Permits are issued by authorized city personnel and shall be placed in clear view
for the Olivia Police Department. Without a permit, the motor home, trailer, or recreational vehicle cannot
be parked on a street, alley or right-of-way for a continuous period in excess of 8 hours. If the trailer
constitutes a concern for safety in the area, the Olivia Police Department reserved the right to revoke the
permit.
(1957 Code, ' 725:01) (Am. Ord. 281, passed 7-21-2007)
(B) Violations. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1957 Code, ' 725:02)
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 72.02 SNOW EMERGENCIES.
(A) Snow emergency; snow emergency parking.
(1) When the public streets of the City of Olivia become impassable and/or hazardous to the
public due to the accumulation of snow, the City of Olivia shall have the authority to declare a snow
emergency.
(2) The purpose of a snow emergency shall be to alert the general public to the necessity of
removing all automobiles from the streets so that maintenance crews may remove all snow and restore the
streets to a passable condition, unhindered by the presence of automobiles in the street.
Parking Regulations
31
(3) The City of Olivia shall announce a snow emergency, to be declared by using the official
notification media. The notice shall be given a minimum of 8 hours prior to the emergency going into
effect, however if the emergency is declared between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. the emergency
will not go into effect until 5:00 p.m. of the following day. When declaring a snow emergency the city will
state the effective time when the emergency goes into effect at which time all automobiles must be
removed from public streets and alleys.
(4) The city will use KOLV radio as the official notification media for the declaration of a snow
emergency. The notice will be given by the radio station a minimum of 10 times before the emergency will
go into effect. The city may use other methods including the local access channel to notify the public.
(5) Any automobile parked on a city street or alley after the snow emergency has gone into effect
shall be deemed to be in violation of this section. The owner of each automobile shall be subject to the
penalties set forth below in division (C) or a fine in an amount set by the City Council from time to time.
(See Appendix A). Each day a violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
(B) General parking regulations.
(1) No person shall stop, halt, or park a vehicle except to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places:
(a) On a sidewalk;
(b) In a crosswalk;
(c) Within an intersection or in any place or manner as to block the passage of other motor
vehicles;
(d) Within 10 feet of a fire hydrant;
(e) In front of a public or private driveway;
(f) In a position as to block entrance to, passage upon, or exit from an alley; and/or
(g) In any place where parking is restricted or prohibited and notice of the restrictions or
prohibitions has been properly posted.
(2) The owner of any vehicle in violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties set forth
in division (C) below or a fine in an amount set by the City Council from time to time. (See Appendix A).
Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate violation.
Olivia - Traffic Code
32
(C) Violations.
(1) A violation of this section shall be deemed to be a petty misdemeanor under Minnesota law,
unless it is committed in a manner or under circumstance so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any
person on the property, in which case it shall be deemed a misdemeanor.
(2) The amounts of any fine for violation of this section as a petty misdemeanor shall be set by
resolution of the City Council of the City of Olivia. In cases of violations which are misdemeanors, the
appropriate penalties shall be set by the Minnesota Statutes.
(3) When necessary to clear the streets for maintenance crews or for the safe passage of other
traffic, the Police Department of the City of Olivia shall have the authority to order a vehicle in violation of
this section to be towed away. The owner shall be responsible for the towing charges which shall be in
addition to any fine assessed for the violation. The owner shall be responsible for making payment to the
person towing his or her vehicle sufficient to obtain release of the vehicle.
(D) Effective date. This section shall be effective when passed, adopted, and published.
(Ord. 220, passed 10-17-1988) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 72.03 PARKING AND LOITERING.
(A) No person shall park, and continue to occupy, any motor vehicle, or thereafter loiter in the
immediate vicinity of the vehicle, on any public or private parking lot within the city, at a time when the
adjacent businesses are closed, in excess of 15 minutes.
(B) No person shall park, and continue to occupy, any motor vehicle, or thereafter loiter in the
immediate vicinity of the vehicle, on any public street or alley within the city, in excess of 15 minutes,
when the only businesses open in the immediate area are engaged in selling alcoholic beverages or 3.2%
malt liquor.
(C) Violation of divisions (A) or (B) above shall constitute a petty misdemeanor.
(Ord. 173, passed 11-19-1979) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Parking Regulations
33
' 72.04 TRUCK PARKING.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
TRUCKS. Any of the following:
(1) SEMI-TRAILER. A vehicle of the trailer type so designed and used in conjunction with a
truck-tractor that a considerable part of its own load rests upon and is carried by the truck-tractor and shall
include a trailer drawn by a truck-tractor SEMI-TRAILER combination.
(2) TRACTOR. Any motor vehicle designed or used for drawing other vehicles used exclusively
for transporting other vehicles but having no provision for carrying loads independently.
(3) TRUCK. Any motor vehicle designed and used for carrying things other than passengers,
except pickup trucks and passenger vans.
(4) TRUCK-TRACTOR. Any motor vehicle designed or used for drawing other vehicles but
having no provision for carrying loads independently.
(B) Unlawful act. It is unlawful for any person to park a truck on or within the limits of any city
street, alley, or right-of-way.
(C) Exceptions. This section shall not apply to the following sections:
(1) Upon city streets, alleys, or rights-of-way, specifically designated by the City Council by
resolution or signpost.
(2) As necessary to allow dwelling occupants to move a significant portion of their furniture and
other personal property to a different location.
(3) Semi-trailers and trucks loading or unloading at a place of business during the time as
reasonably necessary for that activity.
(4) Businesses located within the Highway Business District are allowed to park semi-trailers and
trucks on the street adjacent to their property; provided they are licensed and registered in the
business/owners name.
(Ord. 282 passed 7-21-2005)
Olivia - Traffic Code
34
PARKING TIME LIMITS.
' 72.15 PARKING LIMITED.
(A) (1) No motor vehicle as defined in M.S. 169 shall remain parked at any 1 place on any street,
avenue, or alley in this municipality for more than 24 hours continuously, and no motor vehicle shall be
parked on any street which has been designated as a state trunk highway between the hours of 2 a.m. and 6
a.m. for more than 15 minutes.
(2) Parking within 1 block of the original place shall constitute parking in the same place.
(1957 Code, ' 715:01)
(B) Any person violating any provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1957 Code, ' 715:02)
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 72.16 TRUCKS AND THE LIKE.
No tractors, agricultural or heavy equipment, trucks other than pickup trucks, trailers or automobiles to
which a trailer is attached shall remain parked at any 1 place for more than 15 minutes on any of the
following described streets: on 9th street between the Twin Cities & Western Railroad tracks and Fairview
Avenue; on Lincoln between 11th and 7th Street; on 8th Street between Lincoln and DePue Avenue; and
on DePue Avenue between 10th and 7th Street.
(1957 Code, ' 715:03) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 72.17 DOUBLE PARKING.
(A) No automobile, truck, agricultural or heavy equipment, trailer, tractor or motor vehicle of any kind
shall double park at 1 place on any of the streets heretofore mentioned in ' 72.16 for more than 3 minutes.
(1957 Code, ' 715:04)
(B) Any person violating any provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1957 Code, ' 715:05)
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 72.18 SALES TRUCKS.
It shall be unlawful at all times for any person, firm, or corporation owning, operating, or controlling any
vehicle used for the purpose of selling, vending, or distributing any goods, wares, merchandise, farm
products, or any article offered for sale to the public at retail, to park the vehicle, for the purpose of sale of
the goods, on any of the following described streets within the City of Olivia: the whole of Lincoln
Parking Regulations
35
Avenue, (commonly known as State Highway 212); and Ninth Street, from the Twin Cities & Western
Railroad tracks to Fairview Avenue.
(1957 Code, ' 715:06) Penalty, see ' 10.99
36
CHAPTER 73: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
I. Truck routes
Cross-reference:
For truck parking, see ' 72.04
SCHEDULE I. TRUCK ROUTES.
(A) The terms used in this schedule shall be defined as set out in M.S. ' 169.01, as it may be amended
from time to time, the meaning of any other term used herein not defined by the state statute shall have its
common usage and meaning.
(B) It is hereby established the following classifications of public roads within the City of Olivia,
Minnesota.
(1) Restricted streets or alleys. Restricted streets or alleys shall include all of the public streets
and alleys within the City of Olivia which are not otherwise designated as truck routes.
(2) Truck routes. Truck routes are hereby established as the following public streets in the City
of Olivia, Minnesota:
(a) All state highways;
(b) All county roads; and
(c) The following city streets:
1st Street
2nd Street from Oak Avenue, north to Fairview Avenue
5th Street from Park Avenue, north to Lincoln Avenue
7th Street from south line of Pheasant Lawn First Addition north to Willow Avenue
8th Street from Fairview Avenue, north to the Twin Cities & Western Railroad tracks
37
9th Street from Chestnut Avenue, north to Tree Claim Road
Alleys on Blocks 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, and 10, Original Plat of the City
10th Street from DePue Avenue, north to the railroad tracks
11th Street from Lincoln Avenue, South 1/2 block to alley
City parking lot behind City Hall
North 1/2 of alley located on the east side of City Hall in Block 5 of the Original Plat
11th Street from Lincoln Avenue, north to Elm Avenue
Alley on Block 12, Hein's Park Addition
13th Street Service Drive
14th Street from DePue Avenue, north to Lincoln Avenue
15th Street from DePue Avenue, north to Lincoln Avenue
Corn and Bean Street
Behlen Street
Bayberry Avenue West (from Highway 71 to the Wastewater treatment plant)
22nd Street from Fairview Avenue, north to the Twin Cities & Western Railroad tracks
26th Street from Fairview Avenue, north to the Twin Cities & Western Railroad tracks
Maple Avenue from the alley in Block 12, Hein's Park Addition, east to 9th Street
Walnut Avenue from the alley in Block 12, Hein's Park Addition, east to 9th Street
Elm Avenue from 12th Street, east to 9th Street
Rainbow Lane
Gulf Drive
Service drive in Olivia Development Park, continuing east to Corn and Bean Street
DePue from 15th Street, east to 13th Street
DePue from 10th Street, east to 8th Street
Fairview Avenue West to Healthy Way
Healthy Way
Park Avenue from 7th Street, east to 5th Street
38
Pine Avenue from 9th Street, east to 7th Street
Chestnut Avenue from 13th Street, east to 9th Street
13th Street from Lincoln Avenue, north to the railroad tracks
13 1/2 Street from Lincoln Avenue, north to the railroad tracks
14th Street from Lincoln Avenue, north to the railroad tracks
Oak Avenue from 7th Street, east to Nester Street
Service drive through Milan=s subdivision
(C) No persons, firm, or corporation shall operate, drive, tow, or park any vehicle or any combination
of vehicles with a motor vehicle classification of J, K, L, M, N, 0, P, Q, R, S, or T pursuant to M.S.
' 168.013, as it may be amended from time to time, displayed on its license plates on any restricted public
street or alley.
(D) Vehicles with a motor vehicle classification of J, K, L, M, N, 0, P, Q, R, S, or T pursuant to M.S.
' 168.013, as it may be amended from time to time, displayed on its license plates, which are otherwise
lawful under Minnesota Statutes to travel on state highways shall be permitted upon streets designated as
truck routes, provided they do not violate any other traffic or parking law, statute, or ordinance. The
above-described motor vehicle license classifications currently relate to maximum gross weights per
vehicle in excess of 21,000 pounds. If a vehicle is registered in another state, the criterion for allowing a
vehicle on a nontruck route shall be the license classification in that state which allows a gross vehicle
weight less than 21,000 pounds gross vehicle weight.
(E) Fire trucks, electric utility trucks, refuse haulers, heating fuel trucks, school buses, and milk and
milk product delivery trucks are given special permission to proceed with normal operations on their
regularly established routes and at all regularly established hours to protect the health and welfare. During
spring road postings, additional permits will be required from the City Administrator.
(F) In those instances where it is necessary for vehicles prohibited upon restricted public streets or
alleys to use the same to load, unload, or to travel to and from a place of business or to be serviced or
repaired, then the owner and/or driver shall obtain a permit for the purpose from the City Administrator
before using the same for the purpose. The permit shall be granted only where there is no reasonable truck
route which would lead to the same destination. Prohibited vehicles making no bona fide stops within the
City of Olivia, Minnesota, for fuel, service, conduct of business, loading or unloading, however, are
restricted to truck routes, as in each case applies notwithstanding the directness of the route to the vehicle's
destination.
(G) The Police Chief or any authorized police officer on duty may from time to time authorize
prohibited vehicles to use a restricted public street or alley in emergency situations.
Traffic Schedules
39
(H) Violation of any of the provisions of this schedule shall be a misdemeanor.
(I) This schedule shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and publication.
(Ord. 212, passed 3-16-1987, Amended by Ord. 2015-05, 12-7-2015) Penalty, see ' 10.99
1
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
90. FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
91. RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
92. HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES
93. ANIMALS
94. ABANDONED VEHICLES
95. PARKS AND RECREATION
96. STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
97. E-911 UNIFORM ADDRESSING
Olivia - General Regulations
2
3
CHAPTER 90: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
90.01 Open burning prohibited
90.02 Negligent fires
90.03 Open burning or burning leaves
90.04 Campfires
90.05 Food preparation or recreational fires
90.06 Recreational burning in a pit
' 90.01 OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED.
(A) Prohibition on open burning. Open burning shall be prohibited within the City of Olivia, except
as otherwise provided herein.
(B) The following are permissible exceptions to the prohibition on open burning:
(1) Campfires.
(a) For the purposes of section 90.01 (B)(1), the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
(b) CAMPFIRE. A campfire is a wood fire set for cooking, warming, recreational or
ceremonial purposes, which is not more than 3 feet in diameter by 3 feet high and the ground surrounding
the fire has been cleared of all combustible material for 5 feet from the base of the fire. Campfire shall
have the same meaning as defined in M.S. ' 88.01, subd. 25, as it may be amended from time to time.
(c) WOOD. Wood is dry, clean fuel only, such as twigs, branches, limbs, charcoal,
cordwood, or untreated dimensional lumber. WOOD does not include wood that is green, with leaves or
needles, rotted, wet, oil soaked, or treated with paint, glue, or preservatives.
(2) Contained fires. Fire contained in a charcoal grill, camp stoves, or other devices designed for
the purpose of cooking or heating.
Olivia - General Regulations
4
(3) Olivia firefighter personnel. Fires purposely set for the instruction and training of firefighter
personnel.
(4) City public works personnel. The burning by city employees of trees, brush, grass, and other
vegetative matter for the maintenance of municipal property.
(5) Burning of leaves in the fall. The burning of leaves on private property is allowed only when
a property owner is issued a burning permit from the City of Olivia under the following conditions.
(a) The burning of leaves will only be permitted from October 15 through November 15.
(b) A responsible person shall be in constant attendance until the fire is completely
extinguished.
(c) Burning will only be allowed between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. All fires are
to be extinguished by 8:00 p.m.
(d) The fires shall not be less than 25 feet from any structure, wood fence, hedge, or brush
and no less than 5 feet from any property line.
(e) The burning of leaves is prohibited on city streets, boulevards, or any public property by
private citizens.
(f) No open burning of leaves shall take place during an air pollution alert, warning, or
emergency declared by the Minnesota Environmental Protection Agency.
(g) No burning of leaves shall take place during a fire danger alert declared by the Fire Chief
or by the Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
(h) Notice of any fire danger alert or of any air pollution alert, warning, or emergency shall
be broadcast periodically on any day during which open burning of leaves would otherwise be permitted.
(C) Additional provisions.
(1) A competent person shall constantly attend any fire permitted by this section until the fire is
extinguished. This person shall have a garden hose connected to the water supply, or other extinguishing
equipment, readily available for use.
(2) Fires may not be used for the burning of litter, refuse, garbage, or paper, except as provided in
this section.
Fire Prevention and Protection
5
(3) No person shall conduct, cause, or permit open burning during a burning ban put into effect
by a local authority, county, or state agency.
(M.S. ' 88.171, Subd. 9, as it may be amended from time to time)
(4) Exemption to conduct fire under this section does not excuse a person from the consequences,
damages, or injuries which may result therefrom, nor does it exempt any person from regulations
promulgated by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency or any other governmental unit excising
jurisdiction in matters of pollution or fire hazard regulations.
(D) Violations. Any person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(E) Effective date. This section shall be effective upon adoption and a 1-time publication date, being
8-5-2004, in the official city newspaper.
(Ord. 279, passed 8-5-2004) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 90.02 NEGLIGENT FIRES.
It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit a fire to get out of control and thereby create an
unreasonable risk and high degree of probability of damage or injury to another and the property or person
of another.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 90.03 OPEN BURNING OF LEAVES.
(A) Subject to applicable Minnesota Statutes and regulations the open burning of dried leaves only
between October 15 and November 15 is hereby permitted subject to the stated limits and conditions of the
city code.
(B) (1) The burning should be limited to areas of the city zoned and used for residential purposes
only.
(2) Burning shall be permitted only between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m.
(3) All burning shall be conducted a minimum of 25 feet from all buildings, structures,
flammable materials and tall grasses and weeds.
(4) No person shall kindle a fire on land of another without first obtaining permission of the
owner or his or her agent.
(5) No burning is permitted in any public streets. Any burning that takes place on the in-drive of
a property owned or occupied by the burner must be cleaned following the burning.
Olivia - General Regulations
6
(6) All fires shall be attended at all times by a person of suitable age and discretion.
(7) No burning shall take place during an air pollution alert, warning or emergency declared by
the Pollution Control Agency or during a fire alert or warning declared by the City, and the Fire Chief may
prohibit burning of leaves when atmospheric or local conditions make the burning hazardous.
(8) The burning of refuse is prohibited.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 90.04 CAMPFIRES.
Camp fires in a commercial recreational campground are permitted within a properly constructed fire
ring, but limited to 1 fire ring per camp site.
' 90.05 FOOD PREPARATION OR RECREATIONAL FIRES.
Fires set for food preparation or social purposes are allowed without a permit provided that only
unpainted and untreated wood or charcoal is burned, and provided further the fire is contained within a
grill, firebox made of metal, fireplace or other fire burning equipment designated for such purpose and
further complies with all other state regulations pertaining to open burning.
' 90.06 RECREATIONAL BURNING IN A PIT.
(A) The burn pit cannot exceed 3 feet in diameter and must be at least 18 inches deep.
(B) (1) Fires shall not be conducted within 25 feet of a building or combustible materials unless
contained in a barbecue pit.
(2) For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
BUILDING. As defined in the 1997 Uniform Fire Code, adopted by the City Council.
(C) No materials other than untreated wood or charcoal may be burned for recreational purposes.
(D) The fire cannot be larger than 3 feet diameter and the flames cannot be higher than 3 feet.
(E) Buckets, shovels, garden hoses or fire extinguishers shall be readily available.
(F) Fires shall be constantly attended by a person knowledgeable in the use of extinguishing
equipment.
Fire Prevention and Protection
7
(G) The fire shall be supervised by an adult until fully extinguished.
(H) The Fire Department or Police Department may require the fire to be extinguished if it becomes a
hazardous situation or there are complaints about smoke from the neighbors.
Olivia - General Regulations
8
9
CHAPTER 91: RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
91.01 Purpose
91.02 Definitions
91.03 Administration
91.04 Effective date
Regulations and Requirements
91.15 Registration and right-of-way occupancy
91.16 Permit requirement
91.17 Permit applications
91.18 Issuance of permit; conditions
91.19 Permit fees
91.20 Repair and restoration
91.21 Joint applications
91.22 Other obligations
91.23 Inspection
91.24 Revocation of permits
91.25 Appeal
91.26 Location and relocation of facilities
91.27 Location of facilities and equipment
91.28 Pre-excavation facilities location
91.29 Relocation
91.30 Right-of-way vacation
91.31 Indemnification and liability
91.32 Removal of existing curb; joints between existing curb and new entrance
91.33 Repair of pavement disturbed by curb cut work
91.34 Time limit on curb cut work
Cross-reference:
Administration, see Title III
Streets and Sidewalks, see Ch. 96
Traffic Code, see Title VII
Olivia - General Regulations
10
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 91.01 PURPOSE.
(A) The City of Olivia holds the rights-of-way within its geographical boundaries as an asset in trust
for its citizens. The city and other public entities have invested millions of dollars in public funds to build
and maintain the rights-of-way. It also recognizes that some persons, by placing their equipment in the
right-of-way and charging the citizens of the city for goods and services delivered thereby, are using this
property held for the public good. Although the services are often necessary or convenient for the citizens,
the persons receive revenue and/or profit through their use of public property. Although the service
delivery facilities are in most cases a necessary and proper use of right-of-way, the city hereby seeks to
regulate and manage the uses pursuant to pursuant to state law, and applicable rules of the State of
Minnesota.
(B) To provide for the health, safety, and well-being of its citizens, and to ensure the structural
integrity of its streets and the appropriate use of the rights-of-way by all users, the city strives to keep its
rights-of-way in a state of good repair and free from unnecessary encumbrances. Although the general
population bears the financial burden for the upkeep of the rights-of-way, one of the causes for the early
and excessive deterioration of its rights-of-way is frequent excavation.
(C) This chapter imposes reasonable regulations on the placement and maintenance of equipment
currently within its rights-of-way or to be placed therein at some future time. It is intended to complement
the regulatory roles of state and federal agencies. Under this chapter, persons disturbing and obstructing the
right-of-way will bear a fair share of the financial responsibility for their integrity. Finally, this chapter
provides for recovery of the city's cost associated with managing its rights-of-way.
(Ord. 268, passed 7-16-2001)
' 91.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning:
ABANDONED FACILITY. A facility no longer in service or physically disconnected from a portion
of the operating facility, or from any other facility, that is in use, or still carrying service. A facility is not
abandoned unless declared so by the right-of-way user.
APPLICANT. Any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a right-of-way.
CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE. Proof of insurance from a company licensed to do business in the
State of Minnesota against liability claims.
Right-of-Way Management
11
CITY. Olivia, Minnesota. CITY means its elected officials, officers, subdivisions, affiliates,
employees, committees, and agents.
CITY COST or MANAGEMENT COST. The actual cost incurred by the city for the public
rights-of-way management; including but not limited to costs associated with registering applicants;
issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration
projects; maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving facilities during public right-of-way work;
determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration; restoring work inadequately performed; mapping of
as built locations of facilities located in rights-of-way; and revoking right-of-way permits; and performing
all other tasks required by this chapter, including other costs the city may incur in managing the provisions
of this chapter.
COMMISSION. The State Public Utilities Commission.
CONGESTED RIGHT-OF-WAY. A crowded condition in the subsurface of the public right-of-way
that occurs when the maximum lateral spacing between existing underground facilities does not allow for
construction of new underground facilities without using hand digging to expose the existing lateral
facilities in conformance with M.S. ' 216D.04, as it may be amended from time to time, over a continuous
length in excess of 500 feet.
CONSTRUCTION PERFORMANCE BOND. A performance bond or other form of security posted
to ensure the availability of sufficient funds to assure that right-of-way excavation and obstruction work is
completed in both a timely and quality manner. Any of the following forms of security can be provided at
permittee's option:
(1) Individual project bond;
(2) Cash deposit;
(3) Security of a form listed or approved under M.S. ' 15.73, subd. 3, as it may be amended from
time to time;
(4) Letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the city;
(5) Self-insurance, in a form acceptable to the city; and/or
(6) A blanket bond for projects within the city, or other form of construction bond, for a time
specified and in a form acceptable to the city.
DEGRADATION. A decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused by excavation in or
disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to reconstruct the right-of-way earlier than would be
required if the excavation or disturbance did not occur.
Olivia - General Regulations
12
DEGRADATION COST. Money paid to the city to cover the cost associated with a decrease in the
useful life of a public right-of-way caused by excavation.
DELAY PENALTY. The penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays in right-of-way
excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration as established by permit.
DEPARTMENT. The Department of Public Works of the city.
DEPARTMENT INSPECTOR. Any person authorized by the city to carry out inspections related to
the provisions of this chapter.
DIRECTOR. The City Administrator, or his or her designee.
EMERGENCY. A condition that:
(1) Poses a clear and immediate danger to life or health or of a significant loss of property; or
(2) Requires immediate repair or replacement in order to restore service to a customer.
EQUIPMENT or FACILITIES. Any tangible thing in any right-of-way; but shall not include
boulevard plantings or gardens planted or maintained in the right-of-way between a person's property and
the street curb.
EXCAVATE. To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or penetrate any part of a
right-of-way.
EXCAVATION PERMIT. The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be obtained before a
person may excavate in a right-of-way. An EXCAVATION PERMIT allows the holder to excavate that
part of the right-of-way described in the permit.
EXCAVATION PERMIT FEE. Money paid to the city by an applicant to cover the costs.
GOPHER ONE CALL. Calling for a locate request of utilities. Persons are responsible to call for a
permit prior to excavating or obstructing any rights-of-way within the city. Nothing herein relieves a
person from complying with the provisions of the M.S. Chapter 216D, Excavation Notice System, also
known as Gopher One Call Law, as it may be amended from time to time.
HIGH DENSITY CORRIDOR. A designated portion of the public right-of-way within which
telecommunications right-of-way users having multiple and competing facilities may be required to build
and install facilities in a common conduit system or other common structure.
LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE. A local person or persons, or designee of the person or persons,
authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make decisions for that registrant regarding all matters
within the scope of this chapter.
Right-of-Way Management
13
OBSTRUCT. To place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to hinder free and open passage over
that or any part of the right-of-way.
OBSTRUCTION PERMIT. The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be obtained before a
person may obstruct a right-of-way. An OBSTRUCTION PERMIT allows the holder to obstruct that
portion of the right-of-way described in the permit.
PATCH or PATCHING. A method of pavement replacement that is temporary in nature. A patch
consists of:
(1) The compaction of the sub-base and aggregate base; and
(2) The replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement for a minimum of 2 feet beyond the edges
of the excavation in all directions.
PAVEMENT. Any type of improved surface that is within the public right-of-way and that is paved or
otherwise constructed with bituminous, concrete, aggregate, or gravel.
PERMIT. A permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
PERMITTEE/PERMIT HOLDER. Any person to whom a permit to excavate or place equipment or
facilities in a right-of-way has been granted by the city under this chapter.
PERSON. Any natural or corporate person, business association, or other business entity, including,
but not limited to, a partnership, a sole proprietorship, a political subdivision, a public or private agency of
any kind, a utility, a successor, or assign of any of the foregoing, or any other legal entity (which has or
seeks to have equipment in any right-of-way).
REGISTRANT. Any person who has fulfilled all requirements for registration under ' 91.15 and any
other applicable portions of this chapter.
RESTORATION COST. Money paid to the city by a permittee to cover the cost of restoration.
RESTORE or RESTORATION. The process by which an excavated right-of-way and surrounding
area, including pavement and foundation, is returned to the same condition and life expectancy that existed
before excavation.
RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, cartway, bicycle
lane, and public sidewalk in which the city has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for
travel purposes of the city. A right-of-way does not include the airwaves above a right-of-way with regard
to cellular or other non-wire telecommunications or broadcast service.
RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT. Either the excavation permit or the obstruction permit, or both,
depending on the context, required by this chapter.
Olivia - General Regulations
14
RIGHT-OF-WAY USER. Means:
(1) A telecommunications right-of-way user as defined by M.S. ' 237.162, subd. 4, as it may be
amended from time to time;
(2) A person owning or controlling a facility in the right-of-way that is used or intended to be
used for providing utility service, and who has a right under law, franchise, or ordinance to use the public
right-of-way; or
(3) Any person who in any way occupies, uses, or has or places its facilities or equipment in a
right-of-way, or seeks to do so.
SERVICE or UTILITY SERVICE. Includes:
(1) Those services provided by a public utility as defined in M.S. ' 216B.02, subds. 4, and 6 as
they may be amended from time to time;
(2) Telecommunications, pipeline, community antenna television, fire and alarm
communications, water, electricity, light, heat, natural gas, cooling energy, or power services;
(3) The services provided by a corporation organized for the purpose set forth in M.S. ' 301B.01,
as it may be amended from time to time;
(4) The services provided by a district heating or cooling system;
(5) Cable communications systems as defined in M.S. Chapter 238, as it may be amended from
time to time; and
(6) Telecommunications rights-of-way user as defined below.
TELECOMMUNICATION RIGHT-OF-WAY USER. A person owning or controlling a facility in
the right-of-way, or seeking to own or control a facility in the right-of-way, that is used or is intended to be
used for transporting telecommunication or other voice or data information. For purposes of this chapter, a
cable communication system defined and regulated under M.S. Ch. 238, as it may be amended from time to
time, and telecommunication activities related to providing natural gas or electric energy services whether
provided by a public utility as defined in M.S. ' 216B.02, as it may be amended from time to time, a
municipality, a municipal gas or power agency organized under M.S. Ch. 453 and 453A, as they may be
amended from time to time, or a cooperative electric association organized under M.S. Ch. 308A, as it may
be amended from time to time, are not telecommunications right-of-way users for purposes of this chapter.
TERM. Registrations issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on December 31 of each calendar
year.
TRENCH. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length equal to or greater
than the width of the pavement.
Right-of-Way Management
15
(Ord. 268, passed 7-16-2001)
' 91.03 ADMINISTRATION.
The City Administrator is the official responsible for the administration of the rights-of-way,
right-of-way permits, and the ordinances related thereto. The city may delegate any or all of the duties
hereunder.
(Ord. 268, passed 7-16-2001)
' 91.04 EFFECTIVE DATE.
This chapter shall take effect the day following publication in the city's official newspaper.
(Ord. 268, passed 7-16-2001)
REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS
' 91.15 REGISTRATION AND RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY.
(A) Registration. Each right-of-way user, and any person with installation and maintenance
responsibilities by lease, sublease, or assignment, must register with the city. Registration will consist of
providing application information and paying a registration fee.
(B) Exceptions. The following are not subject to the requirements of this section:
(1) Persons planting or maintaining boulevard planting or gardens;
(2) Persons erecting fences, installing driveways, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, or parking lots;
(3) Persons engaged in snow removal activities;
(4) Federal, state, county, and city agencies;
(5) Persons acting as agents, contractors, or subcontractors for a registrant who has properly
registered in accordance with this section; and
(6) Contractors furnishing services for sewer and water connections.
(C) Information required. The information provided to the city at the time of registration shall
include, but not be limited to:
Olivia - General Regulations
16
(1) Each registrant's name, Gopher One Call registration certificate number, address, telephone
and facsimile numbers;
(2) The name, address, telephone and facsimile numbers of a local representative or designee that
shall be available at all times. Current information regarding how to contact the local representative in an
emergency shall be provided at the time of registration;
(3) The agent for service of process;
(4) A certificate of insurance:
(a) Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the registrant by an insurance
company licensed to do business in the State of Minnesota;
(b) Verifying that the registrant is insured against claims for personal injury, including death,
as well as claims for property damage arising out of the use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the
registrant, its officers, agents, employees, and permittees, and placement and use of facilities and equipment
in the right-of-way by the registrant, its officer, agents, employees, and permittees, including, but not
limited to, protection against liability arising from completed operations, damage of underground facilities,
and collapse of property;
(c) Naming the city as an additional insured as to whom the coverages required herein are in
force and applicable and for whom defense will be provided as to all the coverage;
(d) Requiring that the city be notified 30 days in advance of cancellation of the policy or
material modification of a coverage term;
(e) Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile liability coverage, workers
compensation, and umbrella coverage established by the city in amounts sufficient to protect the city and
the public and to carry out the purposes and policies of this chapter;
(f) Verifying that all agents, contractors, or subcontractors of the registrant are additional
named insured under the policies; and
(g) The city may, in its discretion, resolve to accept self insurance, if it provides equivalent
protection.
(5) The city will require a copy of the actual insurance policies;
Right-of-Way Management
17
(6) If the person is a corporation, a copy of the Articles required to be filed under M.S. Chapter
302A, as it may be amended from time to time, as recorded and certified by the Secretary of State; and
(7) A copy of the person's order granting a certificate of authority from the Minnesota Public
Utilities Commission or other applicable state or federal agency, where the person is lawfully required to
have the certificate from the Commission or other state or federal agency.
(D) Security. For companies not operating under a franchise with the city, a surety bond letter of credit
or cash deposit in the amount determined by the city but not less than $5,000, may be required from each
applicant at the discretion of the city. A security bond shall be from a corporate security authorized to do
business in the state. Security required pursuant to this division (D) shall be conditioned that the holder
will perform the work in accordance with this chapter and applicable regulations, will pay to the city any
costs incurred by the city in performing work pursuant to this chapter; and will indemnify and save the city
and its officers, agents, and employees harmless against any and all claims, judgments, or other costs
arising from any excavation and other work covered by the permit or for which City Council or any city
officer may be liable by reason of any accident or injury to persons or property through the fault of the
permit holder, either in improperly guarding the excavation or for any other injury resulting from the
negligence of the permit holder. The bond, letter of credit, or cash deposit shall be released by the city
upon completion of the work and compliance with all conditions imposed by the permit. For permits
allowing excavations within public streets, the bond, letter of credit, or cash deposit shall be held for a
period of 24 months to guarantee the adequacy of all restoration work.
(E) Notice of changes. The registrant shall keep all of the information listed above current at all times
by providing to the city information as to changes on which the registrant has knowledge of any change.
(Ord. 268, passed 7-16-2001) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 91.16 PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
(A) Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person, including registrants,
may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way without first having obtained the appropriate right-of-way permit
from the city to do so.
(B) Permit display. Permits issued under this chapter shall be conspicuously displayed or otherwise
available at all times at the indicated work site and shall be available for inspection by the city.
(C) Exceptions. No excavation/obstruction permit shall be required for the following:
(1) Landscaping work;
(2) Fences, driveways, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, and parking lots, street furnishings, bus stop
benches, shelters posts and pillars;
(3) Snow removal activities;
Olivia - General Regulations
18
(4) Vending machines;
(5) Irrigation systems, provided that the system does not connect directly to water mains in the
right-of-way;
(6) Activities of the city; or
(7) Installation and maintenance of sewer or water services, provided that no excavation or other
work is done within a street, sidewalk, or alley and all work is confined to unimproved portions of
rights-of-way or easements.
(Ord. 268, passed 7-16-2001) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 91.17 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
(A) An application for a permit shall be made on forms provided by the city and shall be accompanied
by the fees set forth. If the work is to be performed by an agent, a contractor, or subcontractor on behalf of
a registrant, the application shall be signed by the registrant.
(B) Right-of-way permit applications shall contain, and will be considered complete only upon
compliance with the requirements of the following provisions:
(1) Scaled drawings showing the location of all facilities owned by the applicant and
improvements proposed by the applicant;
(2) A description of the methods that will be used for installation;
(3) A proposed schedule for all work;
(4) The location of any public streets, sidewalks, or alleys that will be temporarily closed to
traffic during the work;
(5) The location of any public streets, sidewalks, or alleys that will be disrupted by the work;
(6) A description of methods for restoring any public improvements disrupted by the work;
(7) Payment of money due the city for permit fees, estimated restoration costs, and other
management cost; prior obstructions or excavations; any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by
the city because of applicant's prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way or any emergency
actions taken by the city; franchise fees, security deposit, or other charges, if applicable;
Right-of-Way Management
19
(8) Payment of disputed amounts due the city by posting security or depositing in an escrow
account an amount equal to at least 110% of the amount owing. Exempt from this provision are individual
property owners within the city limits of Olivia;
(9) Any other information reasonably required by the city;
(10) When an excavation permit is requested for the purpose of installing additional equipment,
and the posting of a performance bond for the additional equipment is insufficient, the posting of an
additional or larger performance bond of the additional equipment may be required;
(11) Provide a detailed construction schedule;
(12) Adequately notifying property owners affected, with a minimum of 48 hours of notification;
and
(13) Except when acting as agent, contractor, or subcontractor of a registrant, applicant must
comply with the insurance requirements of ' 91.15.
(Ord. 268, passed 7-16-2001) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 91.18 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.
(A) Permit issuance. If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of this chapter, the city shall issue
a permit, subject to compliance with the conditions imposed by this chapter.
(B) Conditions. The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of the permit and the
performance of the applicant there under to protect the health, safety, and welfare, to ensure the structural
integrity of the right-of-way, to protect the property and safety of other users of the right-of-way, and to
minimize the disruption and inconvenience to the traveling public.
(C) Diligence in performing work. Work shall progress in an expeditious manner as reasonably
permitted by weather conditions until completion in order to avoid unnecessary inconvenience to traffic. In
the event that the work is not performed in accordance with applicable regulations pertaining to excavations
and utility connections, or the work is not done in an expeditious manner, or shall cease or be abandoned
without due cause, the city may, after a 72-hour notice to the permit holder, correct the work and fill the
excavation or repair the street. The entire cost of the work shall be paid by the permit holder upon demand
by the city. In the event the permittee fails to comply with the prescribed schedule as described in the
permit, the city may impose a delay penalty in an amount prescribed in the fee schedule.
Olivia - General Regulations
20
(D) Denial of permit. The city may deny a permit due to the following:
(1) Failure to register pursuant to this chapter;
(2) A proposed excavation within a street or sidewalk surface that has been constructed or
reconstructed within the preceding 5 years unless the city determines that no other locations are feasible or
when necessitated by an emergency;
(3) The applicant has failed to comply with or correct inadequacies of previous permits;
(4) The proposed schedule for the work would conflict or interfere with an exhibition,
celebration, festival, or any other similar event;
(5) The right-of-way would become unduly congested due to the proposed facilities and
equipment when combined with other uses in the right-of-way as provided in this chapter;
(6) Businesses or residences in the vicinity will be unreasonably disrupted by the work;
(7) The proposed schedule conflicts with scheduled total or partial reconstruction of the
right-of-way; and/or
(8) The applicant fails to comply with the requirements of this section or other sections of this
chapter.
(E) Permit limitations. Permits issued pursuant to this chapter are valid only for the area of the
right-of-way specified in the application and the permit, and only for the dates so specified. No work shall
be extended beyond the permitted area or dates without a new permit being obtained. The city may extend
the completion date of the work in accordance with this chapter.
(F) Standards during construction or installation. The permit holder shall comply with the following
standards when engaging in the work:
(l) Observe and comply with all laws, rules, and regulations of the state and city and take the
precautions as are necessary to avoid creating unsanitary conditions;
(2) Conduct the operations and perform the work in a manner as to ensure the least obstruction
and interference to traffic;
(3) Take adequate precautions to ensure the safety of the general public and those who require
access to abutting property;
(4) If required by the city, notify adjoining property owners prior to the commencement of work
which may disrupt the use of and access to the adjoining properties;
Right-of-Way Management
21
(5) In all cases where construction work interferes with the normal use of the construction area,
provide for closing the construction area to traffic or to afford it restricted use of the area and comply with
MUTCD (Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices) traffic safety signing requirements;
(6) Exercise precaution at all times for the protection of person, including employees and
property;
(7) Protect and identify excavations and work operations with barricades or flags as required, by a
flagperson in the daytime, and by warning lights at night;
(8) Provide proper trench protection (as required by O.S.H.A.) when necessary and depending
upon the type of soil, in order to prevent cave-ins endangering life or tending to enlarge the excavation;
(9) Protect the root growth of trees and shrubbery;
(10) Installation of pipe (utility conductors) under portland cement concrete, asphalt concrete, or
other high-type bituminous pavements shall be done by jacking, auguring, boring, or tunneling as directed
by the city, unless otherwise authorized. HDPE (High Density Polyethelyne) sleeving shall be an acceptable
casing or sleeving material for telecommunications installations;
(11) When removing pavement of portland cement concrete, asphalt concrete, or high-type built up
bituminous surfacing, the pavement shall be removed on each side of the trench or excavation a distance of
9 inches beyond the trench width and length, in order to provide a shoulder and solid inundation for the
surface restoration;
(12) To obtain a straight edge and neat-appearing opening in pavement surface, the following
procedure is required.
(a) Portland cement concrete pavement. The surface shall be saw-cut scored 2 inches deep
and the concrete broken out by sledge or pneumatic hammer chisel.
(b) Asphalt concrete. The surface shall be cut full depth by pneumatic hammer chisel.
(13) Excavations, trenches, and jacking pits off the roadway or adjacent to the roadway or curbing
shall be sheathed and braced depending upon location and soil stability, and as directed by the city;
(14) Excavations, trenches, and jacking pits shall be protected when unattended to prevent entrance
of surface drainage;
(15) All backfilling must be placed in 6-inch layers at optimum moisture compacted with the
objective of attaining 100% of AASHO (American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials) density. Compaction shall be accomplished with hand, pneumatic or vibrating compactors as
appropriate;
(16) Backfill material shall consist of the excavated soils that have been removed during
Olivia - General Regulations
22
excavation. The materials shall be segregated and backfilled in the same manner as removed, provided the
material moisture is capable of obtaining optimum compaction. If the backfill material is too wet, then
granular material may be substituted at the direction of the city. All backfill must replace in kind the
materials removed. All organic materials must be replaced with granular material as directed by the city;
(17) Compacted backfill shall be brought to street grade and crowned at the center not more than 1
inch;
(18) Street and pedestrian traffic shall be maintained throughout construction unless provided
otherwise by the permit;
(19) No lugs damaging to roadway surfaces may be used;
(20) Dirt or debris must be periodically removed during construction; and
(21) Other reasonable standards and requirements of the city.
(Ord. 268, passed 7-16-2001) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 91.19 PERMIT FEES. (See Appendix A).
(A) Excavation/obstruction permit fee. The city shall establish a permit fee in an amount sufficient to
recover the following costs:
(1) The city management costs; and
(2) Degradation costs, if applicable.
(B) Payment of permit fees. No obstruction permit shall be issued without a payment of the required
fees.
(C) Nonrefundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the city has revoked for a breach is
not refundable.
(D) Application to franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise, management costs may be
charged separately from and in addition to the franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the
franchise.
(E) City project permit fees. No excavation permit or obstruction permit fee shall be charged for City
of Olivia projects.
(Ord. 268, passed 7-16-2001)
' 91.20 REPAIR AND RESTORATION.
Right-of-Way Management
23
(A) Schedule. The work to be done under the permit, and the repair and restoration of the right-of-way
as required herein, must be completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days as
work could not be done because of extraordinary circumstances beyond the control of the permit holder
when work was prohibited as unseasonable or unreasonable or when extended by the city. In addition to
repairing its own work, the permittee must restore the right-of-way and surrounding areas, including the
pavement and its foundation, to the same condition that existed before the commencement of the work and
must inspect the area of the work and use reasonable care to maintain the same condition for 24 months
thereafter.
(B) General standards. The permit holder shall perform repairs and restoration according to the
standards and with the materials specified by the city. The city shall have the authority to prescribe the
manner and extent of the restoration, and may do so in verbal or written procedures of general application
or on a case-by-case basis. The city in exercising this authority shall be guided by the following standards
and consideration:
(1) The number, size, depth, and duration of the excavations, disruptions, or damage to the
right-of-way;
(2) The pre-excavation condition of the right-of-way; the remaining life expectancy of the
right-of-way affected by the excavation;
(3) Whether the relative cost of the method of restoration to the permit holder is in reasonable
balance with the prevention of an accelerated depreciation of the right-of-way that would otherwise result
from the excavation, disturbance, or damage to the right-of-way; and
(4) The likelihood that the particular method of restoration would be effective in slowing the
depreciation of the right-of-way that would otherwise take place.
(C) City restoration.
(1) Generally. If the city restores the right-of-way, permittee shall pay the costs thereof within 30
days of billing. If, during the 24 months following the restoration, the pavement settles due to permittee's
improper backfilling, the permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, all costs associated with
correcting the defective work.
(2) Patching, restoration, and degradation fees. If the city patches or restores the right-of-way
involved in a city project, fees shall not be charged for restoration or degradation.
Olivia - General Regulations
24
(D) Duty to correct defects. The permittee shall correct defects in patching or restoration performed
by permittee or its agents. Permittee upon notification from the city shall correct all restoration work to the
extent necessary, using methods required by the city. The work shall be completed within 5 calendar days
of the receipt of the notice from the city, not including days during which work cannot be done because of
circumstances constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable.
(E) Failure to restore. If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way in the manner and condition
required for restoration by the city, or fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by
the city, the city at its option may do the work. In that event the permittee shall pay to the city, with 30 days
of billing, the cost of restoring the right-of-way. If permittee fails to pay as required, the city may exercise
its rights under the construction performance bond.
(Ord. 268, passed 7-16-2001)
' 91.21 JOINT APPLICATIONS.
(A) Joint application. Registrants may jointly apply for permits to excavate or obstruct the
right-of-way at the same place and time.
(B) Shared fees. Registrants who apply for permits for the same obstruction or excavation, which the
city does not perform, may share in the payment of the obstruction or excavation permit fee. In order to
obtain a joint permit, registrants must agree among themselves as to the portion each will pay and indicate
the same on their applications.
(C) City projects. Registrants who join in a scheduled obstruction or excavation performed by the
city, whether or not it is a joint application by 2 or more registrants or a single application, are not required
to pay the excavation or obstruction and degradation portions of the permit fee, but a permit would still be
required.
(Ord. 268, passed 7-16-2001)
' 91.22 OTHER OBLIGATIONS.
(A) Compliance with other laws. Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not relieve permittee of its
duty to obtain all other necessary permit, licenses, and authority and to pay all fees required by the city or
other applicable rule, law, or regulation. A permittee shall comply with all requirements of local, state, and
federal laws, including M.S. ' 216D.01-216D.09 (Gopher One Call, Excavation Notice System), as it may
be amended from time to time. A permittee shall perform all work in conformance with all applicable
codes and established rules and regulations, and is responsible for all work done in the right-of-way
pursuant to its permit, regardless of who does the work.
Right-of-Way Management
25
(B) Prohibited work. Except in an emergency, and with the approval of the city, no right-of-way
obstruction or excavation may be done when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for
the work.
(C) Interference with right-of-way. A permittee shall not obstruct or interfere with a right-of-way that
allows the natural free and clear passage of water through the gutters. Private vehicles of those doing work
in the right-of-way may not be parked within or next to a permit area, unless parked in conformance with
city parking regulations. The loading or unloading of the trucks must be done solely within the defined
permit area unless specifically authorized by the permit.
(D) Emergency work.
(1) (a) A registrant may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to an
emergency.
(b) Within 2 business days after the occurrence of the emergency, the registrant shall apply
for the necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith, and fulfill the rest of the requirements
necessary to bring itself into compliance with this chapter for the actions it took in response to the
emergency.
(2) If the city becomes aware of an emergency, the city shall attempt to contact the local
representative of each registrant affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. If a registrant or any of
its agents creates or causes to create an emergency they shall notify any and all affected parties within a
reasonable amount of time. In any event, the city may take whatever action deemed necessary to respond to
the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the registrant whose facilities or equipment occasioned
the emergency.
(Ord. 268, passed 7-16-2001) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 91.23 INSPECTION.
(A) Notice of completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is completed, the permittee
shall furnish a completion certificate in accordance Minn. Rules, part 7819.1300, as it may be amended
from time to time.
(B) Site inspection. Permittee shall make the work-site available to the city and to all others as
authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the excavation of and upon completion of
the work.
Olivia - General Regulations
26
(C) Authority of the city.
(1) The city may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the
life, health, safety, or well-being of the public.
(2) The city may issue an order to the permittee for any work which does not conform to the
terms of the permit or other applicable standards, conditions, or codes. The order shall state that failure to
correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within 10 days after issuance of the order,
the permittee shall present proof to the city that the violation has been corrected. If the proof has not been
presented within the required time, the city may revoke the permit pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 268, passed 7-16-2001)
' 91.24 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
(A) Generally. The city may revoke any permit, without a fee refund, if there is a substantial breach of
the terms and conditions of any statute, this chapter, rule, or regulation, or any condition of the permit
which the substantial breach shall continue uncured for 10 calendar days after the issuance of a written
order of the city. A substantial breach of a permit holder shall include, but shall not be limited to, the
following:
(1) The violation of any material provision of the permit;
(2) An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the permit, or the perpetration or
attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens;
(3) Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a permit;
(4) The failure to maintain the required bonds and insurance;
(5) The failure to complete the work in a timely manner; and
(6) The failure to correct a condition indicated on an order issued by the city.
(B) Written notice of breach. If the city determines that the permittee has committed a substantial
breach of a term or condition of any statute, ordinance, rule, regulation, or any condition of the permit, the
city shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy the violation. The demand shall state that
continued violations may be cause for revocation of the permit. Further, a substantial breach, as stated
above, will allow the city to place additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate and remedy the
breach.
Right-of-Way Management
27
(C) Response to notice of breach. Within 24 hours of receiving notification of the breach, permittee
shall provide the city with a plan, acceptable to the city, that will cure the breach. Permittee's failure to so
contact the city, or permittee's failure to timely submit an acceptable plan, or permittee's failure to
reasonably implement the approved plan, shall be cause for immediate revocation of the permit.
(Ord. 268, passed 7-16-2001)
' 91.25 APPEAL.
(A) A right-of-way user that has been denied registration, has been denied a permit, has had a permit
revoked, or believes that the fees imposed are invalid, may have the denial, revocation, or fee imposition
reviewed, upon written request, by the City Council. The City Council shall act on a timely written request
at its next regularly scheduled meeting. A decision by the City Council affirming the denial, revocation, or
fee imposition will be in writing and supported by written findings establishing the reasonableness of the
decision.
(B) If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall also reimburse the city for the city's reasonable costs,
including restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorney's fees incurred in connection
with the revocation.
(Ord. 268, passed 7-16-2001)
' 91.26 LOCATION AND RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.
(A) Placement, location, and relocation of facilities must comply with this chapter, with other
applicable laws, and with Minn. Rules, parts 7819.3100, 7819.5000, and 7819.5100, as they may be
amended from time to time, to the extent the rules do not limit authority otherwise available to cities.
(B) Within 120 days following completion of any work pursuant to a permit, the registrant shall
provide the city accurate maps and drawings certifying the as built location of all facilities and equipment
installed, owned, and maintained by the registrant. The maps and drawings shall indicate both the
horizontal and vertical location of all facilities and equipment and shall be provided in a format consistent
with the city's mapping system.
(C) Failure to provide maps and drawings in accordance with this chapter shall be grounds for
revoking the permit holder's registration.
(Ord. 268, passed 7-16-2001)
Olivia - General Regulations
28
' 91.27 LOCATION OF FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT.
(A) Undergrounding by telecommunications right-of-way users. Any new construction and the
installation of new equipment and replacement of old equipment of telecommunications right-of-way users
shall be underground or contained within buildings or other structures in conformity with applicable codes.
Telecommunications right-of-way users may attach equipment and facilities to existing poles and
structures maintained by a service or utility service with the owner's permission.
(B) Corridors. The city may assign specific corridors within the right-of-way, or any particular
segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of equipment installation currently permitted or
anticipated to be permitted in the future. All permits issued by the city involving the installation or
replacement of equipment shall designate the proper corridor for the equipment at issue.
(C) Limitation of space. To protect health and safety, the city shall have the power to prohibit or limit
the placement of new or additional equipment within the right-of-way if there is insufficient space to
accommodate all of the requests of registrants or persons to occupy and use the right-of-way. In making the
decisions, the city shall strive to the extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the
right-of-way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public interest, the public's needs for
the particular utility service, the condition of the right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential
utilities, the protection of existing equipment in the right-of-way, and future city plans for public
improvements and development projects which have been determined to be in the public interest.
(D) Preservation of corridor space in the right-of-way for future installations. To adequately plan for
future demand on the right-of-way by users, the city may reserve corridor space within the right-of-way for
equipment to be installed at a point of time in the future even though it is not currently permitted.
(E) Nuisance. One year after the passage of this chapter, any facilities found in a right-of-way that
have not been registered shall be deemed to be a nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it
has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance or taking possession of the
facilities and restoring the right-of-way to useable condition.
(Ord. 268, passed 7-16-2001)
' 91.28 PRE-EXCAVATION FACILITIES LOCATION.
In addition to complying with the requirements if M.S. ' 216D.01-216D.09 (Gopher One Call,
Excavation Notice System), as it may be amended from time to time, before the start date of any
right-of-way excavation, each registrant who has facilities or equipment in the area to be excavated shall
mark the horizontal placement of all the facilities. Any registrant whose facilities are less than 20 inches
below a concrete or asphalt surface shall notify and work closely with the excavation contractor to establish
the exact location of its facilities and the best procedure for excavation.
(Ord. 268, passed 7-16-2001) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 91.29 RELOCATION.
Right-of-Way Management
29
(A) Relocation for city purposes. A registrant shall promptly but in no event more than 120 days of
the city's request, permanently remove and relocate at no charge to the city, any facilities or equipment if
and when made necessary by a change in the grade, alignment or width of any right-of-way, vacation of any
right-of-way, by the construction, maintenance or operation of any city facilities or to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare. The registrant shall restore any rights-of-way to the condition it was in prior to
removal and relocation. No fees shall be required of the permittee for work done under this division (A).
(B) Undergrounding of relocated telecommunications facilities. A telecommunications right-of-way
user shall relocate all above ground facilities and equipment to underground locations at its own cost and
expense at the city's request when the city requires the relocation of all telecommunications facilities and
equipment to underground locations or structures or poles to which the registrant's facilities or equipment is
attached are abandoned or removed by the owner of the structures or poles.
(Ord. 268, passed 7-16-2001)
' 91.30 RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION.
(A) Reservation of right. If the city vacates a right-of-way which contains the equipment of a
registrant, and the vacation does not require the relocation of registrant facilities and equipment, the city
shall reserve, to and for itself and all registrants having facilities and equipment in the vacated right-of-way,
the right to install, maintain, and operate any facilities and equipment in the vacated right-of-way and to
enter upon the vacated right-of-way at any time for the purpose of reconstruction, inspecting, maintaining,
or repairing the same.
(B) Relocation of equipment. If the vacation requires the relocation of registrant facilities and
equipment, and if the vacation proceedings are initiated by the registrant, the registrant must pay the
relocation costs or, if the vacation proceedings are initiated by the city, the registrant must pay the
relocation costs unless otherwise agreed to by the city and the registrant or, if the vacation proceedings are
initiated by a person or persons other than the registrant or permit holder, the other person or persons must
pay the relocation costs.
(C) Abandoned and unstable equipment.
(1) Discontinued operations. A registrant who has determined to discontinue its operations in the
city must either;
(a) Provide information satisfactory to the city that the registrant's obligations for its
equipment in the right-of-way under this chapter have been lawfully assumed by another registrant; or
Olivia - General Regulations
30
(b) Submit to the city an action plan for the removal or abandonment of equipment and
facilities. The city shall require removal of the facilities and equipment if the city determines the removal
is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. The city may require the registrant to post a
bond in an amount sufficient to reimburse the city for reasonably anticipated costs to be incurred removing
the facilities and equipment.
(2) Abandoned facilities equipment. Facilities and equipment of a registrant located on the
surface of or above a right-of-way, or on city property which remains unused for a period of 2 years shall be
deemed to be abandoned. The abandoned equipment is deemed to be a nuisance, or abating the nuisance,
or requiring removal of the equipment or facilities by the registrant, or the registrant's successor.
(3) Removal of underground equipment. Any registrant who has unusable and abandoned
underground facilities or equipment in any right-of-way shall remove it from that right-of-way during the
next scheduled excavation, to the extent the facilities or equipment is uncovered by the excavation unless
this requirement is waived by the city.
(Ord. 268, passed 7-16-2001) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 91.31 INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.
(A) Limitation of liability. By reason of the acceptance of a registration or the grant of a right-of-way
permit, the city does not assume any liability for:
(1) Injuries to persons, damage to property, or loss of service claims by parties other than the
registrant or the city; or
(2) Claims or penalties of any sort resulting from the installation, presence, maintenance, or
operation of equipment by registrants or activities of registrants.
(B) Indemnification. By registering with the city, a registrant agrees, or by accepting a permit under
this chapter, a permit holder agrees, to defend, indemnify, and hold the city whole and harmless from all
costs, liabilities, and claims for damages of any kind arising out of the construction, presence, installation,
maintenance, repair, or operation of its equipment, or out of any activity undertaken in or near a
right-of-way, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or prohibited by a
right-of-way permit. It further agrees that it will not bring, nor cause to be brought, any action, suit, or
other proceeding claiming damages, or seeking any other relief against the city for any claim nor for any
award arising out of the presence, installation, maintenance, or operation of its equipment, or any activity
undertaken in or near a right-of-way, whether or not the act or omission complained of is authorized,
allowed, or prohibited by a right-of-way permit. The foregoing does not indemnify the city for its own
negligence except for claims arising out of or alleging the city's negligence where the negligence arises out
of or is primarily related to the presence, installation, construction,
Right-of-Way Management
31
operation, maintenance, or repair of the equipment by the registrant or on the registrant's behalf, including
but not limited to, the issuance of permits and inspection of plans or work. This chapter is not as to third
parties, a waiver of any defense or immunity otherwise available to the registrant or to the city; and the
registrant, in defending any action on behalf of the city, shall be entitled to assert in any action every
defense or immunity that the city could assert in its own behalf.
(C) Franchise holder. If there is a conflict in language between the franchise of a person holding a
valid franchise agreement with the city and this chapter, the terms of the franchise shall prevail.
(D) Violations. Every person who violates a section, division, paragraph, item, clause, part, or any
provision of this chapter when performing an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions
thereof.
(Ord. 268, passed 7-16-2001) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 91.32 REMOVAL OF EXISTING CURB; JOINTS BETWEEN EXISTING CURB AND NEW
ENTRANCE.
In making curb cuts, the existing curb shall be removed in complete whole sections. No cutting,
sawing, or breaking of the existing curb shall be made except at the existing joints in the existing curb.
(Ord. 268, passed 7-16-2001) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 91.33 REPAIR OF PAVEMENT DISTURBED BY CURB CUT WORK.
Any portions of the existing pavement structure disturbed during curb cut work shall be repaired with
similar materials of equal or greater structural capacity. Repair limits shall be defined by right angle saw
cuts so oriented to provide the least noticeable surface patch.
(Ord. 268, passed 7-16-2001)
' 91.34 TIME LIMIT ON CURB CUT WORK.
On existing streets improved with curb and gutter, the period between removing the existing curb and
constructing the new entrance shall not exceed 30 days.
(Ord. 268, passed 7-16-2001)
Olivia - General Regulations
32
33
CHAPTER 92: HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
92.01 Assessable current services
92.02 Tree diseases
92.03 Tree removal charge
92.04 Tree trimming and removal
Nuisances
92.15 Public nuisance
92.16 Public nuisances affecting health
92.17 Public nuisances affecting morals and decency
92.18 Public nuisances affecting peace and safety
92.19 Duties of city officers
92.20 Abatement
92.21 Recovery of cost
Weeds
92.35 Short title
92.36 Jurisdiction
92.37 Definitions; exclusions
92.38 Owners responsible for trimming, removal, and the like
92.39 Filing complaint
92.40 Notice of violations
92.41 Appeals
92.42 Abatement by city
92.43 Liability
Excessive Noise
92.55 General prohibition
92.56 Horns, audible signaling devices, and the like
92.57 Mufflers
Olivia - General Regulations
34
92.58 Radios, tape and disc players, and the like
92.59 Buildings
92.60 Pile drivers, hammers, and the like
92.61 Noisy parties and gatherings
92.62 Animals, birds, and the like
92.63 Effective date
92.98 Violations
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 92.01 ASSESSABLE CURRENT SERVICES.
(A) Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
CURRENT SERVICE. Shall mean 1 or more of the following: snow, ice, or rubbish removal
from sidewalks; weed elimination from street grass plots adjacent to sidewalks or from private property;
removal or elimination of public health or safety hazards from private property, excluding any hazardous
building included in M.S. '' 463.15 through 463.26, as they may amended from time to time; installation
or repair of water service lines; street sprinkling, street flushing, light street oiling, or other dust treatment
of streets; repair of sidewalks and alleys; trimming and care of trees and removal of unsound and
insect-infected trees from the public streets or private property; and the operation of a street lighting system.
(B) Snow, ice, dirt, and rubbish.
(1) Duty of owners and occupants. The owner and the occupant of any property adjacent to a
public sidewalk shall use diligence to keep the walk safe for pedestrians. No owner or occupant shall allow
snow, ice, dirt, or rubbish to remain on the walk longer than 24 hours after its deposit thereon. Failure to
comply with this section shall constitute a violation.
(2) Removal by city. The City Clerk or other person designated by the City Council may direct
the removal from all public sidewalks all snow, ice, dirt, and rubbish as soon as possible beginning 24
hours after any matter has been deposited thereon or after the snow has ceased to fall. The City Clerk or
other designated person shall keep a record showing the cost of removal adjacent to each separate lot and
parcel.
Health and Safety; Nuisances
35
(C) Public health and safety hazards. When the city removes or eliminates public health or safety
hazards from private property under the following provisions of this chapter, the administrative officer
responsible for doing the work shall keep a record of the cost of the removal or elimination against each
parcel of property affected and annually deliver that information to the City Clerk.
(D) Installation and repair of water service lines. Whenever the city installs or repairs water service
lines serving private property under this code, the City Clerk shall keep a record of the total cost of the
installation or repair against the property.
(E) Repair of sidewalks and alleys.
(1) Duty of owner. The owner of any property within the city abutting a public sidewalk or alley
shall keep the sidewalk or alley in repair and safe for pedestrians. Repairs shall be made in accordance with
the standard specifications approved by the City Council and on file in the office of the City Clerk.
(2) Inspections; notice. The City Council or its designee shall make inspections as are necessary
to determine that public sidewalks and alleys within the city are kept in repair and safe for pedestrians or
vehicles. If it is found that any sidewalk or alley abutting on private property is unsafe and in need of
repairs, the City Council shall cause a notice to be served, by registered or certified mail or by personal
service, upon the record owner of the property, ordering the owner to have the sidewalk or alley repaired
and made safe within 30 days and stating that if the owner fails to do so, the city will do so and that the
expense thereof must be paid by the owner, and if unpaid it will be made a special assessment against the
property concerned.
(3) Repair by city. If the sidewalk or alley is not repaired within 30 days after receipt of the
notice, the City Clerk shall report the facts to the City Council and the City Council shall by resolution
order the work done by contract in accordance with law. The City Clerk shall keep a record of the total cost
of the repair attributable to each lot or parcel of property.
(F) Personal liability. The owner of property on which or adjacent to which a current service has been
performed shall be personally liable for the cost of the service. As soon as the service has been completed
and the cost determined, the City Clerk, or other designated official, shall prepare a bill and mail it to the
owner and thereupon the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the office of the City Clerk.
(G) Damage to public property. Any person driving any vehicle, equipment, object, or contrivance
upon any street, road, highway, or structure shall be liable for all damages which the surface or structure
thereof may sustain as a result of any illegal operation, or driving or moving of the vehicle, equipment, or
object or contrivance; or as a result of operating, driving, or moving any vehicle, equipment, object, or
contrivance weighing in excess of the maximum weight permitted by statute or this code. When the driver
is not the owner of the vehicle, equipment, object, or contrivance, but is operating, driving, or
Olivia - General Regulations
36
moving it with the express or implied permission of the owner, then the owner and the driver shall be
jointly and severally liable for any the damage. Any person who willfully acts or fails to exercise due care
and by that act damages any public property shall be liable for the amount thereof, which amount shall be
collectable by action or as a lien under M.S. ' 514.67, as it may be amended from time to time.
(H) Assessment. On or before September 1 of each year, the City Clerk shall list the total unpaid
charges for each type of current service and charges under this section against each separate lot or parcel to
which they are attributable under this section. The City Council may then spread the charges against
property benefited as a special assessment under the authority of M.S. ' 429.101, as it may be amended
from time to time, and other pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor and collection along
with current taxes the following year or in annual installments, not exceeding 10, as the City Council may
determine in each case.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 92.02 TREE DISEASES.
(A) Trees constituting nuisance declared. The following are public nuisances whenever they may be
found within the city:
(1) Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected to any degree with the Dutch Elm
disease fungus Ceratocystis Ulmi (Buisman) Moreau or which harbors any of the elm bark beetles Scolytus
Multistriatus (Eichh.) or Hylungopinus Rufipes (Marsh);
(2) Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including branches, stumps, firewood, or other elm material
from which the bark has not been removed and burned or sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle
insecticide;
(3) Any living or standing oak tree or part thereof infected to any degree with the Oak Wilt
fungus Ceratocystis fagacearum;
(4) Any dead oak tree or part thereof which in the opinion of the designated officer constitutes a
hazard, including but not limited to logs, branches, stumps, roots, firewood, or other oak material which has
not been stripped of its bark and burned or sprayed with an effective fungicide; and/or
(5) Any other shade tree with an epidemic disease.
(B) Abatement of nuisance. It is unlawful for any person to permit any public nuisance as defined in
division (A) of this section to remain on any premises the person owns or controls within the city. The City
Council may by resolution order the nuisance abated. Before action is taken on that resolution, the City
Council shall publish notice of its intention to meet to consider taking action to abate the nuisance. This
notice shall be mailed to the affected property owner and published once no less than 1 week prior to the
meeting. The notice shall state the time and place of the meeting, the street affected,
Health and Safety; Nuisances
37
action proposed, the estimated cost of the abatement, and the proposed basis of assessment, if any, of costs.
At the hearing or adjournment thereof, the City Council shall hear any property owner with reference to the
scope and desirability of the proposed project. The City Council shall thereafter adopt a resolution
confirming the original resolution with modifications as it considers desirable and provide for the doing of
the work by day labor or by contract.
(C) Record of costs. The City Clerk shall keep a record of the costs of abatement done under this
section for all work done for which assessments are to be made, stating and certifying the description of the
land, lots, parcels involved, and the amount chargeable to each.
(D) Unpaid charges. On or before September 1 of each year, the City Clerk shall list the total unpaid
charges for each abatement against each separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this
section. The City Council may then spread the charges or any portion thereof against the property involved
as a special assessment as authorized by M.S. ' 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time, and other
pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor and collection the following year along with the
current taxes.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 92.03 TREE REMOVAL CHARGE.
(A) Declaration of intent. The rates and charges hereby imposed are intended to help recover city
costs for the removal of diseased trees on private property.
(B) Removal charge. (See Appendix A)
(1) A tree removal and hauling charge, in an amount set by the Council from time to time, is
hereby imposed on all diseased trees removed by the city on private property as follows:
(a) Tree removal charge per tree; and
(b) Hauling tree debris away, per truck load or partial load.
(2) The Council may waive or change these fees from time to time by resolution.
(C) Right of refusal. The city shall have the right at all times to refuse to remove a tree on private
property. The determination shall be made by the city. It shall be the obligation of the property owner to
have the tree removed at the owner's expense, should the city elect not to remove it.
(D) Liability. Each property owner shall sign a statement prior to removal of a tree to hold the City of
Olivia harmless for any and all damage done to property in the removal of any tree.
(Ord. 183, passed 5-3-1982)
' 92.04 TREE TRIMMING AND REMOVAL.
Olivia - General Regulations
38
(A) The intent of this section is to set public policy regarding the removal and/or trimming of trees on
public property (i.e. boulevards, alleys, parks, and other public facilities/buildings, and grounds.) Trees
located on private property are addressed in ' 92.03.
(B) It is the responsibility of the city to maintain trees located on public property.
(C) Maintenance includes trimming and/or removal because of disease, dying (aging), or damage from
storms.
(D) The city is also responsible for the safety and well-being of its citizens, such as maintaining visible
traffic signs, providing adequate street lighting, and limiting liability in the parks.
(E) The city also desires to protect the investment of equipment during such operations as snow
removal, street sweeping, etc.
(F) The city owns and maintains an electrical distribution system and desires to keep distribution
equipment (i.e. lines, transformers, etc.) clear of branches.
(G) The city recognizes that an employee of the city receives specialized training and education in the
area of trees.
(H) From time to time, trees may need to be moved or trimmed.
(I) The City Tree Inspector is responsible for deciding which trees are in need of trimming and/or
removal.
(J) The City Council desires to maintain a healthy tree inventory and provided that adequate funds are
available will re-plant a new tree in place of one removed.
(Res. 2004-58, passed 10-7-2004)
Health and Safety; Nuisances
39
NUISANCES
' 92.15 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
Whoever by his or her act or failure to perform a legal duty intentionally does any of the following is
guilty of maintaining a public nuisance, which is a misdemeanor:
(A) Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys, injures, or endangers the safety,
health, morals, comfort, or repose of any considerable number of members of the public;
(B) Interferes with, obstructs, or renders dangerous for passage any public highway or right-of-way, or
waters used by the public; or
(C) Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law or '' 92.16, 92.17, or 92.18, or any other
part of this code to be a public nuisance and for which no sentence is specifically provided.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 92.16 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.
The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health:
(A) Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or vegetable matter;
(B) All diseased animals running at large;
(C) All ponds or pools of stagnant water;
(D) Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours after death;
(E) Accumulations of manure, refuse, or other debris;
(F) Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not rodent-free or fly-tight or which are so maintained as
to constitute a health hazard or to emit foul and disagreeable odors;
(G) The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake, canal or body of water by sewage,
industrial waste, or other substances;
(H) All noxious weeds and other rank growths of vegetation upon public or private property;
(I) Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders, in unreasonable quantities;
(J) All public exposure of people having a contagious disease; and
Olivia - General Regulations
40
(K) Any offensive trade or business as defined by statute not operating under local license.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 92.17 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY.
The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public morals and decency:
(A) All gambling devices, slot machines, and punch boards, except as otherwise authorized by federal,
state, or local law;
(B) Betting, bookmaking, and all apparatus used in those occupations;
(C) All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous sexual intercourse, gambling
houses, houses of ill fame, and bawdy houses;
(D) All places where intoxicating liquor is manufactured or disposed of in violation of law or where,
in violation of law, people are permitted to resort for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor, or where
intoxicating liquor is kept for sale or other disposition in violation of law, and all liquor and other property
used for maintaining that place; and
(E) Any vehicle used for the unlawful transportation of intoxicating liquor, or for promiscuous sexual
intercourse, or any other immoral or illegal purpose.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 92.18 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.
The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and safety:
(A) All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks 24 hours after the snow or other precipitation
causing the condition has ceased to fall;
(B) All trees, hedges, billboards, or other obstructions which prevent people from having a clear view
of all traffic approaching an intersection;
(C) All wires and limbs of trees which are so close to the surface of a sidewalk or street as to
constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles;
(D) All obnoxious noises in violation of Minn. Rules Ch. 7030, as it may be amended from time to
time, which are hereby incorporated by reference into this code;
Health and Safety; Nuisances
41
(E) The discharging of the exhaust or permitting the discharging of the exhaust of any stationary
internal combustion engine, motor boat, motor vehicle, motorcycle, all-terrain vehicle, snowmobile, or any
recreational device except through a muffler or other device that effectively prevents loud or explosive
noises therefrom and complies with all applicable state laws and regulations;
(F) The using or operation or permitting the using or operation of any radio receiving set, musical
instrument, phonograph, paging system, machine, or other device for producing or reproduction of sound in
a distinctly and loudly audible manner so as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of any person nearby.
Operation of any device referred to above between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a manner so as
to be plainly audible at the property line of the structure or building in which it is located, or at a distance of
50 feet if the source is located outside a structure or building shall be prima facie evidence of violation of
this section;
(G) The participation in a party or gathering of people giving rise to noise which disturbs the peace,
quiet, or repose of the occupants of adjoining or other property;
(H) Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary public use of streets, alleys, sidewalks, or
public grounds except under conditions as are permitted by this code or other applicable law;
(I) Radio aerials or television antennae erected or maintained in a dangerous manner;
(J) Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any use of a public street or
sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and the free use of the street or
sidewalk;
(K) All hanging signs, awnings, and other similar structures over streets and sidewalks, so situated so
as to endanger public safety, or not constructed and maintained as provided by ordinance;
(L) The allowing of rain water, ice, or snow to fall from any building or structure upon any street or
sidewalk or to flow across any sidewalk;
(M) Any barbed wire fence less than 6 feet above the ground and within 3 feet of a public sidewalk or
way;
(N) All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so situated or operated on private
property as to attract the public;
(O) Waste water cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets or other public properties;
(P) Accumulations in the open of discarded or disused machinery, household appliances, automobile
bodies, or other material in a manner conducive to the harboring of rats, mice, snakes, or vermin, or the
rank growth of vegetation among the items so accumulated, or in a manner creating fire, health, or safety
hazards from accumulation;
Olivia - General Regulations
42
(Q) Any well, hole, or similar excavation which is left uncovered or in another condition as to
constitute a hazard to any child or other person coming on the premises where it is located;
(R) Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or a public street drain, gutter, or ditch
with trash of other materials;
(S) The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk, or other public property of any glass, tacks, nails,
bottles, or other substance which may injure any person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire when
passing over the substance;
(T) The depositing of garbage or refuse on a public right-of-way or on adjacent private property; and
(U) All other conditions or things which are likely to cause injury to the person or property of anyone.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 92.19 DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.
The Police Department or Sheriff, if the city has at the time no Police Department, shall enforce the
provisions relating to nuisances. Any peace officer shall have the power to inspect private premises and
take all reasonable precautions to prevent the commission and maintenance of public nuisances.
' 92.20 ABATEMENT.
(A) Any nuisance defined under sections 92.16, and 92.18, excluding any structure included under the
provisions of Minn. Stats. §§ 463.15 through 463.26, may be removed, corrected, or eliminated from
private property through summary abatement as set forth in the following subsections:
(1) Whenever the City Administrator or a City peace officer determines that a public nuisance is
being maintained or exists on private property in the City, the City Administrator or peace officer shall
notify in writing, the record owner and occupant, if any, of the real property of such fact and order the
nuisance to be terminated and abated.
(2) The notice shall be served in person or by certified mail. If the property is unoccupied and the
owner is unknown, the notice may be served by posting it on the property. The notice shall specify the
steps necessary to abate the nuisance. The notice must also provide a reasonable deadline, not
exceeding 20 days, for the nuisance to be abated.
(3) If the notice is not complied with, a report shall be submitted to the City Administrator, and a
hearing by the City Council shall be set. The owner or occupant shall be provided with at least ten
days' notice of the hearing. The hearing notice shall be served on the owner or occupant in the same
manner, as provided in subsection (A)(2) of this section. For posted notice of the hearing, 30 days must
Health and Safety; Nuisances
43
elapse between the day of posting and the hearing.
(4) At the hearing, the City Council shall provide the owner or occupant an opportunity to be
heard. After hearing the evidence, the Council may issue Findings of Fact and an Order providing for
the City to abate the nuisance. The abatement order shall be executed as soon as practicable thereafter
under the supervision of a peace officer.
(5) Any abatement order issued by the council may be appealed to the Renville County District
Court if the appeal is filed within ten days of the Order. Any properly filed appeal shall be limited to
the issue of cost recovery by the City.
(6) Any motor vehicle removed from private property shall be impounded and disposed of in
accordance with Minnesota Statutes Chapter 168B, as amended. Any other personal property removed
from private property, which in the opinion of the supervising peace officer, has more than nominal
fair market value, shall be photographed and inventoried, and written notice of the property removed
shall be posted on the property. The property may be reclaimed by the record owner of the real
property, within 30 days of removal, only after payment of the City’s cost of removal and storage fees,
which shall be the same as the vehicle impound fee per day. If any property remains unclaimed after
30 days, it may be sold or disposed of by the City without further notice.
(B) Any charges incurred by the City in abating, removing, correcting or eliminating from private
property a nuisance as described in Code sections 92.16 and 92.18, may be collected as provided in Minn.
Stat. section 429.101 and City Code section 92.21. Such charges may include any actual costs incurred by
the City, including, but not limited to, administrative, legal, engineering, and inspection and monitoring
expenses, in connection with the abatement of the nuisance.
(C) Emergency Procedure; Summary Enforcement.
(1) In cases of emergency, where delay in abatement required to complete the notice and
procedure requirements set forth in divisions (A) and (B) of this section will permit a continuing
nuisance to unreasonably endanger public health, safety, or welfare, the City Council may order
summary enforcement and abate the nuisance.
(2) To proceed with summary enforcement, a peace officer shall determine that a public nuisance
exists or is being maintained on premises in the City and that delay in abatement of the nuisance will
unreasonably endanger public health, safety, or welfare. The officer shall attempt to notify in writing
the occupant or owner of the premises of the nature of the nuisance and of the City's intention to seek
summary enforcement and the time and place of the City Council meeting to consider the question of
summary enforcement.
(3) The City Council shall determine whether or not the condition identified in the notice to the
owner or occupant is a nuisance, whether public health, safety or welfare will be unreasonably
endangered by delay in abatement required to complete the procedure set forth in division (A) of this
section, and may order that the nuisance be immediately terminated or abated. If the nuisance is not
Olivia - General Regulations
44
immediately terminated or abated, the City Council may order summary enforcement and abate the
nuisance.
(D) Immediate abatement. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city, without notice or other
process, from immediately abating any condition which poses an imminent and serious hazard to human
life or safety.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
(Ord. 2015-3, passed 7-6-2015)
' 92.21 RECOVERY OF COST.
(A) Personal liability. The owner of premises on which a nuisance has been abated by the city shall
be personally liable for the cost to the city of the abatement, including administrative costs. As soon as the
work has been completed and the cost determined, the City Clerk or other official shall prepare a bill for the
cost and mail it to the owner. Thereupon the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the office of
the City Clerk.
(B) Assessment. If the nuisance is a public health or safety hazard on private property, the
accumulation of snow and ice on public sidewalks, the growth of weeds on private property or outside the
traveled portion of streets, or unsound or insect-infected trees, the City Clerk shall, on or before September
1 next following abatement of the nuisance, list the total unpaid charges along with all other the charges as
well as other charges for current services to be assessed under M.S. ' 429.101, as it may be amended from
time to time, against each separate lot or parcel to which the charges are attributable. The City Council may
then spread the charges against the property under that statute and other pertinent statutes for certification to
the County Auditor and collection along with current taxes the following year or in annual installments, not
exceeding 10, as the City Council may determine in each case.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
WEEDS
' 92.35 SHORT TITLE.
This subchapter shall be cited as the Weed Ordinance.
' 92.36 JURISDICTION.
This subchapter shall be in addition to any state statute or county ordinance presently in effect,
subsequently added, amended, or repealed.
' 92.37 DEFINITIONS; EXCLUSIONS.
(A) For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
Health and Safety; Nuisances
45
DESTRUCTION ORDER. The notice served by the City Council or designated city official, in
cases of appeal, on the property owner of the ordinance violation.
PROPERTY OWNER. The person occupying the property, the holder of legal title, or a person
having control over the property of another, such as a right-of-way, easement, license, or lease.
WEEDS, GRASSES, and RANK VEGETATION. Includes but is not limited to the following:
(1) Noxious weeds and rank vegetation shall include but not be limited to: alum (allium),
Buckthorn, Bur Cucumber, Canada Thistle, Corncockle, Cressleaf Groundsel, Curly Dock, Dodder, Field
Bindweed, French Weed, Hairy Whitetop, Hedge Bindweed, Hoary Cress, Horsenettle, Johnsongrass, Leafy
Spurge, Mile-A-Minute Weed, Musk Thistle, Oxeye Daisy, Perennial Sowthistle, Poison Hemlock, Purple
Loosestrife, Quackgrass, Russian Knapweed, Russian Thistle, Serrated Tussock, Shatter Cane, Sorghum,
Wild Carrot, Wild Garlic, Wild Mustard, Wild Onion, Wild Parsnip;
(2) Grapevines when growing in groups of 100 or more and not pruned, sprayed, cultivated,
or otherwise maintained for 2 consecutive years;
(3) Bushes of the species of tall, common, or European barberry, further known as berberis
vulgaris or its horticultural varieties;
(4) Any weeds, grass, or plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers, or other ornamental plants,
growing to a height exceeding 12 inches;
(5) Rank vegetation includes the uncontrolled, uncultivated growth of annuals and perennial
plants; and
(6) The term WEEDS does not include shrubs, trees, cultivated plants, or crops.
(B) In no event shall cultivated plants or crops include plants which have been defined by state statute
or administrative rule as being noxious or detrimental plants.
' 92.38 OWNERS RESPONSIBLE FOR TRIMMING, REMOVAL, AND THE LIKE.
All property owners shall be responsible for the removal, cutting, or disposal and elimination of weeds,
grasses, and rank vegetation or other uncontrolled plant growth on their property, which at the time of
notice is in excess of 12 inches in height.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 92.39 FILING COMPLAINT.
Any person, including the city, who believes there is property located within the corporate limits of the
city which has growing plant matter in violation of this subchapter shall make a written complaint signed,
Olivia - General Regulations
46
dated, and filed with the City Clerk. If the city makes the complaint, an employee, officer, or Council
member of the city shall file the complaint in all respects as set out above.
' 92.40 NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS.
(A) Upon receiving notice of the probable existence of weeds in violation of this subchapter, a person
designated by the City Council shall make an inspection and prepare a written report to the City Council
regarding the condition. The City Council, upon concluding that there is a probable belief that this
subchapter has been violated, shall forward written notification in the form of a Destruction Order
to the property owner or the person occupying the property as that information is contained within the
records of the City Clerk or any other city agency. The notice shall be served in writing by certified mail.
The notice shall provide that within 7 regular business days after the receipt of the notice that the
designated violation shall be removed by the property owner or person occupying the property.
(B) (1) All notices are to be in writing and all filings are to be with the City Clerk.
(2) Certified mailing to the City Clerk or others is deemed filed on the date of posting to the
United States Postal Service.
' 92.41 APPEALS.
(A) (1) The property owner may appeal by filing written notice of objections with the City Council
within 48 hours of the notice, excluding weekends and holidays, if the property owner contests the finding
of the City Council.
(2) It is the property owner's responsibility to demonstrate that the matter in question is shrubs,
trees, cultivated plants, or crops or is not otherwise in violation of this subchapter, and should not be
subject to destruction under the subchapter.
(B) An appeal by the property owner shall be brought before the City Council and shall be decided by
a majority vote of the Council members in attendance and being at a regularly scheduled or special meeting
of the City Council.
' 92.42 ABATEMENT BY CITY.
In the event that the property owner shall fail to comply with the Destruction Order within 7 regular
business days and has not filed a notice within 48 hours to the City Clerk of an intent to appeal, the City
Council may employ the services of city employees or outside contractors and remove the weeds to
conform to this subchapter by all lawful means.
Health and Safety; Nuisances
47
' 92.43 LIABILITY.
(A) The property owner is liable for all costs of removal, cutting, or destruction of weeds as defined by
this subchapter.
(B) The property owner is responsible for all collection costs associated with weed destruction,
including but not limited to court costs, attorney's fees, and interest on any unpaid amounts incurred by the
city. If the city uses municipal employees, it shall set and assign an appropriate per hour rate for
employees, equipment, supplies, and chemicals which may be used.
(C) All sums payable by the property owner are to be paid to the City Clerk and to be deposited in a
general fund as compensation for expenses and costs incurred by the city.
(D) All sums payable by the property owner may be collected as a special assessment as provided by
M.S. ' 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time.
EXCESSIVE NOISE
' 92.55 GENERAL PROHIBITION.
No person shall make, or cause to be made, any distinct and loud audible noise that unreasonably
annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety, or welfare or any person,
or precludes their enjoyment or diminishes their property values. This general prohibition is not limited by
the specific restrictions of '' 92.55 et seq.
(Ord. 266, passed 6-5-2000) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 92.56 HORNS, AUDIBLE SIGNALING DEVICES, AND THE LIKE.
No person shall sound any audible signaling device except as a warning of danger as required by M.S.
' 169.68, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 266, passed 6-5-2000) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Olivia - General Regulations
48
' 92.57 MUFFLERS.
Every motor vehicle shall at all times be equipped with a muffler in good working order which blends
the exhaust noise into the overall vehicle noise and is in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual
noise, and no person shall use a dynamic engine or transmission brake, muffler cutout, bypass, or similar
device upon a motor vehicle on a street or highway. The exhaust system shall not emit or produce a sharp
popping or crackling sound.
(Ord. 266, passed 6-5-2000) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 92.58 RADIOS, TAPE AND DISC PLAYERS, AND THE LIKE.
(A) No person shall use, operate, or play any radio receiving set, tape or disc player, musical
instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other device in such a manner as to disturb the
peace, quiet, and repose of a person or persons of ordinary sensibilities, except as allowed by city license or
permit for civic and/or charitable activities and events.
(B) The play, use, or operation of any radio, tape or disc players, musical instrument, phonograph, or
other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound in such a manner as to be plainly
audible at a distance of one city block from the machine or device, or for the purpose of commercial
advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building structure, shall be prima facie evidence
of a violation of this section.
(C) When sound violating this section is produced or reproduced by a machine or device that is
located in or on a vehicle, the vehicle's owner(s) is guilty of the violation, provided, however, that if the
vehicle's owner is not present at the time of the violation, the person in charge or control of the vehicle at
the time of the violation is guilty of the violation.
(Ord. 266, passed 6-5-2000) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 92.59 BUILDINGS.
(A) No person shall engage in construction (including excavation), demolition, alteration, or repair of
any building between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. weekdays and all day Sunday, except where
single individuals or families work on single-family residences for their own occupancy.
(B) City officials may, in case of emergency, grant permission to repair at any time when they find
repair work will not affect the health and safety of the persons in the vicinity.
(Ord. 266, passed 6-5-2000) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Health and Safety; Nuisances
49
' 92.60 PILE DRIVERS, HAMMERS, AND THE LIKE.
No person shall use or operate, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., any pile driver, power
shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick power, electrical hoist, or other appliance the use of which is
accompanied by loud or unusual noise.
(Ord. 266, passed 6-5-2000)
' 92.61 NOISY PARTIES AND GATHERINGS.
(A) Prohibition. No person shall congregate at, or participate in, any party or gathering from which
noise emanates of a sufficient volume so as to disturb the peace, quiet, or repose of another person. No
person shall knowingly remain at that noisy party or gathering.
(B) Evidence. The following is prima facie evidence of violation of this section:
(1) Noise of the volume as to be clearly heard at a distance of a one city block from the structure
or building in which the party or gathering is occurring, or in the case of an apartment building, in the
adjacent hallway or apartment; and/or
(2) Any complaint from a person that is verified by an officer.
(C) Duty to disperse. When an officer determines that a party or gathering is in violation of this
section, the officer may order all persons present at the premises where the violation is occurring, other than
the owner or tenants of the premises, to disperse immediately. No person shall knowingly remain at that
party or gathering.
(D) Exemption. The following are exempt from violation of this section:
(1) Activities which are duly authorized, sponsored, or licensed by the city so long as the activity
is conducted pursuant to the conditions of the license, permit, or contract;
(2) Person(s) who have gone to a party for the sole purpose of abating the violation;
(3) Church bells, chimes, or carillons;
(4) School bells;
(5) Anti-theft devices; and
(6) Machines or devices for the production of sound on or in authorized emergency vehicles.
(Ord. 266, passed 6-5-2000) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Olivia - General Regulations
50
' 92.62 ANIMALS, BIRDS, AND THE LIKE.
No person shall keep, or allow to be kept, any animal which is causing long continued noise which
disturbs the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity.
(Ord. 266, passed 6-5-2000) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 92.63 EFFECTIVE DATE.
The effective date of '' 92.55 et seq. shall be effective when passed, adopted, and published.
(Ord. 266, passed 6-5-2000)
' 92.98 VIOLATIONS.
A violation of '' 92.55 et seq. is a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 266, passed 6-5-2000) Penalty, see ' 10.99
51
CHAPTER 93: ANIMALS
Section
Dogs and Cats
93.01 License requirements
93.02 Control of animal
93.03 Potentially Dangerous and Dangerous Animals
93.04 Vicious animals
93.05 Effective date
93.98 Violations
DOGS AND CATS
' 93.01 LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.
The following regulations shall apply to all dogs and cats within the City of Olivia.
(A) A license shall be required for every dog and cat over the age of 6 months kept in the City of
Olivia. This shall not apply to any dog or cat temporarily present within the City of Olivia for a period of
less than 30 days.
(B) The owner, caretaker, or other person in possession of a dog or cat kept within the City of Olivia
shall apply to the City Clerk for a license for the animal. The Clerk shall record the licenses issued and
shall furnish the applicant with a tag for each license. The applicant shall attach the tag to a collar or chain
around the neck of the animal in a secure manner.
(C) Licenses for dogs and cats shall be issued for the lifetime of the animal.
(D) The City Clerk shall not issue any license for a dog or cat until the applicant furnishes a certificate
from a veterinarian indicating that the animal has been vaccinated for rabies within the preceding 2 years.
52
(E) License fees shall be set by the City Council of the City of Olivia by resolution and may be
changed from time in the same manner. (See Appendix A).
(Ord. 250, passed 10-20-1997) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 93.02 CONTROL OF ANIMAL.
(A) Running at large prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, harbors, or keeps a
dog to fail to prevent the same from running at large. A person who owns, harbors, or keeps a dog which
runs at large shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Dogs on a leash and accompanied by a responsible person
or accompanied by and under the control and direction of a responsible person, so as to be effectively
restrained by command as by leash, shall be permitted in streets or on public land unless the city has posted
an area with signs reading Dogs or Cats Prohibited.
(B) Nuisances.
(1) Habitual barking. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor a dog which
habitually barks or cries. Habitual barking shall be defined as barking for repeated intervals of at least 3
minutes with less than 1 minute of interruption. The barking must also be audible off of the owner's or
caretaker's premises.
(2) Damage to property. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to prevent that person's dog or
other animal to damage any lawn, garden, or other property, whether or not the owner has knowledge of the
damage.
(3) Cleaning up litter. The owner of any animal or person having the custody or control of any
animal shall be responsible for cleaning up any feces of the animal and disposing of the feces in a sanitary
manner whether on their own property, on the property of others, or on public property.
(4) Other. Any animals kept contrary to this section are subject to impoundment as provided in
' 93.03.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 93.03 POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS AND DANGEROUS AMIMALS.
(A) Definitions.
(1) Animal Control Officer. The Chief Law Enforcement Officer, or an individual or employee of a
business retained by the City for purposes of enforcing the provisions of this Chapter. In the latter case, the
City may have them deputized with police powers for such enforcement, including authority to issue
complaints for the violation of this Section.
(2) Dangerous Animal. A dangerous animal is an animal which has:
(a) Caused bodily injury or disfigurement to any person on public or private property; or
(b) Engaged in any attack on any person under circumstances, which would indicate danger to
53
personal safety; or
(c) Exhibited unusually aggressive behavior, such as an attack on another animal; or
(d) Bitten one or more persons on two or more occasions; or
(e) Been found to be potentially dangerous and/or the owner has personal knowledge of the same,
the animal aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals.
(3) Potentially Dangerous Animal. A potentially dangerous animal is an animal which has:
(a) Bitten a human or a domestic animal on public or private property; or
(b) When unprovoked, chased or approached a person upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public
property in an apparent attitude of attack; or
(c) Has engaged in unprovoked attacks causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety of
humans or domestic animals.
(4) Proper Enclosure. Proper enclosure means securely confined indoors or in a securely locked pen
or structure suitable to prevent the animal from escaping and to provide protection for the animal from
the elements. A proper enclosure does not include a porch, patio, or any part of a house, garage, or
other structure that would allow the animal to exit of its own volition, or any house or structure in
which windows are open or in which door or window screens are the only barriers which prevent the
animal from exiting. The enclosure shall not allow the egress of the animal in any manner without
human assistance. A pen or kennel shall meet the following minimum specifications:
(a) Have a minimum overall floor size of 32 square feet.
(b) Sidewalls shall have a minimum height of five feet and be constructed of 11-gauge or heavier
wire. Openings in the wire shall not exceed two inches, support posts shall be 1 1/4 inch or larger steel
pipe buried in the ground 18 inches or more. When a concrete floor is not provided, the sidewalls shall
be buried a minimum of 18 inches in the ground.
(c) A cover over the entire pen or kennel shall be provided. The cover shall be constructed of the
same gauge wire or heavier as the sidewalls and shall also have no openings in the wire greater than
two inches.
(d) An entrance/exit gate shall be provided and be constructed of the same material as the
sidewalls and shall also have no openings in the wire greater than two inches. The gate shall be
equipped with a device capable of being locked and shall be locked at all times when the animal is in
the pen or kennel.
(5) Unprovoked. Unprovoked shall mean the condition in which the animal is not purposely excited,
stimulated, agitated or disturbed.
(B) Seizure of animals. Any police officer or Animal Control Officer may enter upon private property and
seize any animal, provided that the following exist:
(1) There is an identified complainant other than the police officer or Animal Control Officer making a
contemporaneous complaint about the animal;
(2) The officer reasonably believes that the animal meets either the barking dog criteria set out in §
93.02 (B)(1); the criteria for dangerous set out in § 93.03 (A)(2); the criteria for cruelty set out in M.S. §
343.20 Subd. 3; or the criteria for an at large animal set out in the definition of "at large" in § 93.02 (A);
(3) There is evidence that the animal is dangerous or the officer can demonstrate that there has been at
54
least one previous complaint of a barking dog; inhumane treatment of the animal; or that the animal was at
large at this address on a prior date;
(4) The officer has made a reasonable attempt to contact the owner of the property and those attempts
have either failed or have been ignored;
(5) The seizure will not involve the forced entry into a private residence. Use of a pass key obtained
from a property manager, landlord, innkeeper, or other authorized person to have such key shall not be
considered unauthorized entry; and
(6) Written notice of the seizure is left in a conspicuous place if personal contact with the owner of the
dog is not possible.
(C) Impounding.
(1) Biting animals. Any animal that has not been inoculated by a live modified rabies vaccine and
which has bitten any person, wherein the skin has been punctured or the services of a doctor are required,
shall be confined in the City Pound for a period of not less than 10 days, at the expense of the owner. The
animal may be released at the end of such time if healthy and free from symptoms of rabies, and by the
payment of all costs by the owner. However, if the owner of the animal shall elect immediately upon receipt
of notice of need for such confinement by the officer to voluntarily and immediately confine the animal for
the required period of time in a veterinary hospital of the owner's choosing, not outside of the county in
which this City is located, and provide immediate proof of such confinement in such manner as may be
required, the owner may do so. If, however, the animal has been or is being deemed a dangerous animal,
then the animal shall be confined until such time as the owner complies with the requirements of M.S. §
347.51. The animal shall be confined until the order becomes final if the animal is ordered destroyed.
(D) Reclaiming.
(1) All animals conveyed to the pound shall be kept, with humane treatment and sufficient food and
water for their comfort, at least five regular business days, unless the animal is a dangerous animal as
defined under § 93.03(A)(2), in which case it shall be kept for the times specified in §§ 93.03(C), (G) or (I),
and except if the animal is a cruelly-treated animal in which case it shall be kept for 10 regular business
days, unless sooner reclaimed by their owners or keepers as provided by this section. In case the owner or
keeper shall desire to reclaim the animal from the pound, the following shall be required:
(a) Payment of the animal pick up fees, as established in the fine and fee schedule, and receipt of a
release permission from the police;
(b) Payment of veterinary and maintenance costs, as provided by the pound, per day or any part of
day while animal is in said pound; and
(c) If a dog is unlicensed, payment of a regular license fee and valid certificate of
vaccination for rabies and distemper shots is required.
(E) Destruction or confinement of animals.
(1) If, in the reasonable belief of any person or police officer, an animal presents an immediate danger
55
to the health and safety of any person, or the animal is threatening imminent harm to any person, or the
animal is in the process of attacking any person, the officer may immediately destroy the animal in a proper
and humane manner. Otherwise the person or officer may apprehend the animal and deliver it to the pound
for confinement under this section. If the animal is destroyed, the actual cost to dispose of the animal is
payable by the owner of the animal. If the animal is found not to be a danger to the health and safety of the
City, it may be released to the owner or keeper in accordance with § 93.03(D).
(F) Designation as Potentially Dangerous Animal.
(1) The Animal Control Officer shall designate any animal as a potentially dangerous animal upon
receiving such evidence that the animal meets the definition of “potentially dangerous” as defined in
93.03(A)(3). When an animal is declared potentially dangerous, the Animal Control Officer shall cause
one owner of the potentially dangerous animal to be notified in writing that such animal is potentially
dangerous.
(G) Appeal hearing procedures for Potentially Dangerous Animal. A potentially dangerous animal
declaration appeal shall consist of a record review by the city administrator or his/her designee, using the
designated appeal form supplied at the time of the written request. The appeal form must be completed and
returned to the animal control officer or designee with written evidence and/or affidavits that dispute the
declaration within 14 business days of notification. The owner/custodian of the dog shall be notified, in
writing, of the record review results within ten calendar days of receipt. There shall be a fee for an appeal
of a potentially dangerous animal declaration, as established in the Fine & Fee Schedule. The individual
conducting the review shall have the authority to amend the declaration or order as appropriate and to
establish specific requirements for the dog found to be potentially dangerous.
(H) Designation as Dangerous Animal. The Animal Control Officer shall have the authority to designate
any animal as a dangerous animal upon receiving evidence that the animal meets the definition of
“dangerous” as defined in 93.03(A)(2). When an animal is declared dangerous, the Animal Control Officer
shall cause one owner of the dangerous animal to be notified in writing that such animal is deemed
dangerous.
(I) Appeal hearing procedures for Dangerous Animal.
(1) The owner/custodian of an animal that has been declared dangerous may appeal the declaration and
request a hearing. The appeal request is to be submitted in writing within 14 days of notification. If a
hearing is requested, the animal control officer or the designee, shall schedule a hearing within 14 calendar
days. A dangerous declaration appeal shall consist of an appearance before an independent city employee
or hired representative. The hearing fee, as established in the Fine & Fee Schedule, must be paid prior to
the hearing. The hearing officer may set limits on the evidence that may be submitted and the length of
testimony offered. The hearing officer conducting the review shall have the authority to amend the
declaration or order as appropriate and to establish specific requirements. Any time after a declaration has
been issued, the animal control officer or designee may seize a declared animal. All applicable fees and
costs shall be the responsibility of the owner/custodian of the animal. The animal shall not be released until
all fees are paid in full and in compliance with the provisions of this Code is achieved.
(2) All animals seized pursuant to this subsection may be disposed of by animal control after 14
56
calendar days of notification of declaration when the animal is not properly registered or an appeal has not
been properly submitted pursuant to this section.
(3) In the event the declaration is overturned, all fees will be reviewed by the hearing officer. The
owner/custodian of the animal shall be notified of the hearing results within ten business days. All
decisions may be appealed to the Minnesota Court of Appeals.
(4) The animal control officer, after having determined that an animal is dangerous, may proceed in
the following manner: The animal control officer shall cause one owner/custodian of the animal to be
notified in writing or in person that the animal is dangerous and may order the dog seized or make orders as
deemed proper. This owner/custodian shall be notified as to dates, times, places and parties bitten, and shall
be given 14 days to appeal this order.
(a) If no appeal is filed within the time allowed, the animal control officer may authorize the
seizure and the destruction of the animal, unless the animal is already in custody or the
owner/custodian consents to the seizure and destruction of the animal.
(b) If an appeal is filed within the time allowed, the animal control officer may, pending the
outcome of the appeal, either authorize the continued impounding of the animal, or authorize the
release of the animal to the owner if the owner proves compliance with all requirements for keeping a
dangerous animal and the animal does not present an immediate danger to the health and safety of any
person.
(J) Authority to order destruction.
(1) The Animal Control Officer, upon finding that an animal is dangerous hereunder, is authorized to
order, as part of the disposition of the case, that the animal be destroyed based on a written order containing
one or more of the following findings of fact:
(a) The animal is dangerous as demonstrated by a vicious attack, an unprovoked
attack, an attack without warning or multiple attacks; or
(b) The owner of the animal has demonstrated an inability or unwillingness to control the animal
in order to prevent injury to persons or other animals.
(2) The Animal Control Officer shall require a previously designated dangerous animal to be
destroyed if:
(a) The dog afflicted substantial or great bodily harm on a human or a domestic animal on public
or private property.
(b) The dog inflicted multiple bites on a human on public or private property without provocation.
(c) The dog bit multiple human victims on public or private property without
provocation; or
(d) The dog bit a human on public or private property without provocation, in an
attack where more than one dog participated in the attack.
(K) No person shall harbor an animal after it has been found to be dangerous and ordered into custody for
destruction.
(L) Notification of new address. The owner of an animal which has been identified as dangerous or
potentially dangerous must notify the Animal Control Officer in writing if the animal is to be relocated
57
from its current address or given or sold to another person. The notification must be given in writing at least
14 days prior to the relocation or transfer of ownership. The notification must include the current owner's
name and address, the relocation address, and the name of the new owner, if any.
Penalty, see §10.99.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed 07-18-2016) (replaced part of Ord. 250, passed 10-20-1997)
' 93.04 VICIOUS ANIMALS.
(A) No person shall keep a dog or cat within the City of Olivia if the animal, when unprovoked has
shown a tendency to attack, bite, scratch, claw, or otherwise injure or attempt to injure any person.
(B) In addition to the penalties set forth below, the owner, caretaker, or person in possession of a
vicious dog or cat shall either destroy the animal or remove it permanently to a location outside the City of
Olivia.
(Ord. 250, passed 10-20-1997) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 93.05 EFFECTIVE DATE.
Sections 93.01 et seq. shall be effective upon passage and publication.
(Ord. 250, passed 10-20-1997)
' 93.98 VIOLATIONS.
(A) It shall be a petty misdemeanor for anyone, whether owner, caretaker, or person in possession of
an animal, to violate the regulations set forth in '' 93.01, 93.03, and 93.04.
(B) Any subsequent violation, within 1 year from the date of a previous conviction by an owner,
caretaker, or person in possession, regardless of whether the dog or cat is the same, shall be a misdemeanor.
(C) In addition to the penalties set forth above, an owner, caretaker, or person in possession of a dog or
cat convicted of a subsequent violation, excluding those provisions set forth in ' 93.04(B), may be ordered
by the court to either destroy the animal(s) or remove it (them) permanently to a location outside the City of
Olivia.
(D) It shall be a misdemeanor to harass, abuse, threaten, or in any way interfere with a police officer
who is enforcing or attempting to enforce the terms of '' 93.01 et seq.
(Ord. 250, passed 10-20-1997) Penalty, see ' 10.99
58
CHAPTER 94: ABANDONED VEHICLES
Section
94.01 Nuisance
94.02 Definitions
94.03 Abandonment of vehicles
94.04 Leaving of wrecked, nonoperating vehicles on street
94.05 Wrecked or discarded vehicles; private property
94.06 Authority to remove
94.07 Prosecution
94.08 Claiming vehicle
94.09 Impoundment and sale
94.10 Proceeds of sale
94.11 Records
94.98 Violations
' 94.01 NUISANCE.
The City Council of Olivia determines and declares that vehicles that are or may in the future be
abandoned in the streets and other places within the city; and are or may in the future be dismantled,
partially dismantled, wrecked, junked, nonoperating, or discarded in and about the city other than in junk
yards or other appropriate places; and the conditions tend to impede traffic in the streets or interfere with
the enjoyment of and reduce the value of private property, invite plundering, create fire hazards and other
safety and health hazards to children, as well as adults, interfere with the comfort and well-being of the
public and creates extends and aggravate area blight; and adequate protection of the public health safety and
welfare requires that the conditions shall be regulated, abated, or prohibited.
(Ord. 248, passed 7-21-1997)
Abandoned Vehicles
59
' 94.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
ABANDONED VEHICLES. Shall have the definition given in M.S. ' 168B.011, Subd. 2, as it may
be amended from time to time.
JUNK VEHICLE. Shall have the definition given in M.S. ' 168B.011, Subd. 3, as it may be amended
from time to time.
PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, associations, corporation, company, or organization of any
kind.
PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any real property which is not a duly dedicated street or highway.
STREET or HIGHWAY. The dedicated traveled portion of any public way between the boundaries of
private property, whenever the same is open to the use of the public for the purposes of travel.
UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLE. Shall have the definition given in M.S. ' 168B.011, Subd. 4, as it
may be amended from time to time.
VEHICLE. Any device or machine designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads,
runners, or slides and transport persons or property, and shall include, without limitation, automobiles,
trucks, trailers, wagons, tractors, and motorcycles
(Ord. 248, passed 7-21-1997)
' 94.03 ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLES.
No person shall abandon any vehicle within the city, and no person shall leave any vehicle at any place
within the city for the time or under the circumstances as to cause the vehicle reasonably to appear to have
been abandoned or so as to become unauthorized as set forth in M.S. ' 168B.04, Subd. 2, as it may be
amended from time to time.
(Ord. 248, passed 7-21-1997) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 94.04 LEAVING OF WRECKED, NONOPERATING VEHICLES ON STREET.
No person shall leave on any street or highway within the city any partially dismantled, nonoperating,
wrecked, or junked vehicle or any vehicle not properly and currently licensed by the State of Minnesota for
operation within the State of Minnesota. This section shall not apply to a vehicle left
Olivia - General Regulations
60
due to an emergency or accident provided that the vehicle shall not be allowed to remain for more than 24
hours or in a manner that unduly interferes with the flow of traffic or otherwise endangers the health, safety,
or welfare of the public.
(Ord. 248, passed 7-21-1997) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 94.05 WRECKED OR DISCARDED VEHICLES; PRIVATE PROPERTY.
No person in charge or control of any property within the city whether as owner, tenant, occupant,
lessee, or otherwise shall permit or allow any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked,
discarded, or abandoned vehicle, or any vehicle not properly licensed for operation within the State of
Minnesota by the State of Minnesota, to remain on the property longer than 24 hours; and no person shall
leave the vehicle on any property within the city for a longer period than 24 hours, except that this section
shall not apply to vehicles within a closed building or to a vehicle on the premises of a business or
enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner when necessary to the operation of the business or
enterprise, and except that a vehicle may be considered unauthorized after the time limits set forth in M.S.
' 168B.04, Subd. 2, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 248, passed 7-21-1997) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 94.06 AUTHORITY TO REMOVE.
Any vehicle parked or stored in violation of any provision of this code or any ordinance of the city, or
of the law of the State of Minnesota, shall be declared to be a public nuisance and the same may be abated
by removing the vehicle by or under the direction of any police officer of the city by means of towing or
otherwise as authorized by state law, and provided that notice that the vehicle has been impounded shall be
given in compliance with M.S. ' 168B.06, as it may be amended from time to time, and any other
applicable statute.
(Ord. 248, passed 7-21-1997)
' 94.07 PROSECUTION.
The impounding of any vehicle shall not prevent or preclude the institution or prosecution of any
criminal proceedings against the owner or operator of the impounded vehicle.
(Ord. 248, passed 7-21-1997)
Abandoned Vehicles
61
' 94.08 CLAIMING VEHICLE.
Before the owner or his or her agent shall be permitted to remove a vehicle from the possession of the
city, he or she shall:
(A) Furnish satisfactory evidence to the city of his or her identity and ownership of the vehicle; and
(B) Pay the expenses of towing and storage.
(Ord. 248, passed 7-21-1997)
' 94.09 IMPOUNDMENT AND SALE.
(A) The city shall take into custody and impound any junked, abandoned, or unauthorized motor
vehicle as defined by M.S. ' 168.011, as it may be amended from time to time, and as regulated by this
chapter.
(B) It shall give notice of the taking as provided by law and, if the owner or any lien holder does not
reclaim the vehicle within the period provided by law, it shall provide for the sale of the vehicle to the
highest bidder at auction or sale following 2-weeks' published notice.
(Ord. 248, passed 7-21-1997)
' 94.10 PROCEEDS OF SALE.
The proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor vehicle shall be placed in the general fund of the city
and treated as required by state law. If the former owner or entitled lien holder makes application and
furnishes satisfactory proof of ownership or lien interest within 90 days of the sale, the former owner shall
be paid the proceeds of the sale of the vehicle less the cost of towing, preserving, and storing the
vehicle and all administrative, notice, and publication costs incurred in its handling.
(Ord. 248, passed 7-21-1997)
' 94.11 RECORDS.
The city shall keep a record of all vehicles impounded by manufacturer's trade name, motor vehicle
license number, V.I.N. number, and the names and addresses of the owner and of all persons claiming the
vehicle and the nature and circumstances of the impounding thereof together with the violation on account
of which the vehicle was impounded.
(Ord. 248, passed 7-21-1997)
Olivia - General Regulations
62
' 94.98 VIOLATIONS.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be adjudged guilty of a misdemeanor.
The costs of prosecution may be added as authorized by state law, the Rules of Court, and the Rules of
Civil and Criminal Procedure.
(Ord. 248, passed 7-21-1997) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Abandoned Vehicles
63
64
CHAPTER 95: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
95.01 Overnight use of city parks; camping
95.02 Picnic tables
95.03 Designation of city parks (with Exhibit A)
' 95.01 OVERNIGHT USE OF CITY PARKS; CAMPING.
(A) The purpose of this section is to secure the quiet, orderly, and suitable use and enjoyment of city
parks, public places, streets, and thoroughfares in the City of Olivia.
(B) The city parks of the City of Olivia are hereby closed to use from the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m., and no person may be lawfully upon the premises of any public park during those hours, except as
permitted within the provisions of this section.
(C) No person shall dwell, reside, live, camp, stay overnight, sleep overnight, or otherwise remain
overnight in any city park, public place, street, or thoroughfare within the City of Olivia, except as
authorized and permitted by the terms of the provisions of this section.
(D) Overnight camping shall be permitted in Memorial Park only and subject to the following specific
terms and conditions.
(1) Overnight camping in vehicles, tents, and recreational equipment shall be permitted in the
park.
(2) During the course of using Memorial Park as a camping facility, all persons shall allow no
debris, litter, or waste to accumulate or to be left upon the grounds shall keep and leave the area in a neat,
clean, and orderly fashion.
(3) No person or vehicle shall be allowed to camp for more than 3 consecutive nights without
permission from City Administration or the Olivia Police Department.
(4) If the City Council determines that it is necessary to set fees for the park, they will be set by
resolution.
Parks and Recreation
65
(5) The number of recreational vehicles in the park shall be limited to the number of pads
constructed for camping use excluding tents. No parking will be allowed on the roadway.
(6) No vehicle that is partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked, or discarded shall
remain on any property for more than 72 hours. Violators will be towed at the owner's expense.
(7) Washing or drying of clothing is prohibited in all areas. No drying lines are allowed.
(8) Open burning is prohibited. Grills using propane gas or charcoal will be permitted.
(E) The City Council shall have the authority from time to time to waive the provisions of this section
to permit camping in the city parks or other public places. The camping shall be done in conjunction with a
recognized fair, exhibition, tournament, or other community activity, previously approved of by the City
Council. Vehicles and recreational equipment used for visitation are permitted within the city for short
periods of time.
(F) The Police Chief and all on-duty police officers are charged with the duty of removing and
evicting any person from any city park, public place, street, or thoroughfare who is violating the terms and
provisions of this section.
(G) Violation of this section shall constitute a petty misdemeanor.
(H) The effective date of this section shall be 1-1-1992.
(Ord. 231, passed 9-23-1991) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 95.02 PICNIC TABLES.
The city picnic tables will no longer be rented. They shall remain in the parks for the general public to
use.
Editor=s note:
This provision was passed by Council during a regularly meeting
' 95.03 DESIGNATION OF CITY PARKS.
(A) The City of Olivia hereby designates the following as official City Parks:
(1) Dirks Park. (Includes: Soccer Fields, and Little League Baseball Field with Bleachers);
(2) Dowling Park. (Includes: Downtown park area with Gazebo, Picnic Tables, and Decorative
Flower Boxes);
Olivia - General Regulations
66
(3) Henton Park. (Includes: Baseball Field, Bleachers, Drinking Fountain, Playground Equipment,
Basketball Court, Shelter/Gazebo, Picnic Tables, Warming House, and Winter Skating Rink);
(4) Kubesh Park. (Includes: Shelter, Picnic Tables, Drinking Fountain, Playground Equipment,
Restrooms, and Horseshoe Pits);
(5) Memorial Park. (Includes: Picnic Shelter, Picnic Tables, Drinking Fountain, Six Primitive Camp
Sites, and Restrooms);
(6) Nester Park. (Includes: Shelter with Picnic Tables, Playground Equipment, Tennis Court,
Restrooms, and Drinking Fountain);
(7) Pond Park. (Includes: picnic tables, benches, dock, possible future Warming House & Winter
Skating, and Fishing);
(8) Rainbow Park. (Nature park area);
(9) Softball Park. (Includes: Softball Fields, Bleachers, Concessions and Restrooms);
(10) Sunrise Park. (Includes: Shelter with Picnic Tables, Drinking Fountain, Restrooms, Playground
Equipment, and Volleyball Court Area); and
(11) West Park. (Includes: Playground Equipment).
(B) The legal descriptions for the parks named in section (A) above are attached hereto as Exhibit A,
and incorporated herein by reference.
(C) This Ordinance shall be incorporated into Olivia City Code as Section 95.03.
(Ord. 2015-02, passed 6-01-2015)
(Ord. 2016-04, passed 09-06-2016)
Exhibit A to Olivia Code Section 95.03
(1) Dirks Park.
Lot D, except the South 50’ thereof and except that part of the East 16 rods of said Lot D which
lies south of the North 267’ thereof, of Peterson’s 4th Addition to the Village (now City) of
Olivia. Parcel #35-00160-00.
(2) Dowling Park.
The West 37 feet of Lot 11, Block 7, Original Plat of the City of Olivia, in Renville County,
Minnesota. Parcel #35-00740-00.
Parks and Recreation
67
(3) Henton Park.
Henton Park, formerly a part of Windhorst’s Addition to the Village, now City, of Olivia
according to the Plat thereof approved by the Council of the Village, now City, of Olivia on
March 1st, 1935, and to be recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds of Renville County,
Minnesota. Parcel #35-03836-00.
(4) Kubesh Park.
Lot 14, except the east 105 feet thereof, and Lot 17 and the West 25 feet of Lot 16 of Block 1 of
Heins First Addition to the Village, now City, of Olivia. Parcel #35-02076-00. AND
East 105 feet of Lot 14, Block 1, Heins First Addition, City of Olivia, except the North 20 feet
thereof. Parcel #35-02077-00.
(5) Memorial Park.
The East 288 feet of the Southwest Quarter of Section 12, Township 115, Range 35, lying
between the south section line and the south right of way line of U.S. Highway 212. Parcel #35-
00125-00.
(6) Nester Park.
All of Block 18 (Park), as dedicated on Plat of Nester’s Addition to the City of Olivia, Renville
County, Minnesota. Parcel #35-01302-00.
(7) Pond Park.
Part of the Northeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of Section 13, Township 115 North,
Range 35 West, City of Olivia, Renville County, Minnesota, described as follows:
Commencing at the Southeast Corner of Lot 4 in the Northeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter
of said Section 13, according to the recorded plat thereof; thence Westerly, on the south line of
said Lot 4, a distance of 75.00 feet to the west right-of-way line of U.S. Trunk Highway 71;
thence Southerly along said west right-of-way line, 370.00 feet to the point of beginning; thence
westerly, parallel with the south line of said Lot 4, a distance of 450.00 feet; thence Southerly
parallel with said west right-of-way line of U.S. Trunk Highway 71 to the south line of said
Northeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter; thence Easterly to said west right-of-way line of
U.S. Trunk Highway 71; thence Northerly, along said west right-of-way line to the point of
beginning; Renville County, Minnesota. Parcel # 35-00251-00 - South of West Court; AND
Part of the Northwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter and the Northeast Quarter of the
Northeast Quarter of Section 13, Township 115 North, Range 35 West, Renville County,
Minnesota, described as follows:
Commencing at the North Quarter Corner of said Section 13; thence North 89 degrees 44
minutes 28 seconds East (bearings based on Renville County Coordinates, NAD 83, 2007
adjustment), on the north line of said Northeast Quarter of Section 13, a distance of 1208.27 feet
Olivia - General Regulations
68
to a point on the west line of a parcel of land recorded as Document No. 351835; thence South
00 degrees 28 minutes 22 seconds East on the west line of a parcel of land recorded as
Document No. 351835, a distance of 625.98 feet to the point of beginning; thence South 89
degrees 41 minutes 29 seconds West on the west line of a parcel of land recorded as Document
No. 351835, a distance of 465.00 feet; thence South 00 degrees 28 minutes 22 seconds East on
said west line of a parcel of land recorded as Document No. 351835, a distance of 700.00 feet to
the south line of the Northwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter, thence North 89 degrees 41
minutes 29 seconds East on said south line of the Northwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter, a
distance of 465.00 feet to the west line of a parcel of land recorded as Document No. 261641;
thence North 00 degrees 28 minutes 22 seconds West on said west line of parcel of land
recorded as Document No. 261641, a distance of 109.77 feet to the north line of a parcel of land
recorded as Document No. 261641; thence North 89 degrees 41 minutes 38 seconds East on
said North line of a parcel of land recorded as Document No. 261641, a distance of 903.45 feet
to the east line of a parcel of land recorded as Document No. 348181; thence North 00 degrees
28 minutes 53 seconds West on said east line of a parcel of land recorded as Document No.
348181, a distance of 163.00 feet; thence South 89 degrees 41 minutes 38 seconds West, a
distance of 639.00 feet; thence North 32 degrees 10 minutes 52 seconds West, a distance of
503.09 feet to the point of beginning. Parcel contains 12.15 acres of land; Parcel #35-00132-00
- Storm Pond.
(8) Rainbow Park.
Park, as dedicated on the plat of Rainbow Park Addition to the City of Olivia, Renville County,
Minnesota. Parcel #35-00127-00.
(9) Softball Park.
Beginning at Northwest corner of Lot D of Peterson’s 4th Addition to the Village, now City, of
Olivia, thence North 480 feet, thence East along South line of Lot E of said Peterson’s 4th
Addition, 720 feet, thence South to Northeast corner of said Lot D thence West along North line
of said Lot D 720 feet to place of beginning, being in the North ½ of Southeast ¼ of Section
number 7 in Township number 115 North of Range number 34 (said tract sometimes described
as Outlot 4 in North ½ of Southeast ¼ of said Section 7). Parcel #35-00050-00.
(10) Sunrise Park.
Park, as dedicated on the plat of Peavy’s Third Sunrise Addition to the City of Olivia, Renville
County, Minnesota. Parcel #35-05371-00.
(11) West Park.
Dedicated for Playground Area, Block 3, West Park Addition to the City of Olivia, Renville
County, Minnesota. Parcel #35-05515-00.
69
CHAPTER 96: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
96.02 Sidewalks, driveway approaches, curbs, and gutters
96.03 Street name designation
96.04 Street grades; Datum
96.06 Curbs
96.07 Sidewalk, curb and gutter inspection
96.08 Removal of ice and snow from sidewalks
Olivia - General Regulations
70
' 96.02 SIDEWALKS, DRIVEWAY APPROACHES, CURBS, AND GUTTERS.
(A) Regulation established. No sidewalks, driveway approaches, or curbs and gutters will be installed,
constructed, altered, or repaired on any public property within the corporate limits of the City of Olivia
except in conformity with the provisions of this section.
(1957 Code, ' 1010:01)
(B) Permit required. No work on any sidewalk, driveway approaches, or curb and gutter shall be
commenced unless permission is first obtained from the City Council. This provision shall not apply,
however, to ordinary repairs or removal of obstructions or hazards, but shall apply to all changes in the
location or complete replacement of old work.
(1957 Code, ' 1010:02)
(C) Zones.
(1) The commercial and industrial zone, as referred to in this section, shall include all sidewalks,
driveway approaches, and curbs and gutters constructed along the streets in the commercial and industrial
zones as established in the city zoning ordinance.
(2) The residential zone shall consist of all sidewalks and curbs and gutters on streets not
included in the commercial and industrial zone.
(1957 Code, ' 1010:03)
(D) Size and location of sidewalks, and driveway approaches.
(1) All sidewalks constructed or replaced in the commercial zone shall not be less than 72 feet
wide, 4 inches thick, and have 4 inches of gravel filling directly underneath, and shall abutt on the property
line adjacent thereto. Private driveway approaches within the City-owned boulevard areas shall be as above
except to be 6 inches thick.
(2) (a) All sidewalks constructed or replaced in the residential zone shall be not less than 4 feet
wide, 4 inches thick, and have 4 inches of gravel filling directly underneath, and shall be placed 1 foot from
the property line adjacent thereto.
(b) Private driveway approaches within the City-owned boulevard areas shall be as above
except to be 6 inches thick.
(3) Width of sidewalks to be constructed in both zones shall be determined by the City Council at
the time of application for permission but in no case less than the minimums established by divisions (D)(1)
and (D)(2) above.
(1957 Code, ' 1010:04)
71
(E) Size and location of curb and gutter.
(1) Curb and gutter constructed in the commercial zone shall be built according to the
specifications on file in the office of the City Administrator and shall be placed as determined by the City
Council at the time of application for permission and not less than 72 feet from the property line.
(2) Curb and gutter constructed in the residential zone shall be built according to the
specifications on file in the office of the City Administrator and shall be centered within the platted right of
way.
(1957 Code, ' 1010:05)
(F) Special cases. Where existing conditions make the adherence to these regulations impractical, the
matter shall be brought before the City Council who may allow the modification thereof in any particular
case as may be deemed necessary and proper.
(1957 Code, ' 1010:06)
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 96.03 STREET NAME DESIGNATION.
(A) East and west designated. All avenues and parts of avenues lying and being east of 9th street shall
be, and they hereby are, designated as avenues east, and that all avenues and parts of avenues lying and
being west of 9th Street shall be, and they hereby are, designated as avenues west.
(1957 Code, ' 1025:02)
(B) North and south designated. All streets lying and being south of Lincoln Avenue, formerly
Lincoln Street, shall be and they are hereby designated as streets south, and that all streets lying and being
north of Lincoln Avenue, formerly Lincoln Street, shall be and they hereby are designated as streets north.
(1957 Code, ' 1025:03)
(C) Generally. For the purpose of uniformity and systematizing the naming and numbering of the
public streets and highways situated in and within the incorporate limits of the City of Olivia, as appears of
record now on file in the office of the Renville County Recorder, that all public streets and highways within
the corporate limits of the city together with all public streets and highways that may hereafter be laid out,
platted, and dedicated as provided by law, running in and through the incorporated City of Olivia, from
west to east, or from east to west, shall be named, called, and known by and with the name of any person or
place to be designated and determined by resolution or ordinance of the City Council of Olivia, duly passed
as provided by law.
(1957 Code, ' 1025:04)
Olivia - General Regulations
72
(D) Arabic system. All streets and highways heretofore dedicated for public use, including any and all
streets and highways that may hereafter be laid out, platted, and dedicated for public use in any and all
additions or subdivisions attached to and incorporated within the incorporated limits of the City of Olivia,
running in and through the incorporated limits from south to north, or from north to south, shall be named
and be known by Arabic numbers only.
(1957 Code, ' 1025:05)
' 96.04 STREET GRADES.
(A) Datum established. According to MnDOT.
' 96.06 CURBS
(A) Curb, driveway approach, and sidewalk repair.
(1) Any curb and/or gutter removal or replacement to add a driveway is done at 100% cost to the
property owner. Cost of the apron, radius, and curb replacement is 100% property owner.
(2) Driveway aprons shall be separate from street curb and gutter. Aprons shall be designed and
approved by appropriate city staff.
(B) Utility hookups, curb and gutter replacement and driveway approaches. Citizens installing water
or sewer hookups into city streets who find it necessary to remove curb and gutter, sidewalk, and driveway
approaches will be responsible for the replacement of the same at their cost.
Editor=s note:
This provision was passed by Council at a Council meeting
' 96.07 SIDEWALK, DRIVEWAY APPROACH, CURB AND GUTTER INSPECTION.
(A) Frequency. All sidewalks, curbs and gutters located in the community shall be inspected on a
regular annual basis. The inspections shall be completed in the spring months of the year, which will allow
time for the contractor to be contacted and scheduled for repair and/or replacement for that year.
(B) Responsible for inspections. The Maintenance Supervisor shall be responsible for coordinating
the annual inspection efforts. The Maintenance Supervisor may require additional assistance from other city
staff in order to complete the inspection.
(C) Criteria for repair and/or replacement. Sidewalks, curbs and gutters should be considered for
repair and/or replacement if one of the following criteria is met:
73
(1) One-half inch difference or more in elevation.
(2) Excessive broken pieces.
(3) Excessive cracks, deterioration, or alligating.
(D) Records. The person completing the inspection should document all areas that were inspected. If
an area(s) of sidewalk, driveway approach, curb and gutter meets that above criteria for repair or
replacement, then the area affected, date of inspection, and signature of the person inspection should be
recorded. This will reveal what areas have been inspected and what problems were found.
(E) Areas to be repaired/replaced first. Once the community has been inspected by the Street
Superintendent or other city staff, the appropriate documentation should be submitted to the Street
Superintendent. The Street Superintendent will prioritize what area(s) will be repaired and/or replaced first.
The area(s) that will be considered first priority will be those located along the designated sidewalk route.
(See 1997 sidewalk map.) After these areas have been identified as first priority, then the remaining areas
will be prioritized according to severity of cracks, deterioration, etc.
(F) Procedure for notification of property owner. Once an area has been identified as a priority and is
scheduled for either repair or replacement in a given year, the correct procedure to follow is stated in the
Special Assessment Policy (Resolution 99-14; Project Initiation/Review: AProjects may be initiated by
petition of affected property owners or City Council).
(G) Responsibility for payment of sidewalks. The city budgets money on an annual basis to assist in
the repair and/or replacement of the sidewalks. Once these budget funds have been exhausted, those
sidewalks that were not either repaired or replaced and were on the list will be again inspected the next year
and assigned a priority. The assessment and portion of payment between the city and the property owner is
defined by the Special Assessment Policy, Resolution 99-14 (see resolution for further explanation.)
(H) Obstacles on sidewalks and/or curb and gutter. Obstacles may include trees, water valves,
newspaper stands, etc. The Maintenance Supervisor will decide if the obstacle should be removed. The
cost of removing the obstacle should be the expense of the city; unless the obstacle is located on private
property.
(I) Duty of the property owner. It shall be the duty of the property owner and/or occupant of any
abutting city sidewalk or driveway approach to use diligence so as to remove snow, dirt, or rubbish from
such walk.
(J) Construction or repairs or sidewalks or removal of public sidewalks. No construction, repair, or
removal of sidewalks, boulevard, service walks, or curb and gutter in the city shall be conducted without
prior approval from the City Council or City Administrator. (See Resolution 99-14 for correct procedure.)
(K) Guidelines for construction of sidewalks. The following guidelines shall be used in the
construction of sidewalks:
Olivia - General Regulations
74
(1) Sidewalks may be required by the City Council in such areas that are necessary to adequately
provide for the safety and welfare of pedestrians.
(2) All sidewalk widths shall conform to the following minimum standards:
Classification Width
Single-family Zone (R-1) 5 feet
Multi-family Zone (R-2) 4 feet
Commercial Zone determined by Maintenance Supervisor
Industrial Zone determined by Maintenance Supervisor
(3) All sidewalks shall have a traverse/cross slope 1/4 inch per foot away from the property line
and the profile grade shall not exceed 6%.
(4) Sidewalks shall be placed in the public right-of-way, one foot from the property line, or as
determined otherwise by the City Council or City Administrator.
(5) Required sidewalks shall be concrete of 4-inch thickness and placed on a 4-inch gravel base.
(6) The City Council shall designate the head of the City Street Department, City Engineer or
such person to approve all sidewalks.
(L) Guidelines for construction of curb and gutter. The following guidelines shall be used in the
construction of sidewalks: All curb and gutter shall be approved by the City Engineer before installation.
(Res. 99-79, passed 10-18-1999)
' 96.08 REMOVAL OF ICE AND SNOW FROM CITY SIDEWALKS.
(A) City. The city will remove the snow from city property as determined by the public works
superintendent when he determines it is necessary.
(B) Property owner. Property owners with property which abuts a sidewalk will be responsible for
removing the snow within 24 hours from the end of the snowfall or as otherwise required in the city code.
75
CHAPTER 97: E-911 UNIFORM ADDRESSING
Section
97.01 Purpose
97.02 Definitions
97.03 Uniform addressing system requirements
97.04 Multiple dwelling/business numbering
97.05 Exceptions and practical alternatives
97.06 Maintenance of numbers
97.07 Compliance
§ 97.01 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a system by which the owners of all primary structures
located in the city shall be required to maintain the address number assigned to his, her or their primary
structure in specified locations in accordance with this section. This chapter shall be intended to
promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to further the implementation of the
Emergency Telephone Services Act, M.S. Ch. 403, as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 97.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ADDRESS NUMBER. The number for each primary structure as assigned by the city. The
minimum size for numbers shall be three inches. Numbers shall be reflective or of a color contrasting
with background color. Numbers shall be numeric, and not alphabetic.
ADDRESS SIGN. A two-sided sign, which contains an address number in reflective or high
contrast colored numbers, on both sides of the sign that are at least three (3) inches tall and that are
positioned horizontally on the sign.
DRIVEWAY. A private road serving only one primary structure.
PRIMARY STRUCTURE. A building which shall be used for the principal lot or parcel in,
which it is located.
PRIVATE DRIVE. A private road serving more than one primary structure.
ROAD. A public or private way, no matter how designated, which affords primary means of
access by vehicles to adjacent property. A public or private way which is accessible only by foot or offroad
vehicle shall not be a ROAD, as defined in this section.
Olivia - General Regulations
76
SIGNPOST. A post, permanently affixed in the ground, used solely for display of an address
number or an address sign.
§ 97.03 UNIFORM ADDRESSING SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Assignment and display. The City shall assign an address number to each primary structure
located inside the corporate limits of the City. All owners of the primary structures shall cause the
address number assigned to his, her or their primary structure to continuously be displayed in
conformity with this Chapter.
(B) Display location.
(1) All owners of primary structures shall display the address number assigned to his,
her or their primary structure on the primary structure on or near the door facing the nearest street.
(2) Where the primary structure is not visible from the street or private road, or is
located more than 100 feet from such street or road, an additional set of numbers shall be
placed on an address sign on a signpost, or address numbers on a mailbox at the driveway
apron or entrance with the address numbers visible in both directions of travel on the street. The
signpost shall conform to the following standards:
(a) The signpost shall be located within five feet of the driveway, at a
location which shall be clearly visible year round from the road. The signpost
shall be placed in a location which is at least five feet from the edge of the surface
of the road and not farther from the road than the outward edge of the right-ofway.
(b) In the event there is no driveway, the signpost shall be located in the
public right-of-way in front of the primary structure to clearly indicate the
location of the primary structure, no farther from the public road than the outward
edge of the right-of-way.
(c) An address sign with the address number assigned to the primary
structure shall be placed on the signpost. The address sign shall be placed
perpendicular to the road. The bottom of the address sign shall be placed at a
height which shall be between four and five feet above the level of the surface of
the road.
(C) Temporary address numbers. No building permit may be obtained for a primary structure
unless the applicant for the building permit places a temporary post with a sign displaying the address
numbers for the primary structure until the numbers can be placed on the primary structure or an
address sign, as applicable. When the building permit expires, this paragraph shall not apply and the
property owner must comply with the remaining provisions of this Chapter.
(D) Multiple houses or primary structures. Where more than one house or structure is served by
the same private driveway or unnamed private road, each individual property owner on the private
driveway or road shall be responsible for including his or her address number on a single, common
77
identification sign in the public right-of-way near the public roadway entrance, consistent with the
signpost requirements above, that contains all of the address signs for the addresses on the private road.
Alternatively, the single common identification sign may list the range of address numbers located on
the driveway or road, for example “1300-1308”. The identification numbers on the signpost shall be in
numerical order, and shall contain the numbers of primary structures on the private drive with the
address number for the farthest primary structure on the bottom of the identification sign. Consistent
with paragraphs (B)(1) and (2) above, additional sets of numbers shall be placed at every fork or other
driveway as necessary to direct traffic to every house, including the house farthest from the street.
Numbers placed on mailboxes are insufficient to satisfy the provisions except when a mailbox stands
on the subject property, not across a public street, and not in a group of mailboxes more than one in
number.
(E) E-911 address change. Following the adoption by the city of an E-911 addressing system,
the City Administrator or Address Coordinator will notify residents and/or owners of any address
change. It is the responsibility of the owner/occupant to notify the United States Postal Service of his
or her address change.
§ 97.04 MULTIPLE DWELLING/BUSINESS NUMBERING.
(A) Structures with more than one dwelling unit or more than one business (apartments, retail
centers and the like) shall be assigned one address number for each building and shall use unit, suite or
apartment numbers for each residential or business tenant.
(B) It shall be the duty of the owner of every building containing more than one dwelling unit or
more than one business and the owner or occupant of every individually owned dwelling unit or
business in any multiple-unit building to properly identify each dwelling unit or business by attaching
identification numbers on or adjacent to each entrance and to provide signs, including directional
arrows, easily identifying the location of each dwelling unit or business in the building which is
accessed from that entrance. The signs shall be placed in an obvious location inside each entrance to
the building as approved by the Fire Chief.
§ 97.05 EXCEPTIONS AND PRACTICAL ALTERNATIVES.
(A) If the locatable primary structure is in or within five feet of the road right-of-way, such as in
a commercial district, the assigned address number shall be displayed on the outside of the primary
structure, near the front door, for emergency purposes. The address number must face the public road,
be clearly visible and shall be no smaller than three inches tall, and must be colors in high contrast to
the primary structure.
(B) Practical alternatives to the application of the provisions of this Chapter may be granted by
the Council where following the applications create undue difficulties created by the unique
characteristics of the property.
Olivia - General Regulations
78
§ 97.06 MAINTENANCE OF NUMBERS.
(A) The owner of the primary structure shall be responsible for keeping his, her or their address
numbers in good repair and clear of snow, dirt, debris or other obstructions.
§ 97.07 COMPLIANCE.
(A) All owners of primary structures in the city shall comply with this chapter after its passage
and publication. It is a misdemeanor for any person to fail to comply with the provisions of this
Chapter or to post numbers other than the correct city-assigned numbers.
(B) If the property owner fails to comply with the requirements of this section, the City may
erect a sign adjacent to the street on which the number is stated or affixed, and upon completion
ascertain the cost and certify the cost to the county auditor to be collected as any other special
assessment.
(Ord. 2015-04, passed 10-05-2015)
Page 1 of 78
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter
110. GENERAL PROVISIONS
111. PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
112. ADULT USE LICENSING
113. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
114. [reserved for future use]
115. GAMBLING
116. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
117. AMUSEMENTS
Page 2 of 78
Page 3 of 78
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Lodging Tax
110.01 Definitions
110.02 Imposition of tax
110.03 Collections
110.04 Advertising no tax
110.05 Payment and returns
110.06 Examination of return; adjustments; notices and demands
110.07 Refunds
110.08 Failure to file a return
110.09 Tax penalties
110.10 Administrator of tax
110.11 Examine records
110.12 Contract with state
110.13 Violations
110.14 Use of proceeds - Convention and Tourism Bureau
110.15 Appeals
110.16 Effective date
Taxicabs
110.50 License required
110.51 Application
110.52 Fees
Page 4 of 78
110.53 Insurance or bond required
110.54 Term; revocation
110.55 Driver=s license; mechanic=s certificate
110.56 Passengers; rates
LODGING TAX
' 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of '' 110.01 et seq., the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ADMINISTRATOR. The City Administrator for the City of Olivia.
CITY. The City of Olivia.
LODGER. The person obtaining lodging from an operator.
LODGING. The furnishing for consideration of lodging by a hotel, motel, or rooming house, except
where the lodging shall be for a continuous period of 30 days or more to the same lodger(s). The furnishing
of rooms by religious, educational, or nonprofit organizations shall not constitute LODGING for purpose of
'' 110.01 et seq.
RENT. The total consideration valued in money charged for lodging whether paid in money or
otherwise, but shall not include any charges for services rendered in connection with furnishing lodging
other than the room charge itself.
SHALL. Is always mandatory.
(Ord. 237, passed 3-7-1994)
' 110.02 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
The tax on the rent charged by an operator for providing lodging will be set by city resolution, effective
1-1-1995. (See Appendix A).
(Ord. 237, passed 3-7-1994; Am. Ord. 243, passed 12-19-1994)
Page 5 of 78
' 110.03 COLLECTIONS.
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this section at the time the rent is paid. The tax
collections shall be deemed to be held in trust by the operator for the city. The amount of tax shall be
separately stated from the rent charged for the lodging and those persons paying the tax shall receive a
receipt of payment from the operator.
(Ord. 237, passed 3-7-1994) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 110.04 ADVERTISING NO TAX.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold out or state to the public or any customer,
directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it
will not be added to the rent or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded.
(B) In computing the tax to be collected, amounts of tax less than 1% shall be considered an additional
cent.
(Ord. 237, passed 3-7-1994) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 110.05 PAYMENT AND RETURNS.
(A) The taxes imposed by '' 110.01 et seq. shall be paid by the operator to the city monthly, not later
than 15 days after the end of the month in which the taxes were collected. At the time of payment, the
operator shall submit a return upon the forms and containing the information as the Administrator may
require. The return shall contain the following minimum information:
(1) The total amount of rent collected for lodging during the period covered by the return;
(2) The amount of tax required to be collected and due for the period;
(3) The signature of the person filing the return or that of his or her agent duly authorized in
writing;
(4) The period covered by the return; and
(5) The amount of uncollectible rental charges subject to the lodging tax.
(B) The operator may offset against the taxes payable with respect to any reporting period, the amount
of taxes imposed by '' 110.01 et seq. previously paid as a result of any transaction the consideration for
which became uncollectible during the reporting period.
(Ord. 237, passed 3-7-1994) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Page 6 of 78
' 110.06 EXAMINATION OF RETURN; ADJUSTMENTS; NOTICES AND DEMANDS.
(A) The Administrator shall, after a return is filed, examine the same and make any investigation or
examination of the records and accounts of the person making the return deemed necessary for determining
its correctness. The tax computed on the basis of the examination shall be the tax to be paid.
(B) If the tax due is found to be greater than that paid, the excess shall be paid to the city within 10
days after receipt of a notice thereof given either personally or sent by registered mail to the address shown
on the return. If the tax paid is greater than the tax found to be due, the excess shall be refunded to the
person who paid the tax to the city within 10 days after determination of the refund.
(Ord. 237, passed 3-7-1994)
' 110.07 REFUNDS.
Any person may apply to the Administrator for a refund of taxes paid for a prescribed period in excess
of the amount legally due for that period, provided that no application for refund shall be considered unless
filed within 1 year after the tax was paid or within 1 year from the filing of the return, whichever period is
longer. The Administrator shall examine the claim and make and file written findings thereon denying or
allowing the claim in whole or in part and shall mail a notice thereof by registered mail to the person at the
address stated upon the return. If the claim is allowed in whole or in part, the taxes due under '' 110.01 et
seq. from the claimant and the balance of the allowance, if any, shall be paid by the Administrator to the
claimant.
(Ord. 237, passed 3-7-1994)
' 110.08 FAILURE TO FILE A RETURN.
(A) If any operator required by '' 110.01 et seq. to file a return shall fail to do so within the time
prescribed, or shall make willfully or otherwise an incorrect, false, or fraudulent return, the operator shall,
upon written notice and demand, file the return or corrected return within 5 days of receipt of the written
notice and shall at the same time pay any tax due on the basis thereof. If the person shall fail to file the
return or corrected return, the Administrator shall make a return or corrected return for the person from the
knowledge and information as the Administrator can obtain, and assess a tax on the basis thereof, which tax
(less any payments covered by the return) shall be paid within 5 days of the receipt of written notice and
demand for the payment. The return filed by the Administrator will be presumed to be prima facie correct
and valid and the person shall have the burden of establishing its incorrectness or invalidity in any action or
proceeding in respect thereto.
(B) If any portion of a tax imposed by '' 110.01 et seq. including penalties thereon is not paid within
30 days after it is required to be paid, the City Attorney may institute the legal action as may be necessary to
recover the amount due plus interest, penalties, and the costs and disbursements of any action.
Page 7 of 78
(C) Upon a showing a good cause, the Administrator may grant an operator one 30-day extension of
time within which to file a return and make payment of taxes as required by '' 110.01 et seq. provided that
interest during the period of extension shall be added to the taxes due at the rate of 10% per annum.
(Ord. 237, passed 3-7-1994)
' 110.09 TAX PENALTIES.
(A) If any tax imposed by '' 110.01 et seq. is not paid within the time herein specified for the
payment, or an extension thereof, there shall be added thereto a specific penalty equal to 10% of the amount
remaining unpaid.
(B) In case of any failure to make and file and return within the time prescribed by '' 110.01 et seq.,
unless it is shown that the failure is not due to willful neglect, there shall be added to the tax, in addition to
the 10% specific penalty provided in division (A) above, 10% if the failure is for not more than 30 days
with an additional 5% for each additional 30 days or fraction thereof during which the failure continues, not
exceeding 25% in the aggregate. If the penalty as computed does not exceed $10, a minimum penalty in an
amount set by Council from time to time shall be assessed. The amount so added to any tax shall be
collected at the same time and the same manner as a part of the tax unless the tax has been paid before the
discovery of the negligence, in which case the amount so added shall be collected in the same manner as the
tax. (See Appendix A).
(C) If any person willfully fails to file any return or make any payment required by '' 110.01 et seq.,
or willfully files a false or fraudulent return, or willfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat the tax
or payment thereof, there shall also be imposed as a penalty an amount equal to 50% of any tax (less
amounts paid on the basis of the false or fraudulent return) found due for the period to which the return
related. The penalty imposed by this division (C) shall be collected as part of the tax, and shall be in
addition to any other penalties provided by this section.
(D) All payments received shall be credited first to penalties, next to interest, and then to the tax due.
(E) The amount of tax not timely paid, together with any penalty provided by this section, shall bear
interest at the rate of 8% per annum from the time the tax should have been paid until paid. Any interest
and penalty shall be added to the tax collected as part thereof.
(F) In addition to any other penalties provided for hereunder, the City Council may, subject to the
provisions set forth in '' 110.01 et seq., suspend or revoke any license or permit issued by the city to the
operator of the facility.
(Ord. 237, passed 3-7-1994)
' 110.10 ADMINISTRATOR OF TAX.
The Administrator shall administer and enforce the assessment collection of the taxes imposed by
Page 8 of 78
'' 110.01 et seq. The Administrator shall cause to be prepared blank forms for the returns and other
documents required by '' 110.01 et seq. and shall distribute the same throughout the city and furnish them
on application, but failure to receive or secure them shall not relieve any person from any obligation under
'' 110.01 et seq.
(Ord. 237, passed 3-7-1994)
' 110.11 EXAMINE RECORDS.
(A) The Administrator, and those persons acting on behalf of the Administrator and authorized in
writing by the Administrator, may examine the books, papers, and records of any operator in order to verify
the accuracy of any return made, or if no return was made, to ascertain the tax as provided in '' 110.01
et seq.
(B) Every operator is directed and required to give to the Administrator or to his or her duly authorized
agent or employee the means, facilities, and opportunity for the examinations and investigations as are
hereby authorized.
(Ord. 237, passed 3-7-1994) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 110.12 CONTRACT WITH STATE.
(A) The Administrator is authorized to confer with the Minnesota Commissioner of Taxation in order
that an agreement between the city and the Commissioner of Taxation may be entered into for the purpose
of providing for the administration and collection of the taxes imposed by '' 110.01 et seq.
(B) The agreement shall not become effective until presented to the Council for its approval and, when
so approved, the tax imposed by '' 110.01 et seq. shall be collected and administered by '' 110.01 et seq.
pursuant to the terms of the agreement.
(Ord. 237, passed 3-7-1994)
' 110.13 VIOLATIONS.
Any person who shall willfully fail to make a return by '' 110.01 et seq., or who shall fail to pay the
tax after written demand for payment, or who shall fail to remit the taxes collected or any penalty or interest
imposed by '' 110.01 et seq. after written demand for the payment, or who shall refuse to permit the
Administrator or any duly authorized agents or employees to examine the books, records, and papers under
his or her control, or who shall willfully fail to make a return by '' 110.01 et seq., or who shall fail to pay
the tax after written demand for payment, or who shall fail to remit the taxes collected or any penalty or
interest imposed by '' 110.01 et seq. after written demand for the payment, or who shall refuse to permit
the Administrator or any duly authorized agents or employees to examine the books, records, and papers
under his or her control, or who shall willfully make any incomplete, false, or fraudulent return shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
Page 9 of 78
(Ord. 237, passed 3-7-1994) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 110.14 USE OF PROCEEDS.
(A) The City shall use at least 95% of the proceeds obtained from the collection of taxes pursuant to
'' 110.01 et seq. and in accordance with state law, to fund a local convention or tourism bureau for the
purpose of marketing and promoting the City as a tourist or convention center. The city may use up to 5%
of the proceeds obtained hereunder to defray the costs and expenses of collection and administration of the
tax.
(B) The City hereby creates a Convention and Tourism Bureau (“CTB” or “Bureau”). The Bureau is
established to promote convention, visitor, and tourism activities benefitting the City.
(C) The Bureau shall have all powers, rights, duties, and obligations set forth in Minn. Stat. § 469.190,
as amended from time to time.
(D) The Bureau shall be governed by a board of directors. The board of directors shall be composed of
seven voting members. The voting members shall include two representatives each from the City Council
(“City”) and the Olivia Economic Development Authority (“EDA”), and three at-large representatives who
have non-profit, commercial, or industrial interests within the City. The City and EDA may appoint an
alternate representative who may participate and vote in the absence of one of the two respective regular
representatives. The chief executive staff or another delegated staff of the City and EDA shall jointly serve
as the support staff for the board, with the duties of secretary handled by either or both staff members as
determined by the CTB Board of Directors. The support staff shall not have a vote on the board, but shall
serve as advisors to the process. The City shall serve as the fiscal agent for the lodging tax and any other
CTB funds, and provide an annual audit of the Bureau’s financial records. The City’s finance director shall
serve as the Bureau’s treasurer.
(E) Representatives and designated alternates from the City Council and EDA shall be appointed on an
annual basis by vote of their respective boards. The terms of service by City and EDA representatives on
the CTB Board shall not exceed their length of service with their respective City and EDA positions. From
a list of qualified applications received, the Mayor shall appoint open or vacant at-large seats subject to City
Council approval. The terms for at-large members shall be three (3) years in length. An at-large member
may apply for and serve consecutive terms on the Board, subject to separate nomination and approval
processes.
(F) For purposes of establishing an initial rotation of at-large positions, the first appointee shall serve a
partial term ending on December 31, 2018; the second appointee shall serve a partial term ending on
December 31, 2019; and the third appointee shall serve an initial term ending on December 31, 2020. For
purposes of continuity of process and maintaining a working quorum of the board only, all representatives
may temporarily continue to serve beyond their scheduled terms until their successors are appointed and
seated.
Page 10 of 78
(G) Minutes shall be kept for all Bureau meetings. The minutes shall include all important facts
pertaining to each meeting, which will include, but not be limited to, the date, time and location of the
meeting; the names of all members present and absent; names of all persons in attendance; motions and
votes taken (including notation of any members abstaining or failing to vote); and the time the meeting
adjourned or otherwise was recessed. These records shall be filed with the City Office upon Board
approval and copies provided to the entities whose representatives comprise the board of directors.
(H) A member of the board may be removed from office for neglect of duty (failure to attend two or
more consecutive meetings), misconduct in office or violation of the law. Prior to declaring a vacancy, the
Board must give the member written notice of the reason(s) for removal. The member is entitled to a
hearing before the Board prior to formal consideration of a member’s removal. The member may be
removed after the hearing and upon a majority vote of the remaining board members.
(I) At its first meeting of each calendar year the Board of Directors shall elect from its membership a
chairperson and vice-chair to serve for that year, determine the rotation schedule for secretarial duties by
support staff, and create and fill such other offices as the Board may determine is needed.
(J) The Board of Directors shall meet as necessary, but shall at a minimum meet bi-annually.
Meetings of the Bureau shall be public. Written notice of the date, time, place, and agenda of the meeting
must be posted in the same manner as other public meetings at least three days before the meeting. In
addition to posting notice, the Bureau must also provide advance notice to each person who has filed a
written request for notice of special meetings with the Bureau. The Chair or two concurring board
members may call special meetings of the board, subject to the same public notice requirements as regular
meetings.
(K) The Bureau shall annually present the City Council at a scheduled Council meeting the final
proposed budget prior to adoption. The Bureau’s board of directors shall have final authority over how
allocated lodging tax proceeds and other sources of revenue are expended, subject to the limitations of State
law, and applicable City finance policies.
(L) The Bureau shall have the authority to seek, secure and expend additional funds beyond lodging
tax proceeds provided annually by the City for marketing and promotion of the City, subject to all laws
regarding segregation and proper use of such funds.
(M) The Bureau may request the City to employ additional support staff to assist with operations and
initiatives of the CTB, however, because the Bureau is established under the authority of the City, the hiring
of any employees shall be subject to City Council approval. Any employees hired to serve the interests of
the CTB shall operate under the City’s personnel policies, and the general day-to-day oversight of the City
Administrator.
(N) The Bureau shall annually present to the City Council at a scheduled council meeting a report
illustrating the expenditures and activities of the Bureau for the previous fiscal year.
(O) The City Council must authorize the official office location of the Bureau for purposes of day to
Page 11 of 78
day operations by a majority approval at a regularly scheduled meeting.
(P) Notwithstanding any City ordinances establishing general policies and bylaws pertaining to other
established City boards and commissions, the Bureau may formally adopt bylaws and other written policies
and procedures as it shall determine necessary and appropriate, subject to City Council approval. Such
bylaws, policies, and procedures must be consistent with this section and State law, and shall be public
data. Copies of any adopted bylaws and other written policies and procedures shall be kept on file at the
City Office.
(Q) The Bureau shall make available bylaws, policies, procedures, financial records, payroll records,
documents and other relevant information to the City upon request to ensure appropriate disposition of
public tax proceeds.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed April 6, 2015; Amended by Ord. 2018-06, passed May 7, 2018)
' 110.15 APPEALS.
(A) Any operator aggrieved by any notice, order, or determination made by the Administrator under
'' 110.01 et seq. may file a petition for review of the notice, order, or determination. The petition shall
contain the name of the petitioner, the petitioner's address, the location of the lodging subject to the order,
notice or determination, and the grounds for review.
(B) The petition for review shall be filed with the Administrator within 10 days after the notice, order,
or determination for which review is sought has been mailed or served upon the person requesting review.
(C) Upon the receipt of the petition, the Administrator, or his or her designee, shall set a date for a
hearing and give the petitioner at least 5-days= prior written notice of the date, time, and place of the
hearing.
(D) At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to show cause why the notice, order, or
determination should be modified or withdrawn. The petitioner may be represented by counsel of
petitioner's choosing at petitioner's own expense.
(E) The hearing shall be conducted by the Administrator, or his or her designee, provided only that the
person conducting the hearing shall not have participated in the drafting of the order, notice, or
determination for which review is sought.
(F) The person conducting the hearing shall make written findings of fact and conclusions based upon
the applicable section and the evidence presented. The person conducting the hearing may affirm, reverse,
or modify the notice, order, or determination made by the Administrator.
(G) Any decision rendered by the Administrator pursuant to this section may be appealed to the City
Council. A petitioner seeking to appeal a decision must file a written notice of appeal with the
Administrator within 10 days after the decision has been mailed to the petitioner. The matter will
Page 12 of 78
thereupon be placed on the Council agenda as soon as is practical. The Council shall then review the
findings of facts and conclusions to determine whether they are correct. Upon a determination by the
Council that the findings and conclusions were incorrect, the Council may modify, reverse, or affirm the
decision of the Administrator or his or her designee upon the same standards as set forth in '' 110.01 et
seq.
(Ord. 237, passed 3-7-1994)
TAXICABS
' 110.50 LICENSE REQUIRED.
No person, firm, or corporation shall engage in the business of operating auto liveries or taxicabs on
the streets of the City of Olivia, Renville County, Minnesota, without first paying the license and obtaining
a license therefore as herein provided.
(1957 Code, ' 900:01) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 110.51 APPLICATION.
Every person desiring to operate the business shall make application in writing, stating the place of
business, the type, make, body style, and year of each car proposed to be operated upon the streets of the
city as a taxicab or auto livery.
(1957 Code, ' 900:02)
' 110.52 FEES.
The fee for the license to operate the business shall be as follows: An amount set by Council from time
to time on the first car proposed to be operated, and for each car after the first car proposed to be operated.
(See Appendix A). The City Council shall have the power to limit the number of franchises, and also limit
the number of cars to be used under each franchise.
(1957 Code, ' 900:03)
' 110.53 INSURANCE OR BOND REQUIRED.
No license shall be issued until the applicant files with the City Administrator, a good and sufficient
surety bond or policy of insurance, whereby each car shall be covered against loss or injury for each
passenger at least the maximum coverage for each accident, and also against loss or damage to property,
that will provide at a minimum that coverage required by Minnesota Statutes section 65B.48 entitled
"Reparation Security Compulsory" as it may be amended from time to time. Minnesota Statutes 65B.48
and other sections of the Minnesota Statutes referenced therein is hereby incorporated into this ordinance
by reference the same as if it were fully set forth. Such insurance policy will be filed for each and every
motor vehicle for which a license is applied. Such policy of insurance will contain a provision for a
continuing liability thereunder to the full amount thereof, notwithstanding any recovery thereon.
Page 13 of 78
The bond or insurance shall provide for the giving of notice to the city of the termination or
cancellation of the bond or policy, and every license issued hereunder shall terminate upon the termination
of the bond or policy.
(1957 Code, ' 900:04)
' 110.54 TERM; REVOCATION.
All licenses so issued shall terminate on December 31 in each year after the issuance thereof, and
license fees shall be for the proportion which the remaining license bears to the license fee for the entire
year. Each license so issued shall be subject to revocation by the City Council upon not less than 10 days
notice to the licensee to show cause why his or her license should not be revoked.
(1957 Code, ' 900:05)
' 110.55 DRIVER'S LICENSE; MECHANIC'S CERTIFICATE.
(A) No person shall operate a taxicab or auto livery unless he or she possesses the appropriate license
duly issued by the State of Minnesota, and unless he or she submits to the City Council, within 2 months
after the adoption of '' 110.50 et seq., and also at the other and further times as the City Council may
direct, a certificate of approval on inspection of the brakes and principal mechanical operating parts of each
taxicab or auto livery operated by him or her, which certificates shall be obtained from a reputable
mechanic established in the business of automobile maintenance and repair.
(B) Upon request of this Council, succeeding certificates shall be issued preceding certificates, or by
inspectors designated by the City Council.
(1957 Code, ' 900:06) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 110.56 PASSENGERS; RATES.
No more than one passenger shall be carried in the front seat of any taxicab or auto livery. Each
taxicab or auto livery shall charge the rates as shall be approved by the Council from time to time.
(1957 Code, ' 900:07)
Page 14 of 78
CHAPTER 111: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
111.01 Definitions
111.02 Exceptions to definitions
111.03 Licensing; exemptions
111.04 License ineligibility
111.05 License suspension and revocation
111.06 License transferability
111.07 Registration
111.08 Prohibited activities
111.09 Exclusion by placard
' 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms shall be given their
commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
PEDDLER. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business,
street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place, for the purpose of offering for sale, displaying or
exposing for sale, selling or attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the goods, wares,
products, merchandise, or other personal property that the person is carrying or otherwise transporting. The
term PEDDLER shall mean the same as the term HAWKER.
PERSON. Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation, partnership, or association. As
applied to groups, organizations, corporations, partnerships, and associations, the term shall include each
member, officer, partner, associate, agent, or employee.
REGULAR BUSINESS DAY. Any day during which the city hall is normally open for the purpose of
conducting public business. Holidays defined by state law shall not be counted as regular business days.
SOLICITOR. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business,
street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place, for the purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain
orders for goods, wares, products, merchandise, other personal property or services of which he or she may
be carrying or transporting samples, or that may be described in a catalog or by other means, and for which
delivery or performance shall occur at a later time. The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a
person from the scope of this provision if the actual purpose of the person's activity is to obtain or attempt
to obtain orders as discussed above. The term shall mean the same as the term CANVASSER.
Page 15 of 78
TRANSIENT MERCHANT. A person who temporarily sets up business out of a vehicle, trailer,
boxcar, tent, other portable shelter, or empty store front for the purpose of exposing or displaying for sale,
selling or attempting to sell, and delivering, goods, wares, products, merchandise, or other personal
property and who does not remain or intend to remain in any 1 location for more than 14 consecutive days.
' 111.02 EXCEPTIONS TO DEFINITIONS.
(A) For the purpose of the requirements of this chapter, the terms PEDDLER, SOLICITOR, and
TRANSIENT MERCHANT shall not apply to any person selling or attempting to sell at wholesale any
goods, wares, products, merchandise, or other personal property to a retailer of the items being sold by the
wholesaler. The terms also shall not apply to any person who makes initial contacts with other people for
the purpose of establishing or trying to establish a regular customer delivery route for the delivery of
perishable food and dairy products such as baked goods and milk, nor shall they apply to any person
making deliveries of perishable food and dairy products to the customers on his or her established regular
delivery route.
(B) In addition, persons conducting the type of sales commonly known as garage sales, rummage
sales, or estate sales, as well as those persons participating in an organized multi-person bazaar or flea
market, shall be exempt from the definitions of PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, and TRANSIENT
MERCHANTS, as shall be anyone conducting an auction as a properly licensed auctioneer, or any officer
of the court conducting a court-ordered sale. Exemption from the definitions for the scope of this chapter
shall not excuse any person from complying with any other applicable statutory provision or local
ordinance.
' 111.03 LICENSING; EXEMPTIONS.
(A) County license required. No person shall conduct business as a peddler, solicitor, or transient
merchant within the city limits without first having obtained the appropriate license from the county as
required by M.S. Chapter 329, as it may be amended from time to time.
(B) City license required. Except as otherwise provided for by this chapter, no person shall conduct
business as either a peddler or a transient merchant without first having obtained a license from the city.
Solicitors need not be licensed, but are still required to register pursuant to ' 111.07.
(C) Application. Application for a city license to conduct business as a peddler or transient merchant
shall be made at least 14 regular business days before the applicant desires to begin conducting business.
Application for a license shall be made on a form approved by the City Council and available from the
office of the City Administrator. All applications shall be signed by the applicant. All applications shall
include the following information:
(1) Applicant's full legal name;
(2) All other names under which the applicant conducts business or to which applicant officially
answers;
Page 16 of 78
(3) A physical description of the applicant (hair color, eye color, height, weight, distinguishing
marks and features, and the like);
(4) Full address of applicant's permanent residence;
(5) Telephone number of applicant's permanent residence;
(6) Full legal name of any and all business operations owned, managed, or operated by applicant,
or for which the applicant is an employee or agent;
(7) Full address of applicant's regular place of business (if any);
(8) Any and all business related telephone numbers of the applicant;
(9) The type of business for which the applicant is applying for a license;
(10) Whether the applicant is applying for an annual or daily license;
(11) The dates during which the applicant intends to conduct business, and if the applicant is
applying for a daily license, the number of days he or she will be conducting business in the city (maximum
14 consecutive days);
(12) Any and all addresses and telephone numbers where the applicant can be reached while
conducting business within the city, including the location where a transient merchant intends to set up
business;
(13) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted within the last 5 years of
any felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor for violation of any state or federal statute or any local
ordinance, other than traffic offenses;
(14) A list of the 3 most recent locations where the applicant has conducted business as a peddler
or transient merchant;
(15) Proof of any requested county license;
(16) Written permission of the property owner or the property owner's agent for any property to be
used by a transient merchant;
(17) A general description of the items to be sold or services to be provided;
(18) All additional information deemed necessary by the City Council;
(19) The applicant's driver's license number or other acceptable form of identification; and
Page 17 of 78
(20) The license plate number, registration information, and vehicle identification number for any
vehicle to be used in conjunction with the licensed business and a description of the vehicle.
(D) Fee. All applications for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by the license fee, as
established by the City Council. (See Appendix A).
(E) Procedure. Upon receipt of the completed application and payment of the license fee, the City
Administrator, within 2 regular business days, must determine if the application is complete. An
application is determined to be complete only if all required information is provided. If the City
Administrator determines that the application is incomplete, the City Administrator must inform the
applicant of the required necessary information that is missing. If the application is complete, the City
Administrator must order any investigation, including background checks, necessary to verify the
information provided with the application. Within 10 regular business days of receiving a complete
application, the City Administrator must issue the license unless there exist grounds for denying the license
under ' 111.04, in which case the Administrator must deny the license. If the City Administrator denies the
license, the applicant must be notified in writing of the decision, the reason for denial, and of the applicant's
right to appeal the denial by requesting, within 20 days of receiving notice of rejection, a public hearing
before the City Council. The City Council shall hear the appeal within 20 days of the date of the request.
The decision of the City Council following the public hearing can be appealed by petitioning the Minnesota
Court of Appeals for a writ of certiorari.
(F) Duration. An annual license granted under this chapter shall be valid for 1 calendar year from the
date of issue. All other licenses granted under this chapter shall be valid only during the time period
indicated on the license.
(G) License exemptions.
(1) No license shall be required for any person to sell or attempt to sell, or to take or attempt to
take orders for, any product grown, produced, cultivated, or raised on any farm.
(2) No license shall be required of any person going from house-to-house, door-to-door,
business-to-business, street-to-street, or other type of place-to-place when the activity is for the purpose of
exercising that person's state or federal constitutional rights such as the freedom of speech, press, religion,
and the like, except that this exemption may be lost if the person's exercise of constitutional rights is merely
incidental to a commercial activity.
(3) Professional fund raisers working on behalf of an otherwise exempt person or group shall not
be exempt from the licensing requirements of this chapter.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 111.04 LICENSE INELIGIBILITY.
The following shall be grounds for denying a license under this chapter:
Page 18 of 78
(A) The failure of the applicant to obtain and show proof of having obtained any required county
license;
(B) The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the information requested by the city as a
part of the application, or the failure to sign the application, or the failure to pay the required fee at the time
of application;
(C) The conviction of the applicant within the past 5 years from the date of application for any
violation of any federal or state statute or regulation, or of any local ordinance, which adversely reflects on
the person's ability to conduct the business for which the license is being sought in an honest and legal
manner. Those violations shall include but not be limited to burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud,
unlawful business practices, and any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another person;
(D) The revocation within the past 5 years of any license issued to the applicant for the purpose of
conducting business as a peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant; and/or
(E) The applicant is found to have a bad business reputation. Evidence of a bad business reputation
shall include, but not be limited to, the existence of more than 3 complaints against the applicant with the
Better Business Bureau, the Attorney General's Office, or other similar business or consumer rights office
or agency, within the preceding 12 months, or 3 complaints filed against the applicant within the preceding
5 years.
' 111.05 LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
(A) Generally. Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked at the discretion of
the City Council for violation of any of the following:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statements on the application form;
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements made during the course of the licensed activity;
(3) Conviction of any offense for which granting of a license could have been denied under
' 111.04; and/or
(4) Violation of any provision of this chapter.
(B) Multiple persons under 1 license. The suspension or revocation of any license issued for the
purpose of authorizing multiple persons to conduct business as peddlers or transient merchants on behalf of
the licensee shall serve as a suspension or revocation of each authorized person's authority to conduct
business as a peddler or transient merchant on behalf of the licensee whose license is suspended or revoked.
(C) Notice. Prior to revoking or suspending any license issued under this chapter, the city shall
Page 19 of 78
provide the license holder with written notice of the alleged violations and inform the licensee of his or her
right to a hearing on the alleged violation. Notice shall be delivered in person or by mail to the permanent
residential address listed on the license application, or if no residential address is listed, to the business
address provided on the license application.
(D) Public hearing. Upon receiving the notice provided in division (C) of this section, the licensee
shall have the right to request a public hearing. If no request for a hearing is received by the City
Administrator within 10 regular business days following the service of the notice, the city may proceed with
the suspension or revocation. For the purpose of mailed notices, service shall be considered complete as of
the date the notice is placed in the mail. If a public hearing is requested within the stated time frame, a
hearing shall be scheduled within 20 days from the date of the request. Within 3 regular business days of
the hearing, the City Council shall notify the licensee of its decision.
(E) Emergency. If, in the discretion of the City Council, imminent harm to the health or safety of the
public may occur because of the actions of a peddler or transient merchant licensed under this chapter, the
City Council may immediately suspend the person's license and provide notice of the right to hold a
subsequent public hearing as prescribed in division (C) of this section.
(F) Appeals. Any person whose license is suspended or revoked under this section shall have the right
to appeal that decision in court.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 111.06 LICENSE TRANSFERABILITY.
No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred to any person other than the person to whom
the license was issued.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 111.07 REGISTRATION.
All solicitors, and any person exempt from the licensing requirements of this chapter under ' 111.03,
shall be required to register with the city. Registration shall be made on the same form required for a
license application, but no fee shall be required. Immediately upon completion of the registration form, the
City Administrator shall issue to the registrant a certificate of registration as proof of the registration.
Certificates of registration shall be nontransferable.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 111.08 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant shall conduct business in any of the following manners:
Page 20 of 78
(A) Calling attention to his or her business or items to be sold by means of blowing any horn or
whistle, ringing any bell, crying out, or by any other noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an
enclosed structure;
(B) Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian traffic on any street, alley, sidewalk, or
other public right-of-way;
(C) Conducting business in a way as to create a threat to the health, safety, and welfare of any
individual or the general public;
(D) Conducting business before 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.;
(E) Failing to provide proof of license or registration, and identification, when requested; or using the
license or registration of another person;
(F) Making any false or misleading statements about the product or service being sold, including
untrue statements of endorsement. No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant shall claim to have the
endorsement of the city solely based on the city having issued a license or certificate of registration to that
person; and/or
(G) Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave, or to otherwise conduct business in
a manner a reasonable person would find obscene, threatening, intimidating, or abusive.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 111.09 EXCLUSION BY PLACARD.
No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant, unless invited to do so by the property owner or tenant,
shall enter the property of another for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor, or transient
merchant when the property is marked with a sign or placard at least 4 inches long and 4 inches wide with
print of at least 48 point in size stating ANo Peddlers, Solicitors, or Transient Merchants,@ or APeddlers,
Solicitors, and Transient Merchants Prohibited,@ or other comparable statement. No person other than the
property owner or tenant shall remove, deface, or otherwise tamper with any sign or placard under this
section.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
Page 21 of 78
CHAPTER 112: ADULT USE LICENSING
Section
General Provisions
112.001 Findings
112.002 Short title
112.003 Definitions
112.004 Violations; effective date
112.005 Official Title and Summary
Business License
112.015 Business license required
112.016 Business license fees
112.017 Term and expiration of license
112.018 Application for business license
112.019 Managerial responsibility
112.020 Investigation
112.021 Council approval of business license
112.022 Applications for renewal
112.023 Transfer of business license
112.024 Restrictions on issuance
112.025 Appeal of denied business license
Business License Conditions
112.040 General conditions
112.041 Conditions on physical design
112.042 Conditions on live entertainment
Violations of Business License
112.055 Suspension and revocation
Manager License
112.070 Manager license required
112.071 Manager license fees
Page 22 of 78
112.072 Term and expiration of manager license
112.073 Application for manager license
112.074 Investigation
112.075 Council approval of manager license
112.076 Applications for renewal
112.077 Transfer of manager license
112.078 Restrictions on issuance
112.079 Appeal of denied manager license
Manager License Conditions
112.090 General conditions
Manager License Violations
112.105 Suspension and revocation
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 112.001 FINDINGS.
(A) The concerns which have prompted this city are similar to the concerns which motivated other
communities to undertake their studies of adult entertainment uses; consequently, the results of those
studies are relevant to the existing or foreseeable impacts which the uses can have on the areas surrounding
them in this city and the studies have determined that adult uses have adverse secondary effects, generally,
as follows: increased criminal activity (including public intoxication and prostitution); detriment to public
health, safety, and welfare, including an increased risk of sexually-transmitted diseases; and areas
surrounding adult uses suffer decreased property values, increased vandalism, and neighborhood blight and
disinvestment.
(B) Regardless of whether or to what extent adult entertainment uses have currently had an adverse
impact on the city, the experience of other cities, as documented in the numerous studies considered,
confirms that regulation of adult entertainment uses is essential to prevent adverse social impacts associated
with the uses.
(C) In City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 US 41 (1986), the United States Supreme Court
found that a city may rely on the experiences of other cities to determine whether certain businesses have
adverse secondary effects.
Page 23 of 78
(D) The City of Olivia is a community of approximately 2,700 residents situated in the center of
Renville County, Minnesota, and it is, in virtually all respects, a traditional small town in rural Minnesota.
(E) All of the cities in Renville County, as well as neighboring Cities of Willmar, Redwood Falls, and
Granite Falls, have adopted regulations or are considering adopting the regulations on adult uses which may
lead to the disproportionate dispersion of adult uses in the City of Olivia.
(F) The City of Olivia is situated in the BOLD Independent School District No. 2534. Presently, the
District maintains its High School campus and an elementary campus (the Olivia site) in the southerly
portion of Olivia. The campus presently serves children grades K-4 from Olivia and grades 9-12 from
Olivia and neighboring communities of Bird Island and Lake Lillian. Downtown Olivia and adjacent areas
are used as a gathering place for all children.
(G) The policy of the State of Minnesota, as established by M.S. ' 617.291, as it may be amended
from time to time, to prevent commercial exposure of minors to sexually provocative written, photographic,
printed, sound, or published materials as defined therein which are deemed harmful to minors, reflects the
prevailing sentiment of the residents and City of Olivia.
(H) Residential neighborhoods located within close proximity to adult theaters, bookstores, and other
adult entertainment uses experience increased crime rates (sex-related crimes in particular).
(I) The concern over sexually-transmitted diseases is a legitimate health concern of the city which
demands reasonable regulation of sexually-oriented businesses to protect the health and well-being of the
citizens.
(J) Intoxication, particularly when combined with adult entertainment, leads to increased likelihood of
fights, disorderly conduct, and other illegal activities.
(K) The City of Olivia relies on its Police Department and the Renville County Sheriffs Department
for law enforcement and the City Council believes that licensing of Adult Uses-Primary to ensure the
responsibility of their management would aid law enforcement.
(L) Licensing is a legitimate and reasonable means of accountability to ensure that operators of
sexually-oriented businesses comply with reasonable regulations and to ensure that operators do not
knowingly allow their establishments to be used as places of illegal sexual activity or solicitation.
(M) Provisions for licensing Adult Use-Primary businesses, as defined in Olivia ordinance(s), will help
to ensure compliance with all Olivia ordinances and applicable Minnesota laws.
Page 24 of 78
(N) Provisions for licensing Adult Use-Primary managers will help to ensure compliance with all
Olivia ordinances and applicable Minnesota laws, and serve to reduce the risks of the adverse impacts of
adult use businesses.
(O) Regulation of adult entertainment uses is essential to ensure that family values and youth values in
the community are protected and provided a physical environment in which to develop in a health and
wholesome manner.
(P) The City Council desires to prevent the adverse effects of adult entertainment and thereby protect
the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens, protect the citizens from increased crime, preserve the quality
of life, preserve the property values and character of surrounding neighborhoods, and deter the spread of
urban blight.
(Q) It is not the intent of the city in enacting any ordinance addressing these findings to suppress any
speech activities protected by the First Amendment, but to enact a content neutral ordinance which
addresses the secondary effects of adult entertainment as well as the health problems associated with the
businesses.
(R) On 3-18-2004, the Olivia City Council enacted the Adult Use Zoning Ordinance, whereby it
established zoning regulations for adult uses and the City Council has determined that business regulations,
including licensing, can be coordinated with zoning regulations to afford better protection of the public
health, safety, and welfare.
(Ord. 278, passed 3-18-2004)
' 112.002 SHORT TITLE.
This Ordinance shall be known, cited, and referred to as the Adult Use Licensing Ordinance except as
referred to herein, where it shall be known as this chapter.
(Ord. 278, passed 3-18-2004)
' 112.003 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
ADULT BOOKSTORE. A building or portion of a building used for the barter, rental, or sale of items
consisting of adult media if the building or portion of a building is not open to the public generally but only
to 1 or more classes of the public excluding any minor by reason of age or if a substantial or significant
portion of the items are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Page 25 of 78
ADULT CABARET. A building or portion of a building used for providing dancing or other live
entertainment, if the building or portion of a building excludes minors by virtue of age or if the dancing or
other live entertainment is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the presentation, display,
depiction, or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT MEDIA. Includes printed matter, magazines, newspapers, books, pictures, slides, records,
audio tape, videotape, motion picture film, compact discs, digital video discs, floppy discs, and other
communicative materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on the presentation,
display, depiction, or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A building or portion of a building with a capacity
for less than 50 persons used for presenting material if the building or portion of a building as a prevailing
practice excludes minors by virtue of age, or if the material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled or operated still or
motor picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to 5
or fewer persons per machine at any on time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A building or portion of a building with a capacity of 50
or more persons used for presenting material if the building or portion of a building as a prevailing practice
excludes minors by virtue of age or if the material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT NOVELTY BUSINESS. A business which has as its principal activity the sale of devices
which stimulate human genitals or devices which are designated for sexual stimulation.
ADULT USES. Include enterprises, establishments, businesses, or places open to some or all
members of the public, at or in which there is an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction, or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas which are capable of being seen by
members of the public. Licensed or accredited veterinary, medical, or educational establishments shall not
be considered adult uses.
Page 26 of 78
ADULT USE-PRIMARY. An adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult
motion picture arcade, adult motion picture theater, adult novelty business, or any other use, business, or
establishment meeting any of the following:
(1) Advertising, or otherwise holding itself out, in any forum as featuring adult, hardcore, XXX,
sex or otherwise as an adult use, despite having 10% or less of its stock in trade or floor area allocated to, or
20% or less of its gross receipts derived from adult media rentals or sales for the customer's private use
off-premises;
(2) Having more than 10% of its stock in trade or floor area allocated to, or more than 20% of its
gross receipts derived from adult media rentals or sales;
(3) Providing any form of on-premises entertainment with an emphasis on the presentation,
display, depiction, or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and/or
(4) An adult use not meeting the definition of adult use-incidental or adult use-nonprotected in
the Adult Use Zoning Ordinance.
LIVE ENTERTAINMENT. An employee, agent, or independent contractor of an Adult Use-Primary,
whether or not paid a salary, wages, or other compensation, who performs a dance routine, exhibition, or
other live performance distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the presentation, display,
depiction, or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas during the course of the
routine, exhibition, or performance.
PATRON. Any spectator, customer, club-member, invitee, or member of the public invited or allowed
to attend, whether or not an admission charge or dues is levied, an Adult Use-Primary for the purpose of
viewing, purchasing, or renting an exhibition, performance, presentation, display, depiction, or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
PREMISES. The real property upon which the Adult Use-Primary is located, and all appurtenances
thereto and buildings thereon, including, but not limited to, the licensed establishment, the grounds,
sidewalks, and walkways not in the public right-of-way and parking lots or garages under the ownership,
control, or supervision of the Adult Use-Primary.
PRINCIPAL OWNER(S). Sole proprietor if the business is a sole proprietorship, all individual
partners in a partnership who hold more than a 5% interest in the partnership, the general and/or limited
partners in a limited liability partnership if the partner or limited partner holds more than a 5% interest in
the limited liability partnership, all members of a limited liability company who hold more than a 5%
interest in the limited liability company, principal stockholders of a corporation (having ownership of more
than 5% of outstanding issued shares). In the event no PRINCIPAL OWNER for the business entity is
identified pursuant to the foregoing criteria, the PRINCIPAL OWNER shall be determined to be the
individual or individuals with managerial decision making power, i.e., the right to hire, fire, and enter into
contracts on behalf of the Adult Use-Primary.
Page 27 of 78
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
(1) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitalia, pubic region, perineum anal
region, natal cleft, or the nipple and/or areola of the female breast(s).
(2) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY.
(1) Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity of a sexual nature; sale,
distribution, or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance by a child; possession or
distribution of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; sexual
assault; molestation of a child; or any similar sex-related offenses to those described above under the
criminal or penal code of this state, other states, or other countries.
(2) For which:
(a) Less than 3 years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from
confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor
offense, or offense with a maximum penalty of 1 year or less imprisonment; or
(b) Less than 10 years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from
confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense,
or offense with a maximum penalty of greater than 1-year imprisonment.
(3) Whether or not a conviction is being appealed shall not be considered in the implementation
of this chapter.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
(1) Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation,
bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual
relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the
following sexually-oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus,
fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty, pygmalionism, urolagia;
(2) Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence;
(3) Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation;
(4) Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breast;
Page 28 of 78
(5) Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are in a state of nudity, or clad in
undergarments or in sexually-revealing costumes, and who are engaged in activities involving the
flagellation, torture, fettering, binding, or other physical restraint of those persons;
(6) Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other sexually-oriented contact with an animal by a
human being; or
(7) Human erection, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation.
STATE OF NUDITY.
(1) The showing of the human male or female genitalia, pubic hair, perineum anal region, or natal
cleft with less than a fully opaque covering;
(2) The showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the
nipple and/or areola;
(3) The exposure of any device, costume, or covering which gives the appearance of or simulates
the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum anal region, or pubic hair region; or
(4) The exposure of any device worn as a cover over the nipple and/or areola of the female breast,
which device simulates and gives the realistic appearance of nipples and/or areola.
(Ord. 278, passed 3-18-2004)
' 112.004 VIOLATIONS; EFFECTIVE DATE.
(A) Violations.
(1) Any person violating the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(2) The City Council shall impose a civil penalty of up to $2,000 for each violation of this chapter
as provided by the minimum schedule of presumptive civil penalties. These civil penalties shall be in
addition to any criminal penalties imposed under division (A) or any suspension or revocation imposed
under this chapter. Conviction of a violation in a court of law is not required for the City Council to
impose the civil penalty. A hearing under the Administrative Procedures Act, M.S. '' 14.57 through
14.69, as they may be amended from time to time, is not required before the penalty is imposed, but the
City Council shall hold a hearing on the proposed violation and the proposed penalty and hear
Page 29 of 78
any person who wishes to speak. Nonpayment of the penalty is grounds for suspension or revocation of the
manager license. The following is the minimum schedule of presumptive civil penalties in addition to any
suspensions which must be imposed for each violation unless the manager license is revoked:
(a) For the first violation within any 3-year period. (See Appendix A);
(b) For the second violation within any 3-year period. (See Appendix A); and
(c) For the third and subsequent violations within any 3-year period. (See Appendix A).
(B) Effective date.
(1) A. This chapter shall be in full force and effect immediately upon its passage and execution.
(2) (a) The Council hereby determines that the text of the summary of this chapter entitled,
“Official Title and Summary”, Code section 112.005, clearly informs the public of the intent and effect of
this chapter.
(b) The Council further determines that publication of the title and this summary will clearly
inform the public of the intent and effect of this chapter.
(Ord. 278, passed 3-18-2004) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 112.005 OFFICIAL TITLE AND SUMMARY.
(A) Title. An Ordinance Regulating the Operation and Management of Adult Uses-Primary Within
the City of Olivia.
(B) Summary. The City Council of the City of Olivia does hereby ordain as follows:
The Ordinance incorporates findings made by the Olivia City Council following a Public
Hearing. The Ordinance also defines adult uses. The ordinance also provides that any adult
use business must obtain a Business License; provides for fees incident to the application for
such License; the procedures and fees for applications for such Licenses; conditions and
restrictions surrounding the issuance of such License; establishes the term, and procedures for
renewal and transfer, of a Business License; facility requirements; and penalties for violations
of the License. The Ordinance also requires the Manager of any adult business to have a
Manager License; provides for fees incident to the application for such License; provides for
the investigation of Applicants; establishes the term, and procedures for renewal and transfer,
of a Manager License; and restrictions and conditions of issuance and penalties for violations
of the Manager License.
(C) Notice. This Title and Summary have been published to clearly inform the Public of the intent and
effect of the City of Olivia’s Ordinance Regulating the Operation and Management of Adult Uses-Primary
Page 30 of 78
within the City of Olivia. A copy of the Ordinance, in its entirety, is available for inspection by any person
during regular office hours at the offices of the City Administrator of the City of Olivia, 1009 West Lincoln
Avenue, Olivia, Minnesota 56277.
(Ord. 278, passed 3-18-2004)
BUSINESS LICENSE
' 112.015 BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to operate an Adult Use(s)-Primary at any premises without
a valid Adult Use-Primary business license issued by the City Administrator pursuant to this chapter. An
Adult Use(s)-Primary operating without a valid Adult Use-Primary business license shall be considered a
public nuisance under Chapter 92. The applicant or licensee has an affirmative duty to supplement an
application with new information received subsequent to the date the application was completed or
business license was issued.
(Ord. 278, passed 3-18-2004) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 112.016 BUSINESS LICENSE FEES.
(A) The fee for an Adult Use-Primary business shall be as set and amended by the City Council from
time to time. The business license fee may not exceed the cost of issuing the business license and other
costs directly related to the enforcement of this chapter; no business license fee shall be increased without
providing mailed notice of a hearing on the proposed increase to all affected business licenses at least 45
days before the hearing.
(B) All business license fees shall be paid in full at the time the application is filed with the city. If the
application is denied, the business license fee shall be returned to the applicant.
(Ord. 278, passed 3-18-2004)
' 112.017 TERM AND EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
Each business license shall be issued for a maximum period of 1 year from the date of issuance by the
City Administrator.
(Ord. 278, passed 3-18-2004)
' 112.018 APPLICATION FOR BUSINESS LICENSE.
(A) Every application for a business license issued under this chapter shall be on a form provided by
the city and shall be substantially the same as that application located in the Appendix to this Code and
entitled Adult Use-Primary Business License Application Form. The application shall be verified, filed
Page 31 of 78
with the city, and accompanied by the documents and materials described on the application. No person
shall make a false statement in an application. In the event the applicant is an entity, the principal owner(s)
shall be considered the applicant.
(B) Every application for a business license shall contain a statement under oath that:
(1) The applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application, and
that the information contained therein and furnished therewith is complete, true, and correct; and
(2) The applicant has personal knowledge of the provisions of this chapter, the Adult Use Zoning
Ordinance, and the zoning code of the City of Olivia.
(Ord. 278, passed 3-18-2004) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 112.019 MANAGERIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
Prior to the issuance of an Adult Use-Primary business license, the applicant shall demonstrate proof of
managerial responsibility. Proof of managerial responsibility shall consist of one or more licensed
manager(s) with valid Adult Use-Primary manager business license(s), or complete application for the
business license(s). Proof of managerial responsibility is a continuing condition of the business license.
(Ord. 278, passed 3-18-2004)
' 112.020 INVESTIGATION.
(A) Preliminary background investigation. On an initial application for a business license or transfer
of a business license, the City Council shall cause to be conducted a preliminary background investigation.
The applicant shall pay with the application a preliminary investigation fee which shall be in addition to
any business license fee. If the actual cost of the preliminary investigation is less than the preliminary
investigation fee, the unused portion shall be returned to the applicant.
(B) Comprehensive background investigation. If the results of a preliminary investigation warrant a
comprehensive background investigation, then the city may conduct or cause to be conducted a
comprehensive background investigation. The applicant shall pay a fee for a comprehensive background
investigation. The fee for a comprehensive background investigation is the amount established by the City
Council and listed in the fee schedule. The unused balance of the fee shall be returned to the applicant
whether or not the application is denied. The fee shall be paid in advance of any investigation and the
amount actually expended on the investigation shall not be refundable in the event the application is denied.
(Ord. 278, passed 3-18-2004)
' 112.021 COUNCIL APPROVAL OF BUSINESS LICENSE.
Pursuant to this chapter, the City Council may either grant or deny the initial application, including
Page 32 of 78
transfer, for any business license. The City Council shall complete any investigation and make its decision
consistent with the time periods and procedures provided by M.S. ' 15.99, as it may be amended from time
to time. No applicant has a right to a business license under this chapter.
(Ord. 278, passed 3-18-2004)
' 112.022 APPLICATIONS FOR RENEWAL.
Any application for renewal shall be filed with the City Administrator at least 15, and not more than
30, days before the expiration of a business license issued under this chapter. If there have been no
violations of the license, no background investigation pursuant to ' 112.020 is required. The decision
whether or not to renew a business license will be based upon compliance with this chapter and standards
set forth herein. The City Council shall make its decision within 15 days of the city's receipt of a completed
application. No licensee has a right to have the business license renewed.
(Ord. 278, passed 3-18-2004)
' 112.023 TRANSFER OF BUSINESS LICENSE.
No business license issued under this chapter may be transferred without the approval of the City
Council. Any transfer of stock of a corporate licensee resulting in a change in the principal owners is
deemed to be a transfer of the business license, and a transfer of stock without prior City Council approval
is a ground for revocation of the business license. An application to transfer a business license shall be
treated the same as an application for a new business license, and all of the provisions of this chapter
applying to applications for a business license shall apply.
(Ord. 278, passed 3-18-2004) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 112.024 RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE.
(A) Each Adult Use-Primary business license shall be issued only to the applicant for only the
premises described in the application.
(B) No Adult Use-Primary business license shall be granted to an individual or entity in the event a
principal owner is under the age of 18.
(C) No Adult Use-Primary business license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any premises
without evidence of the legally enforceable right of the owner or proposed owner of the Adult Use-Primary
to have or obtain the use and possession of the tract.
(D) No Adult Use-Primary business license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any premises
on which taxes, assessments, utility charges, service charges, or other financial claims of the city are
delinquent and unpaid.
Page 33 of 78
(E) No Adult Use-Primary business license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any premises
located in a zone other than a commercial or industrial zone.
(F) No Adult Use-Primary business license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any premises
located on property within 300 feet of any R-1 or R-2 Districts or otherwise in violation of the Olivia Adult
Use Zoning. The distance is to be measured in a direct line from property line to property line without
regard for intervening properties or structures.
(G) No Adult Use-Primary business license shall be granted to an individual or an entity in the event 1
or more principal owner(s) has been convicted of a specified criminal activity which is a felony.
(H) No Adult Use-Primary business license shall be granted to an individual or an entity in the event 1
or more principal owner(s) has been convicted of specified criminal activities or had similar adult use
business licenses, at 1 or more locations, suspended, denied, or revoked, whereby the violations would
exceed 10 accumulated points under ' 112.055.
(I) No Adult Use-Primary business license shall be granted or renewed to an individual or an entity in
the event 1 or more principal owner(s) has had an Adult Use-Primary business license revoked under the
provisions of this chapter within the past 5 years.
(Ord. 278, passed 3-18-2004)
' 112.025 APPEAL OF DENIED BUSINESS LICENSE.
If the applicant alleges that a business license was denied in error, the status quo will remain in effect
pending the outcome of a hearing pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act, M.S. '' 14.57 through
14.69, as they may be amended from time to time. The City Council may act as the hearing body under that
act, or it may contract with the Office of Hearing Examiners for a hearing officer.
(Ord. 278, passed 3-18-2004)
BUSINESS LICENSE CONDITIONS
' 112.040 GENERAL CONDITIONS.
(A) The failure of a licensee to meet any 1 of the following conditions of the business license specified
below shall result in a suspension or revocation of the business license.
(B) (1) Every licensee is responsible for the conduct within the place of business. The act of any
employee, while on the premises, is deemed the act of the licensee as well, and the licensee shall be liable
to all penalties provided by this chapter and the law equally with the employee.
Page 34 of 78
(2) The licensee is responsible for having the issued Adult Use-Primary business license posted
and clearly visible and readable to the public in a prominent location.
(3) The licensee is responsible for having posted and clearly visible and readable to the public in
a prominent location a sign indicating the following information.
(a) The Adult Use-Primary is licensed by the City of Olivia.
(b) No patron is allowed on a stage, if applicable, or in any area posted as nonpublic.
(c) No person shall interfere with a peace officer.
(d) All patrons must leave the premises within 30 minutes after the close of hours of
operation.
(e) Use and possession of controlled substances is prohibited.
(f) Sale and consumption of alcohol is prohibited, if applicable.
(g) State of nudity is prohibited in public areas, excluding restrooms.
(h) Prostitution and solicitation are prohibited.
(i) Intercourse, masturbation, and other directly physical sexual stimulation are prohibited.
(j) If applicable, touching between patrons and live entertainment is prohibited.
(4) The licensee is responsible for having entrances to nonpublic areas clearly posted or marked
as nonpublic or otherwise held out as off-limits to patrons.
(5) The licensee is responsible for having the issued Adult Use-Primary manager business
license(s) for the on-duty manager(s) posted and clearly visible and readable to the public. The posted
business license is deemed evidence that the manager is on duty and responsible for conduct on the
premises.
(6) Every licensee shall allow, without a warrant, any peace officer, health officer, city employee,
or any other person designated by the City Council to conduct compliance checks and to otherwise enter,
inspect, and search the premises of the licensee during business hours and after business hours during the
time when patrons remain on the premises.
(7) One or more manager stations are required to maintain visibility of all public areas within the
Adult Use-Primary.
(a) 1. The interior of the Adult Use-Primary shall be configured in a manner so that there is
Page 35 of 78
an unobstructed view from the manager station(s) of the entire area of the Adult Use-Primary to which any
patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms.
2. If the Adult Use-Primary has 2 or more manager stations designated, then the interior
shall be configured in a manner so that there is an unobstructed view of the every area of the Adult
Use-Primary to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least 1 of the manager
stations. The view required in this division (B)(7)(a) must be by direct line of sight from the manager
station.
(b) A manager station may not exceed 32 square feet in a compact and contiguous area.
(c) It is the duty of the licensee of the Adult Use-Primary to ensure that at least 1 licensed
manager is on duty and situated in each manager station at all times that any patron is present inside the
Adult Use-Primary.
(d) It shall be the duty of the licensee, and it shall also be the duty of any licensed manager
present in the Adult Use-Primary, to ensure that the view area specified in division (B)(7)(a) above remains
unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times.
(e) It shall be the duty of the licensee, and it shall also be the duty of any licensed manager
present in the Adult Use-Primary, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises
that has been designated as a nonpublic area.
(8) The Adult Use-Primary shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient
intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than
5.0 foot-candle as measured at 3 feet above floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also
be the duty of any licensed manager present in the Adult Use-Primary, to ensure that the illumination
described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the Adult Use-Primary.
(9) The exterior of the premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient
intensity to illuminate every parking area, driving lanes, sidewalks, and an area 20 feet in front of all doors
at an illumination of not less than 1.5 foot-candle as measured at the ground. It shall be the duty of the
operator, and it shall also be the duty of any licensed manager present at the premises, to ensure that the
illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present at the premises.
(10) Hours of operation, open to patrons, are limited to between 8:00 a.m. and 12:30 a.m. of the
subsequent calendar day on Sundays through Thursdays.
(11) Hours of operation, open to patrons, are limited to between 1:00 p.m. and 12:30 a.m. of the
subsequent calendar day, except that operation is prohibited after 12:30 a.m. on Sundays.
(12) No patron shall remain on the premises, including parking and other exterior areas, more than
30 minutes after the close of hours of operation.
Page 36 of 78
(13) The possession or use of a controlled substance as defined under M.S. Ch. 152, as it may be
amended from time to time, is prohibited on the premises.
(14) The sale or consumption of intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor in violation of Chapter
116 of this Code is prohibited at the Adult Use-Primary.
(15) Prostitution, solicitation, inducement, or promotion of prostitution, or coercion of prostitution
as defined under M.S. '' 609.321 through 609.322 and 611A.80, as they may be amended from time to
time, is prohibited on the premises.
(16) No person shall be in a state of nudity in any area of the premises to which any patron is
permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms.
(17) Engaging in sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation,
masturbation, bestiality; direct physical stimulation of the male or female genitalia, pubic hair, perineum
anal region or natal cleft or the female breast, whether clothed or unclothed; flagellation or torture in the
context of a sexual relationship; use of human or animal ejaculation, or the use of excretory functions in the
context of a sexual relationship; and any of the following sexual-oriented acts or conduct: analingus,
buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism,
sapphism, zooerasty, pygmalionism, urolagia is prohibited on the premises.
(18) The licensee is responsible for maintaining the cleanliness and sanitary condition of the
premises.
(Ord. 278, passed 3-18-2004) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 112.041 CONDITIONS ON PHYSICAL DESIGN.
(A) No openings of greater than 1 square inch or less than 4 square feet shall be permitted in any wall
or partition adjoining between rooms, booths, or other enclosed or semi-enclosed areas of under 150 square
feet.
(B) All surfaces within 48 inches of the floor in all rooms, booths, or other enclosed or semi-enclosed
areas of under 150 square feet shall be constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily
cleanable material.
(C) Restrooms may not contain video transmission or reproduction equipment.
(D) Exterior windows shall be opaque, screened, or otherwise maintained to prevent viewing of
merchandise or entertainment from outside the Adult Use-Primary.
(E) Exterior signage shall not include any photograph, drawing, silhouette, or other caricature
depicting specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
Page 37 of 78
(F) An Adult Use-Primary offering live entertainment must have a stage or surface at least 18 inches
above floor level. The stage must have a bar, railing, fence, or similar barrier, with a height between 42
inches and 54 inches, at least 60 inches away from the stage or a solid, floor-to-ceiling wall, window or
similar barrier. The stage and the area between stage and railing shall be designated a nonpublic area.
(Ord. 278, passed 3-18-2004) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 112.042 CONDITIONS ON LIVE ENTERTAINMENT.
(A) Live entertainment, whether in a state of nudity or clothed, shall not touch any patron.
(B) No patron shall touch any live entertainment, whether in a state of nudity or clothed.
(C) Live entertainment, whether in a state of nudity or clothed, shall be performed only upon a stage or
surface at least 18 inches above floor level. No patron shall be allowed on the stage.
(D) Live entertainment, whether in a state of nudity or clothed, shall be performed behind 1 of the
following.
(1) A bar, railing, fence, or other similar barrier to keep patrons at least 60 inches away from all
parts of the stage. The bar, railing, fence, or other similar barrier shall be at least 42 inches and not more
than 54 inches above floor level.
(2) A solid, floor-to-ceiling wall, window, or other similar barrier to prevent physical contact
between patrons and live entertainment. No opening in the barrier is permitted.
(E) Live entertainment, in a state of nudity, is prohibited at a licensed liquor establishment.
(F) The licensee shall keep on file the full name, any aliases, including stage names, addresses, and
proof of age of all live entertainment. The records shall be maintained for a period of at least 3 years.
(Ord. 278, passed 3-18-2004) Penalty, see ' 10.99
VIOLATIONS OF BUSINESS LICENSE
' 112.055 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
(A) The City Council shall either suspend or revoke any business license upon finding that the licensee
has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter. No suspension or revocation shall take effect until
the licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act,
M.S. '' 14.57 through 14.69, as they may be amended from time to time. The City Council may act as the
hearing body under that act, or it may contract with the Office of Hearing Examiners for a hearing officer.
Page 38 of 78
(B) Points are to be assigned according to the following schedule.
(1) Violations meriting 5 points include commission by the licensee, or principal owner, of a
specified criminal activity that is a misdemeanor, whether on or off the premises; commission by the
licensee, or principal owner, of use or possession of a controlled substance while on the premises;
revocation of an adult use business license issued by another municipality or county; operation of an Adult
Use-Primary without a valid Adult Use-Primary business license.
(2) Violations meriting 3 points include false statement or omission in the business license
application or failure to provide subsequent information that would not have resulted in the revocation or
denial of the business license; nonpayment of civil fines imposed under this chapter; interference with
inspections or enforcement; commission by licensed manager of a specified criminal activity that is a felony
while on the premises; allowing live entertainment under age 18; occurrence of prostitution, solicitation,
inducement, or promotion of prostitution or coercion for prostitution on the premises.
(3) Violations meriting 2 points include commission by any person other than the licensee, or
principal owner, or a licensed manager of a specified criminal activity that is a felony while on the
premises; commission by a licensed manager of a specified criminal activity that is a misdemeanor while on
the premises; failure to have a licensed manager on duty; allowing a minor to patronize the Adult
Use-Primary; allowing live entertainment in a prohibited area; allowing the patrons into a nonpublic area,
including remaining on the premises after hours; allowing prohibited touching between patron and live
entertainment; allowing on the premises sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal
copulation, masturbation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of the male or female genitalia, pubic hair,
perineum anal region or natal cleft or the female breast, whether clothed or unclothed, flagellation or torture
in the context of a sexual relationship, use of human or animal ejaculation, or the use of excretory functions
in the context of a sexual relationship; failure to maintain visibility or lighting requirements.
(4) Violations meriting 1 point include suspension of an adult use business license issued by
another municipality or county; failure to post business license; failure to post any required signs; failure to
maintain required live entertainment records; failure to maintain physical design requirements; allowing
prohibited sale or consumption of intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor on the premises; failure to
maintain cleanliness; commission by any person other than the licensee, or principal owner, or a licensed
manager of a specified criminal activity that is a misdemeanor while on the premises.
(C) (1) Points are cumulative and remain on business license, including a renewed business license,
for 3 years.
(2) Occurrences continuing for more than 1 day shall be considered separate occurrences for each
day.
(3) Each occurrence of a violation shall be considered a separate violation; where the occurrence
of a single violation may be assigned more than 1 point classification under division (B) above, the greater
value shall be assigned.
Page 39 of 78
(4) Violations will be cited in writing with opportunity for appeal.
(5) Failure to appeal shall be deemed to indicate no contest to the charge.
(D) The business license shall be suspended by the City Council after a finding under division (A)
above that the licensee has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter for at least the minimum
periods below. The City Council shall select the day or days during which the business license will be
suspended:
(1) For 1 point, a 1-day suspension in addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be
imposed;
(2) For 2 points accumulated within any 3-year period; a 3-consecutive days= suspension in
addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed;
(3) For 3 points accumulated within any 3-year period, a 4-consecutive days= suspension in
addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed;
(4) For 4 points accumulated within any 3-year period, a 7-consecutive days= suspension in
addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed;
(5) For 5 points accumulated within any 3-year period, a 10-consecutive days= suspension in
addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed;
(6) For 6 points accumulated within any 3-year period, a 14-consecutive days= suspension in
addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed;
(7) For 7 points accumulated within any 3-year period, a 21-consecutive days= suspension in
addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed;
(8) For 8 points accumulated within any 3-year period, a 28-consecutive days= suspension in
addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed;
(9) For 9 points accumulated within any 3-year period, a 35-consecutive days= suspension in
addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed; and
(10) For 10 points accumulated within any 3-year period, a 42-consecutive days= suspension in
addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed.
Page 40 of 78
(E) The following are cause for revocation which shall be imposed by the City Council for violations
of the provisions of this chapter. Revocations shall occur within 60 days following a violation for which
the revocation is imposed:
(1) For over 10 points, violation within any 3-year period;
(2) For discovery of a false statement or omission in the business license application or failure to
provide subsequent information that would have resulted in the denial or revocation of the business license;
and
(3) For commission by the licensee, or a principal owner, of a specified criminal activity that is a
felony, whether on or off the premises.
(Ord. 278, passed 3-18-2004)
MANAGER LICENSE
' 112.070 MANAGER LICENSE REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to manage an Adult Use-Primary without a valid Adult Use-Primary
manager license issued by the City Administrator pursuant to this chapter. The applicant or licensee has an
affirmative duty to supplement an application with new information received subsequent to the date the
application was completed or manager license was issued.
(Ord. 278, passed 3-18-2004) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 112.071 MANAGER LICENSE FEES.
(A) The fee for an Adult Use-Primary manager license shall be established by the City Council. (See
Appendix A). The City Council may amend from time to time by resolution the manager license fee. The
manager license fee may not exceed the cost of issuing the manager license and other costs directly related
to the enforcement of this chapter; no manager license fee shall be increased without providing mailed
notice of a hearing on the proposed increase to all affected manager licenses at least 45 days before the
hearing.
(B) All manager license fees shall be paid in full at the time the application is filed with the city. If the
application is denied, the manager license fee shall be returned to the applicant.
(Ord. 278, passed 3-18-2004)
Page 41 of 78
' 112.072 TERM AND EXPIRATION OF MANAGER LICENSE.
A manager license shall be valid only at a specific licensed Adult Use-Primary. Each manager license
shall coincide with the expiration date of the Adult Use-Primary business manager license for which it is
issued.
(Ord. 278, passed 3-18-2004)
' 112.073 APPLICATION FOR MANAGER LICENSE.
(A) Every application for a manager license issued under this chapter shall be on a form provided by
the city and shall be substantially the same as that application located in the Appendix to this Code and
entitled Adult Use-Primary Manager License Application Form. The application shall be verified, filed
with the city, and accompanied by the documents and materials described on the application. No person
shall make a false statement in an application.
(B) Every application for a manager license shall contain a statement under oath that:
(1) The applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application, and
that the information contained therein and furnished therewith is complete, true, and correct;
(2) The applicant has personal knowledge of the provisions of this chapter, the Adult Use Zoning
Ordinance, and the zoning code of the City of Olivia; and
(3) The applicant acknowledges the responsibility of management provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 278, passed 3-18-2004) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 112.074 INVESTIGATION.
(A) Preliminary background investigation. On an initial application for a manager license, the City
Council shall cause to be conducted a preliminary background investigation. The applicant shall pay with
the application an investigation fee, which shall be in addition to any manager license fee. (See Appendix
A). If the actual cost of the preliminary investigation is less than the investigation fee, the unused portion
shall be returned to the applicant.
(B) Comprehensive background investigation. If the results of a preliminary investigation warrant, in the
sound discretion of the City Council, a comprehensive background investigation, the city may cause to be
conducted a comprehensive background investigation. The applicant shall pay a fee for a comprehensive
background investigation. The fee for a comprehensive background investigation is the amount established
by the City Council and listed in the fee schedule. The unused balance of the fee shall be returned to the
applicant whether or not the application is denied. The fee shall be paid in advance of any investigation
and the amount actually expended on the investigation shall not be refundable.
(Ord. 278, passed 3-18-2004)
Page 42 of 78
' 112.075 COUNCIL APPROVAL OF MANAGER LICENSE.
Pursuant to ' 112.078 of this chapter, the City Council may either grant or deny the initial application,
including transfer, for any manager license. The City Council shall complete any investigation and make
its decision consistent with the time periods and procedures provided by M.S. ' 15.99, as it may be
amended from time to time. No applicant has a right to a manager license under this chapter.
(Ord. 278, passed 3-18-2004)
' 112.076 APPLICATIONS FOR RENEWAL.
(A) At least 15 days, and not more than 30 days, before the expiration of a manager license issued
under this chapter, an application for renewal of the license, if one is desired, shall be filed with the City
Administrator.
(B) No background investigation pursuant to this chapter is required with an application for renewal of
a manager license.
(C) Pursuant to this chapter, the decision whether or not to renew a manager license rests within the
sound discretion of the City Council.
(D) The City Council shall make its decision within 15 days of the city's receipt of a completed
application. No licensee has a right to have the manager license renewed.
(Ord. 278, passed 3-18-2004)
' 112.077 TRANSFER OF MANAGER LICENSE.
No manager license issued under this chapter may be transferred to another individual, premises, or
licensed Adult Use-Primary.
(Ord. 278, passed 3-18-2004) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 112.078 RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE.
(A) Each Adult Use-Primary manager license shall be issued only to the applicant for the Adult Use-
Primary described in the application.
(B) No Adult Use-Primary manager license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any Adult
Use-Primary which does not hold a valid business license.
(C) No Adult Use-Primary manager license shall be issued to an individual under the age of 18.
Page 43 of 78
(D) No Adult Use-Primary manager license shall be issued to an individual who has been convicted of,
or pleaded guilty to a specified criminal activity which is a felony.
(E) No Adult Use-Primary manager license shall be granted to an individual who has been convicted
of, or pleaded guilty to specified criminal activities or had similar adult use manager licenses, at 1 or more
locations, suspended, denied, or revoked, whereby the violations would exceed 10 accumulated points
under ' 112.105.
(F) No Adult Use-Primary manager license shall be granted or renewed to an individual who has had
an Adult Use-Primary business license or Adult Use-Primary manager license revoked under the provisions
of this chapter within the past 5 years.
(Ord. 278, passed 3-18-2004)
' 112.079 APPEAL OF DENIED MANAGER LICENSE.
(A) If the applicant alleges that a manager license was denied in error, the status quo will remain in
effect pending the outcome of a hearing pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act, M.S. '' 14.57
through 14.69, as they may be amended from time to time.
(B) The City Council may act as the hearing body under that act, or it may contract with the Office of
Hearing Examiners for a hearing officer.
(Ord. 278, passed 3-18-2004)
MANAGER LICENSE CONDITIONS
' 112.090 GENERAL CONDITIONS.
(A) The failure of a licensee to meet any 1 of the following conditions of the manager license specified
below shall result in a suspension or revocation of the manager license.
(B) (1) When the licensee is managing the Adult Use-Primary, he or she is responsible for the
conduct on the premises.
(2) When the licensee is managing the Adult Use-Primary, he or she is responsible for ensuring
that his or her Adult Use-Primary manager license is posted and clearly visible and readable to the public.
The posted manager license is deemed evidence that the manager is on duty and responsible for conduct on
the premises.
Page 44 of 78
(3) When the licensee is managing the Adult Use-Primary, he or she is responsible for
maintaining his or her position in the designated manager station.
(4) When the licensee is managing the Adult Use-Primary, he or she shall not be in a state of
nudity.
(5) When the licensee is managing the Adult Use-Primary, he or she shall not have a blood
alcohol content exceeding 0.04 or be in the possession or use of a controlled substance.
(Ord. 278, passed 3-18-2004) Penalty, see ' 10.99
MANAGER LICENSE VIOLATIONS
' 112.105 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
(A) The City Council shall either suspend or revoke any license upon finding that the licensee has
failed to comply with any provision of this chapter. No suspension or revocation shall take effect until the
licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act,
M.S. '' 14.57 through 14.69, as they may be amended from time to time. The City Council may act as the
hearing body under that act, or it may contract with the Office of Hearing Examiners for a hearing officer.
(B) Points are to be assigned according to the following schedule:
(1) Violations meriting 5 points include commission by the licensee of a specified criminal
activity that is a misdemeanor, whether on or off the premises; commission by the licensee of use or
possession of a controlled substance while on the premises; revocation of an adult use license issued by
another municipality or county; managing without a valid Adult Use-Primary manager license;
(2) Violations meriting 3 points include false statement or omission in the manager license
application or failure to provide subsequent information that would not have resulted in the revocation or
denial of the manager license; nonpayment of civil fines imposed under this chapter interference with
inspections or enforcement; failure to post manager license or maintain position at manager station while
on duty; allowing performance by live entertainment underage 18; occurrence of prostitution, solicitation,
inducement, or promotion of prostitution or coercion for prostitution on the premises;
(3) Violations meriting 2 points include allowing a minor to patronize the Adult Use-Primary;
allowing live entertainment in a prohibited area; allowing prohibited touching between patron and live
entertainment; allowing the patrons into a nonpublic area, including remaining on the premises after hours;
allowing on the premises sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation,
masturbation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of the male or female genitalia, pubic
Page 45 of 78
hair, perineum anal region or natal cleft or the female breast, whether clothed or unclothed, flagellation or
torture in the context of a sexual relationship, use of human or animal ejaculation, or the use of excretory
functions in the context of a sexual relationship; failing to maintain visibility or lighting requirements;
allowing prohibited sale or consumption of intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor on the premises; and
(4) Violations meriting 1 point include suspension of an adult use license issued by another
municipality or county; having blood alcohol content exceeding 0.04; failure to maintain cleanliness, failure
to maintain physical design requirements.
(C) Points are cumulative and remain on manager license, including a renewed manager license, for 3
years. Occurrences continuing for more than 1 day shall be considered separate occurrences for each day
when the licensee was on duty; each occurrence shall be considered a separate violation. Where the
occurrence of a single violation may be assigned more than 1 point classification under division (B) above,
the greater value shall be assigned. Violations will be cited in writing with opportunity for appeal. Failure
to appeal shall be deemed to indicate no contest to the charge.
(D) The manager license shall be suspended by the City Council after a finding under division (A)
above that the licensee has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter for at least the minimum
periods below. The City Council shall select the day or days during which the manager license will be
suspended:
(1) For 1 point, a 1-day suspension in addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be
imposed;
(2) For 2 points accumulated within any 3-year period, a 3-consecutive days= suspension in
addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed;
(3) For 3 points accumulated within any 3-year period, a 4-consecutive days= suspension in
addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed;
(4) For 4 points accumulated within any 3-year period, a 7-consecutive days= suspension in
addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed;
(5) For 5 points accumulated within any 3-year period, a 10-consecutive days= suspension in
addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed;
(6) For 6 points accumulated within any 3-year period, a 14-consecutive days= suspension in
addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed;
(7) For 7 points accumulated within any 3-year period, a 21-consecutive days= suspension in
addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed;
Page 46 of 78
(8) For 8 points accumulated within any 3-year period, a 28-consecutive days= suspension in
addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed;
(9) For 9 points accumulated within any 3-year period, a 35-consecutive days= suspension in
addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed; and
(10) For 10 points accumulated within any 3-year period, a 42-consecutive days= suspension in
addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed;
(E) The following are cause for revocation which shall be imposed by the City Council for violations
of the provisions of this chapter. Revocations shall occur within 60 days following a violation for which
the revocation is imposed:
(1) For over 10 points, violation within any 3-year period;
(2) For discovery of a false statement or omission in the manager license application or failure to
provide subsequent information that would have resulted in the denial or revocation of the manager license;
and
(3) For commission by the licensee of a specified criminal activity that is a felony, whether on or
off the premises.
(Ord. 278, passed 3-18-2004)
Page 47 of 78
CHAPTER 113: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Section
113.01 Definitions
113.02 Permit procedure
113.03 Restoration and relocation
113.04 Company default
113.05 Public grounds use permitting regulations
' 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
CITY ADMINISTRATOR. The City Administrator or designated representative.
COMPANY. A natural or corporate person, business association, political subdivision, public or
private agency of any kind, its successors and assigns, who or which seeks or is required to construct,
install, operate, repair, maintain, remove, or relocate facilities in the city.
FACILITIES. Telecommunications equipment of any kind, including but not limited to audio, video,
paging, facsimile, or similar service, not governed by M.S. Ch. 238, as it may be amended from time to
time, including all trunks, lines, circuits, physical connections, switching equipment, wireless
communication equipment of all kinds, and any necessary appurtenances owned, leased, or operated by a
company on, over, in, under, across, or along public ground.
PUBLIC GROUND. Highways, roads, streets, alleys, public ways, utility easements, and public
grounds in the city.
(Ord. 245, passed 9-5-1995)
' 113.02 PERMIT PROCEDURE.
A company may not construct, install, repair, remove, or relocate facilities, or any part thereof, in, on,
over, under, or along public ground without first obtaining a permit from the city.
(Ord. 245, passed 9-5-1995) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 113.03 RESTORATION AND RELOCATION.
(A) Restoration.
Page 48 of 78
(1) Upon completion of the work, the company must restore the general area of the work,
including paving and its foundations, to the same condition that existed prior to commencement of the work
and must exercise reasonable care to maintain the same condition for 2 years thereafter. The work must be
completed as promptly as weather permits.
(2) If the company does not promptly perform and complete the work, remove all dirt, rubbish,
equipment, and material, and restore the public ground to the same condition, the city may put it in the
same condition at the expense of the company. The company must, upon demand, pay to the city the direct
and indirect cost of the work done for or performed by the city, including but not limited to the city's
administrative costs. To recover its costs, the city will first draw on the security posted by the company and
then recover the balance of the costs incurred from the company directly by written demand. This remedy
is in addition to any other remedies available to the city.
(B) Company initiated relocation. The company must give the city written notice prior to a company
initiated relocation of facilities. A company initiated relocation must be at the company's expense and must
be approved by the city, the approval not to be unreasonably withheld.
(C) City required relocation. The company must promptly and at its own expense, with due regard for
seasonal working conditions, permanently relocate its facilities whenever the city requires the relocation.
(D) Relocation where public ground vacated. The vacation of public ground does not deprive the
company of the right to operate and maintain its facilities in the city. If the vacation proceedings are
initiated by the company, the company must pay the relocation costs. If the vacation proceedings are
initiated by the city or other persons, the company must pay the relocation costs unless otherwise agreed to
by the city, company, and other persons.
(Ord. 245, passed 9-5-1995) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 113.04 COMPANY DEFAULT.
(A) Notice. If the company is in default in the performance of the work authorized by the permit,
including but not limited to restoration requirements, for more than 30 days after receiving written notice
from the city of the default, the city may terminate the rights of the company under the permit. The notice
of default must be in writing and specify the provisions of the permit under which the default is claimed
and state the grounds of the claim. The notice must be served on the company by personally and other state
and the federal law, including prompt compliance with the requirements of the Gopher State One Call
program, M.S. Ch. 216D, as it may be amended from time to time.
(B) Location.
(1) The facilities must be placed in a location agreed to by the city. The company shall give the
city 45-days= advanced written notice of the company's proposed location of facilities within the public
ground.
Page 49 of 78
(2) No later than 45 days after the city's receipt of the company's written notice, the city will
notify the company in writing of the city's acceptance or rejection of the proposed location. If the city
rejects the company's proposed location, the city shall propose alternative locations. The city does not
waive or forfeit its right to reject the location of facilities by failure to respond within the 45 days.
(C) Emergency work. A company may open and disturb the surface of public ground without a permit
where an emergency exists requiring the immediate repair of its facilities. In that event, the company must
request a permit not later than the second working day thereafter and comply with the applicable conditions
of the permit. In no event may the company undertake an activity which will result in the closing of a street
or alley without prior notification to the city.
(D) Street improvements, paving, or resurfacing. The city will give the company written notice of
plans for street improvements where permanent paving or resurfacing is involved. The notice must contain:
(1) The nature and character of the improvements;
(2) The streets upon which the improvements are to be made;
(3) The extent of the improvements and the time when the city will start the work; and
(4) If more than 1 street is involved, the sequence in which the work is to proceed.
(E) Company protection of facilities. The company must take reasonable measures to prevent the
facilities from causing damage to persons or property. The company must take reasonable measures to
protect its facilities from damage that could be inflicted on the facilities by persons, property, or the
elements. The company must take specific protective measures when the city performs work near the
facilities.
(F) Prior service connections. In cases where the city is undertaking the paving or resurfacing of
streets and the facilities are located under the street, the company may be required to install service
connections prior to the paving or resurfacing, if it is apparent that service will be required during the
5-year period following the paving or resurfacing.
(Ord. 245, passed 9-5-1995)
' 113.05 PUBLIC GROUNDS USE PERMITTING REGULATIONS.
(A) Application for permit. Any person desiring to so use public property shall apply for a permit or
renewal of a permit a minimum of 2 working days before starting work and must submit detailed plans for
street or sidewalk use and pedestrian safety on major projects. This provision or portions thereof may be
waived by the City Administrator in the event of an emergency.
(B) Guarding of obstructions, fences. Any permittee obstructing any street, alley, sidewalk, or other
public property shall keep the obstruction or obstructions properly guarded at all times. From sunset to
Page 50 of 78
sunrise, all obstructions must be guarded by a sufficient number of warning lights placed in a manner so
that they will give proper warning of the obstruction. The City Administrator may require any permittee
obstructing a sidewalk to build adjacent to the obstruction a tight board fence at least 6 feet high, except at
street intersections where a 6-foot open board fence shall be built and maintained, and adjacent to each
fence shall be built and maintained a temporary walk at least 4 feet in width for the use of the public with a
railing along the outside edge of the walk at least 36 inches high. The City Administrator may waive the
requirement for a temporary walk when it is determined that a temporary walk is not necessary and that
pedestrians can more properly be protected by rerouting them to a walk across the street.
(C) Derricks and hoists prohibited. No person shall place or use derricks or hoists of any kind or any
portion thereof, including outriggers and pads, upon any sidewalks unless the permit specifically permits
the action.
(D) Lifting. Whenever any person applies for a permit for the use of a street or sidewalk or portion
thereof for the purpose of hoising or lifting equipment or material over, across, and above the street or
sidewalk, he or she shall provide for closing off those portions of the street and/or sidewalk encompassed
within the lifting area with suitable barricades, signs, and warning lights and shall provide a 4-foot
pedestrian walkway around the lifting area, the walkway to be suitably enclosed on the street side with
barricades and warning lights.
(E) Flaggers. The City Administrator may direct that flaggers, as described in the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, State of Minnesota, be used to control traffic.
(F) Notice of traffic closure. The permittee shall notify the City Administrator when the permit area is
closed to pedestrian and vehicular traffic and again when it is open to the traffic.
(G) Permit revocation. Any permit issued under this chapter may be revoked at any time by the City
Administrator when he or she finds it in the best interest of the City of Olivia.
(H) Insurance. The permittee shall obtain liability insurance for both personal injury and property
damage in an amount not less than $1,000,000. The city shall be named as an additional insured under that
insurance for the services provided under the permit. The permittee's insurance will be the primary
insurance for the city. Permittee shall provide a certificate of insurance on city's approved form which
verifies the existence of the required liability insurance coverage as well as worker's compensation
coverage.
(I) Parking prohibited.
(1) The parking of private vehicles within or adjacent to the permit area is prohibited.
(2) The loading or unloading of truck adjacent to the permit area is prohibited unless specifically
authorized by the permit.
(J) Double fee. Should any person or persons begin work of any kind without having first secured the
Page 51 of 78
necessary permit therefore, they shall be required to pay double the fee provided for the permit.
(K) Display of permits. Permits issued under this chapter by the City Administrator shall be
conspicuously displayed at all times for ease of inspection on the indicated work site.
(Ord. 245, passed 9-5-1995) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Page 52 of 78
CHAPTER 115: GAMBLING
Section
115.01 Adoption of state law by reference
115.02 City may be more restrictive than state law
115.03 Purpose
115.04 Definitions
115.05 Applicability
115.06 Lawful gambling permitted
115.07 Council approval
115.08 Application and local approval of premises permits
115.09 Local permits
115.10 Revocation and suspension of local permit
115.11 License and permit display
115.12 Notification of material changes to application
115.13 Contribution of net profits to fund administered by city
115.14 Designated trade area
115.15 Records and reporting
115.16 Hours of operation
115.17 Severability
115.99 Penalty
' 115.01 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.
The provisions of M.S. Ch. 349, as they may be amended from time to time, with reference to the
definition of terms, conditions of operation, provisions relating to sales, and all other matters pertaining to
lawful gambling, are hereby adopted by reference and are made a part of this chapter as if set out in full. It
is the intention of the Council that all future amendments of M.S. Ch. 349 are hereby adopted by reference
or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this chapter was adopted.
Page 53 of 78
' 115.02 CITY MAY BE MORE RESTRICTIVE THAN STATE LAW.
The Council is authorized by the provisions of M.S. ' 349.213, as it may be amended from time to
time, to impose, and has imposed in this chapter, additional restrictions on gambling within its limits
beyond those contained in M.S. Ch. 349, as it may be amended from time to time.
' 115.03 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate lawful gambling within the city, to prevent its
commercialization, to ensure the integrity of operations, and to provide for the use of net profits only for
lawful purposes.
' 115.04 DEFINITIONS.
In addition to the definitions contained in M.S. ' 349.12, as it may be amended from time to time, the
following terms are defined for purposes of this chapter:
BOARD. The State of Minnesota Gambling Control Board.
LICENSED ORGANIZATION. An organization licensed by the Board.
LOCAL PERMIT. A permit issued by the city.
TRADE AREA. This city and each city and township contiguous to this city.
' 115.05 APPLICABILITY.
This chapter shall be construed to regulate all forms of lawful gambling within the city except:
(A) Bingo conducted within a nursing home or a senior citizen housing project or by a senior citizen
organization if: the prizes for a single bingo game do not exceed $10; total prizes awarded at a single bingo
occasion do not exceed $200; no more than 2 bingo occasions are held by the organization or at the facility
each week; only members of the organization or residents of the nursing home or housing project are
allowed to play in a bingo game; no compensation is paid for any persons who conduct the bingo; and a
manager is appointed to supervise the bingo.
(B) Raffles, if the value of all prizes awarded by the organization in a calendar year does not exceed
$750.
Page 54 of 78
' 115.06 LAWFUL GAMBLING PERMITTED.
Lawful gambling is permitted within the city if the Council, by resolution adopted by a majority of its
members authorizes lawful gambling to occur, provided it is conducted in accordance with M.S. '' 609.75
to 609.763, inclusive, as they may be amended from time to time; M.S. '' 349.11 to 349.23, inclusive, as
they may be amended from time to time, and this chapter.
' 115.07 COUNCIL APPROVAL.
Lawful gambling authorized by M.S. '' 349.11 to 349.23, inclusive, as they may be amended from
time to time, shall not be conducted unless approved by the Council, subject to the provisions of this
chapter and state law.
Penalty, see ' 115.99
' 115.08 APPLICATION AND LOCAL APPROVAL OF PREMISES PERMITS.
(A) Any organization seeking to obtain a premises permit or bingo hall license or renewal of a
premises permit or bingo hall license from the Board shall file with the City Administrator an executed,
complete duplicate application together with all exhibits and documents accompanying the application as
filed with the Board. The application and accompanying exhibits and documents shall be filed not later
than 3 days after they have been filed with the Board.
(B) Upon receipt of an application for issuance or renewal of a premises permit or bingo hall license,
the City Administrator shall transmit the application to the Chief of Police, or the Sheriff of the county in
which this city is located, for review and recommendation.
(C) The Chief of Police or Sheriff shall investigate the matter and make a review and recommendation
to the City Council as soon as possible, but in no event later than 45 days following receipt of the
notification by the city.
(D) Organizations or bingo halls applying for a state-issued premises permit or bingo hall license shall
pay the city an investigation fee. (See Appendix A). This fee shall be refunded if the application is
withdrawn before the investigation is commenced.
(E) The applicant shall be notified in writing of the date on which the Council will consider the
recommendation.
(F) The Council shall receive the Police Chief's or Sheriff's report and consider the application within
45 days of the date the application was submitted to the City Administrator.
(G) The Council shall, by resolution, approve or disapprove the application within 60 days of receipt
of the application.
Page 55 of 78
(H) The Council shall disapprove an application for issuance or renewal of a premises permit for any
of the following reasons:
(1) Violation by the gambling organization of any state statute, state rule or city ordinance
relating to gambling within the last 3 years.
(2) Violation by the on-sale establishment or organization leasing its premises for gambling of
any state statute, state rule or city ordinance relating to the operation of the establishment, including, but not
limited to, laws relating to alcoholic beverages, gambling, controlled substances, suppression of vice, and
protection of public safety within the last 3 years.
(3) Lawful gambling would be conducted at premises other than those for which an on-sale liquor
license has been issued.
(4) Lawful gambling would be conducted at more than 1 premises within the city. The city may
limit the number of premises where lawful gambling may be conducted.
(5) An organization would be permitted to conduct lawful gambling activities at more than1
premises in the city.
(6) More than 1 licensed organization would be permitted to conduct lawful gambling activities at
1 premises.
(7) Failure of the applicant to pay any investigation fee provided by division (D) of this section
within the prescribed time limit.
(8) Operation of gambling at the site would be detrimental to health, safety, and welfare of the
community.
(I) If the Council does not disapprove the application, the Council shall pass a resolution approving the
application.
' 115.09 LOCAL PERMITS.
(A) No organization shall conduct lawful gambling excluded or exempted from state licensure
requirements by M.S. ' 349.166, as it may be amended from time to time, without a valid local permit. This
section shall not apply to lawful gambling exempted from local regulation by ' 115.05.
(B) Applications for issuance or renewal of a local permit shall be on a form prescribed by the city.
The application shall contain the following information:
(1) Name and address of the organization requesting the permit.
Page 56 of 78
(2) Name and address of the officers and person accounting for receipts, expenses, and profits for
the event.
(3) Dates of gambling occasion for which permit is requested.
(4) Address of premises where event will occur.
(5) Copy of rental or leasing arrangement, if any, connected with the event, including rental to be
charged to organization.
(6) Estimated value of prizes to be awarded.
(C) The fee for a local permit shall be as established by the City Council from time to time. (See
Appendix A). The fee shall be submitted with the application for a local permit. This fee shall be refunded
if the application is withdrawn before the investigation is commenced.
(D) Upon receipt of an application for issuance or renewal of a local permit, the City Administrator
shall transmit the notification to the Chief of Police or Sheriff for review and recommendation.
(E) The Chief of Police or Sheriff shall investigate the matter and make review and recommendation
to the City Council as soon as possible, but in no event later than 45 days following receipt of the
notification by the city.
(F) The applicant shall be notified in writing of the date on which the Council will consider the
recommendation.
(G) The Council shall receive the Police Chief's or Sheriff's report and consider the application within
45 days of the date the application was submitted to the City Administrator.
(H) The Council shall disapprove an application for issuance or renewal of a premises permit for any
of the following reasons:
(1) Violation by the gambling organization of any state statute, state rule or city ordinance
relating to gambling within the last 3 years.
(2) Violation by the on-sale establishment or organization leasing its premises for gambling of
any state statute, state rule or city ordinance relating to the operation of the establishment, including, but not
limited to, laws relating to the operation of the establishment, laws relating to alcoholic beverages,
gambling, controlled substances, suppression of vice, and protection of public safety within the last 3 years.
(3) The organization has not been in existence in the city for at least 3 consecutive years prior to
the date of application.
Page 57 of 78
(4) The organization does not have at least 30 active members.
(5) Exempted or excluded lawful gambling will not take place at a premises the organization
owns or rents.
(6) Exempted or excluded lawful gambling will not be limited to a premises for which an on-sale
liquor license has been issued.
(7) An organization will have a permit to conduct exempted or excluded lawful gambling
activities on more than 1 premises in the city.
(8) More than 1 licensed, qualified organization will be conducting exempted or excluded lawful
gambling activities at any 1 premises.
(9) Failure of the applicant to pay permit fee provided by division (C) of this section within the
prescribed time limit.
(10) Operation of gambling at the site would be detrimental to health, safety, and welfare of the
community.
Otherwise the council shall approve the application.
(I) Local permits shall be valid for 1 year after the date of issuance unless suspended or revoked.
Penalty, see ' 115.99
' 115.10 REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION OF LOCAL PERMIT.
(A) A local permit may be revoked or temporarily suspended for a violation by the gambling
organization of any state statute, state rule or city ordinance relating to gambling.
(B) A license shall not be revoked or suspended until notice and an opportunity for a hearing have first
been given to the permitted person. The notice shall be personally served and shall state the provision
reasonably believed to be violated. The notice shall also state that the permitted person may demand a
hearing on the matter, in which case the permit will not be suspended until after the hearing is held. If the
permitted person requests a hearing, the Council shall hold a hearing on the matter at least 1 week after the
date on which the request is made. If, as a result of the hearing, the Council finds that an ordinance
violation exists, then the Council may suspend or revoke the permit.
Page 58 of 78
' 115.11 LICENSE AND PERMIT DISPLAY.
All permits issued under state law or this chapter shall be prominently displayed during the permit year
at the premises where gambling is conducted.
Penalty, see ' 115.99
' 115.12 NOTIFICATION OF MATERIAL CHANGES TO APPLICATION.
An organization holding a state-issued premises permit or a local permit shall notify the city in writing
whenever any material change in the information submitted in the application occurs within 10 days of the
change.
Penalty, see ' 115.99
' 115.13 CONTRIBUTION OF NET PROFITS TO FUND ADMINISTERED BY CITY.
(A) Each organization licensed to conduct lawful gambling within the city pursuant to M.S. ' 349.16,
as it may be amended from time to time, shall contribute 10% of its net profits derived from lawful
gambling in the city to a fund administered and regulated by the city without cost to the fund. The city shall
disburse the funds for lawful purposes as defined by M.S. ' 349.12, Subd. 25, as it may be amended from
time to time.
(B) Payment under this section shall be made on the last day of each month.
(C) The city's use of these funds shall be determined at the time of adoption of the city's annual budget
or when the budget is amended.
Penalty, see ' 115.99
' 115.14 DESIGNATED TRADE AREA.
(A) Each organization licensed to conduct gambling within the city shall expend 100% of its lawful
purpose expenditures on lawful purposes conducted within the city's trade area.
(B) This section applies only to lawful purpose expenditures of gross profits derived from gambling
conducted at a premises within the city's jurisdiction.
Penalty, see ' 115.99
Page 59 of 78
' 115.15 RECORDS AND REPORTING.
(A) Organizations conducting lawful gambling shall file with the City Administrator 1 copy of all
records and reports required to be filed with the Board, pursuant to M.S. Ch. 349, as it may be amended
from time to time, and rules adopted pursuant thereto, as they may be amended from time to time. The
records and reports shall be filed on or before the day they are required to be filed with the Board.
(B) Organizations licensed by the Board shall file a report with the city proving compliance with the
trade area spending requirements imposed by ' 115.14. Such report shall be made on a form prescribed by
the city and shall be submitted annually and in advance of application for renewal.
Penalty, see ' 115.99
' 115.16 HOURS OF OPERATION.
Lawful gambling shall not be conducted between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any day of the week.
Penalty, see ' 115.99
' 115.17 SEVERABILITY.
If any provision of this chapter is found to be invalid for any reason by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the validity of the remaining provisions shall not be affected.
' 115.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates:
(A) Any provision of this chapter;
(B) M.S. '' 609.75 to 609.763, inclusive, as they may be amended from time to time; or
(C) M.S. '' 349.11 to 349.21, as they may be amended from time to time, or any rules promulgated
under those sections, as they may be amended from time to time shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall
be punished as provided in ' 10.99.
Page 60 of 78
CHAPTER 116: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
116.01 Adoption of state law by reference
116.02 City may be more restrictive than state law
116.03 Definitions
116.04 Nudity on the premises of licensed establishments prohibited
116.05 Consumption in public places
Licensing
116.20 Number of licenses which may be issued
116.21 Term and expiration of licenses
116.22 Kinds of liquor licenses
116.23 License fees; pro rata
116.24 Council discretion to grant or deny a license
116.25 Application for license
116.26 Description of premises
116.27 Applications for renewal
116.28 Transfer of license
116.29 Investigation
116.30 Hearing and issuance
116.31 Restrictions on issuance
116.32 Conditions of license
116.33 Hours and days of sale
116.34 Minors on premises; Employment of minors
116.35 Restrictions on purchase and consumption
116.36 Suspension and revocation
Municipal Liquor Stores
116.50 Application of this subchapter
116.51 Existing municipal stores continued
116.52 Location
116.53 Operation
116.54 Proof of financial responsibility
116.55 Issuance of other licenses
Page 61 of 78
116.99 Penalties
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§116.01 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.
The provisions of M.S. Ch. 340A, as they may be amended from time to time, with reference to the
definition of terms, conditions of operation, restrictions on consumption, provisions relating to sales,
hours of sale, and all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and consumption of
intoxicating liquor and 3.2% malt liquor are hereby adopted by reference and are made a part of this
Chapter as if set out in full. It is the intention of the City Council that all future amendments to M.S.
Ch. 340A are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this
Chapter is adopted.
§116.02 CITY MAY BE MORE RESTRICTIVE THAN STATE LAW.
The Council is authorized by the provisions of M.S. § 340A.509, as it may be amended from time to
time, to impose, and has imposed in this chapter, additional restrictions on the sale and possession of
alcoholic beverages within its limits beyond those contained in M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended
from time to time.
§ 116.03 DEFINITIONS.
In addition to the definitions contained in M.S.§ 340A.101, as it may be amended from time to time,
the following terms are defined for purposes of this chapter:
LIQUOR. As used in this chapter, without modification by the words intoxicating or 3.2% malt,
includes both intoxicating liquor and 3.2% malt liquor.
RESTAURANT. An eating facility, other than a hotel, under the control of a single proprietor or
manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the premises, where full waitress/waiter table service is
provided, where a customer orders food from printed menus and where the main food course is served
and consumed while seated at a single location. To be a “restaurant” as defined by this section, an
establishment shall have a license from the state as required by M.S.§ 157.16, as it may be amended
from time to time, and meet the definition of either a “Category 2 establishment,” or a “Category 3
establishment” as defined in M.S. § 157.16, subd. 3(d), as it may be amended from time to time. An
establishment which serves prepackaged food that receives heat treatment and is served in the package
Page 62 of 78
or frozen pizza that is heated and served, shall not be considered to be a restaurant for purposes of this
chapter unless it meets the criteria for licensure as a “Category 2 establishment,” or “Category 3
establishment.”
§ 116.04 NUDITY ON THE PREMISES OF LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS
PROHIBITED.
(A) The City Council finds that it is in the best interests of the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the people of the city that nudity is prohibited as provided in this section on the premises of any
establishment licensed under this chapter. This is to protect and assist the owners, operators, and
employees of the establishment, as well as patrons and the public in general, from harm stemming from
the physical immediacy and combination of alcohol, nudity, and sex. The Council especially intends to
prevent any subliminal endorsement of sexual harassment or activities likely to lead to the possibility of
various criminal conduct, including prostitution, sexual assault, and disorderly conduct. The Council
also finds that the prohibition of nudity on the premises of any establishment licensed under this
chapter, as set forth in this section, reflects the prevailing community standards of the city.
(B) It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person or persons on the licensed premises
when the person does riot have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a nontransparent
material. It is unlawful for any person to be on the licensed premises when the person does
not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a non-transparent material.
(C) A violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable as provided by law, and is justification for
revocation or suspension of any liquor, wine, or 3.2% malt liquor license or the imposition of a civil
penalty under the provisions of§ 116.99(B).
Penalty, see§ 116.99
§ 116.05 CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC PLACES.
No person shall consume intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor in a public park, unless allowed by
permit, on any public street, sidewalk, parking lot or alley, or in any public place other than on the
premises of an establishment licensed under this chapter, in a municipal liquor dispensary if one exists
in the city, or where the consumption and display of liquor is lawfully permitted.
Penalty, see § 116.99
§116.20 NUMBER OF LICENSES WHICH MAY BE ISSUED.
State law establishes the number of liquor licenses that a city may issue. However, the number of
licenses which may be granted under this chapter is limited to the number of license which were issued
as of the effective date of this chapter, even if a larger number of licenses are authorized by law or
election. The Council in its sound discretion may provide by ordinance that a larger number of licenses
Page 63 of 78
may be issued up to the number of licenses authorized by M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from
time to time. If a larger number of licenses in a particular category has been authorized by a referendum
held under the provisions of M.S. § 340A.413, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time, but not
all of them have been issued, the larger number of licenses is no longer in effect until the Council by
ordinance determines that any or all of the licenses may be issued. The Council is not required to issue
the full number of licenses that it has available.
§ 116.21 TERM AND EXPIRATION OF LICENSES.
Each license shall be issued for a maximum period of 1 year. All licenses, except temporary licenses,
shall expire on December 31 of each year unless another date is provided by ordinance. All licenses
shall expire on the same date. Temporary licenses expire according to their terms. Consumption and
display permits issued by the Commissioner of Public Safety, and the accompanying city consent to the
permit, shall expire on March 31 of each year.
§ 116.22 KINDS OF LIQUOR LICENSES.
The Council of a city that does not have a municipal liquor store is authorized to issue the following
licenses and permits, up to the number specified in§ 116.20. The Council of a city which has a
municipal liquor store is authorized to issue only those licenses specified in§ 116.55.
(A) 3.2% malt liquor on-sale licenses, which may be issued only to golf courses, restaurants, hotels,
clubs, bowling centers, and establishments used exclusively for the sale of 3.2% malt liquor with the
incidental sale of tobacco and soft drinks.
(B) 3.2% malt liquor off-sale license. A license may be issued to permit the sale of 3.2 percent malt
liquor at retail establishment, in the original package, for consumption off the premises only. Off-sale
of 3.2 percent malt liquor shall be limited to the legal hours for off-sale as established by Minn. Stat.
§340A.504.
(C) Temporary 3.2% malt liquor licenses which may be issued only to a club, charitable, religious, or
nonprofit organization for no more than 12 days per year.
(D) Off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, which may be issued only to exclusive liquor stores or drug
stores that have an off-sale license which was first issued on or before May 1, 1994. The fee for an offsale
intoxicating liquor license established by the Council under§ 116.23 shall not exceed the amount
which may be permitted by M.S.§ 340A.408, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time.
(E) On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, which may be issued to the following establishments as
defined by M.S. § 340A.101, as it may be amended from time to time, and this chapter: hotels,
restaurants, bowling centers, theaters, clubs or congressionally chartered veterans’ organizations, and
exclusive liquor stores. Club licenses may be issued only with the approval of the Commissioner of
Page 64 of 78
Public Safety. The fee for club licenses established by the Council under§ 116.23 shall not exceed the
amounts provided for in M.S. § 340A.408, subd. 2b, as it may be amended from time to time. The
Council may in its sound discretion authorize a retail on-sale licensee to dispense intoxicating liquor off
the licensed premises at a community festival held within the city under the provisions of M.S. §
340A.404, subd. 4b, as it may be amended from time to time. The Council may in its sound discretion
authorize a retail on-sale licensee to dispense intoxicating liquor off the licensed premises at any
convention, banquet, conference, meeting, or social affair conducted on the premises of a sports,
convention, or cultural facility owned by the city, under the provisions of M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 4(a),
as it may be amended from time to time; however, the licensee is prohibited from dispensing
intoxicating liquor to any person attending or participating in an amateur athletic event being held on
the premises.
(F) Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, only after authorization to do so by voter approval at a
general or special election as provided by M.S. § 340A.504, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to
time. Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued only to a restaurant as defined in§
116.03, club, bowling center, or hotel which has a seating capacity of at least 30 persons, which holds
an on-sale intoxicating liquor license, and which serves liquor only in conjunction with the service of
food.
(G) Combination on-sale/off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses if the city has a population less than
10,000.
(H) Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, with the approval of the Commissioner of Public
Safety, which may be issued only in connection with a social event sponsored by a club, charitable,
religious, or other nonprofit corporation that has existed for at least 3 years. No license shall be for
longer than 4 consecutive days, and the city shall issue no more than 12 days worth of temporary
licenses to any 1 organization in 1 calendar year.
(I) On-sale wine licenses, with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety to: theaters,
restaurants that have facilities for seating at least 25 guests at one time and meet the criteria of M.S. §
340A.404, subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to time, and which meet the definition of restaurant
in § 116.03; and to licensed bed and breakfast facilities which meet the criteria in M.S. § 340A.4011, as
it may be amended from time to time. The fee for an on-sale wine license established by the Council
under the provisions of § 116.23 shall not exceed 1/2 of the license fee charged for an on-sale
intoxicating liquor license. The holder of an on-sale wine license who also holds an on-sale 3.2% malt
liquor license is authorized to sell malt liquor with a content over 3.2% (strong beer) without an
additional license.
(J) One-day consumption and display permit with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety
to a nonprofit organization in conjunction with a social activity in the city sponsored by the
organization.
(K) Approval of the issuance of a consumption and display permit by the Commissioner of Public
Safety. The maximum amount of the additional fee which may be imposed by the Council on a person
who has been issued a consumption and display permit under the provisions of§ 116.23 shall not
exceed the maximum amount permitted by M.S. § 340A.414, subd. 6, as it may be amended from time
Page 65 of 78
to time. Consumption and display permits shall expire on March 31 of each year.
(L) A Brew Pub on-sale intoxicating liquor or on-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses, may be issued to
brewers who operate a restaurant in their place of manufacture as allowed by Minn. Stat. §340A.24, as
it may be amended from time to time.
(M) A Brewer off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, with the approval of the commissioner of Public
Safety, may be issued to a brewer that is a licensee under Section (L) of this Chapter as allowed by
Minn. Stat. §340A.24 subd. 2, as it may be amended from time to time.
(N) A Brewer taproom on-sale intoxicating liquor license may be issued as allowed by Minn. Stat.
§340A.26, as it may be amended from time to time.
(O) A Brewer taproom off-sale intoxicating liquor license, with the approval of the Commissioner of
Public Safety, may be issued as allowed by Minn. Stat. §340A.28, as it may be amended from time to
time.
(P) A Micro-distillery cocktail room license may be issued as permitted in Minn. Stat. §340A.22, as it
may be amended from time to time.
(Q) Micro-distillery off-sale license may be issued to a distillery producing distilled spirits as permitted
in Minn. Stat. §340A.22 as it may be amended from time to time. This license allows the sale of one
375 milliliter bottle per customer per day of the product manufactured on-site as per the hours for retail
off-sale licenses in the licensing municipality and only for brands available for distribution by
wholesalers.
(R) Small Brewer Off-sale License. In accordance with Minn. Stat. 340A.285, the City may issue a
Small Brewer Off-sale License for the sale of malt liquor that has been produced and packaged by the
brewer to be consumer off the licensed premises. The license must be approved by the AGE. Off-sale
of the malt liquor may only be made during the hours as stipulated in Minn. Stat. 340A.504. The malt
liquor shall be packaged in sixty-four (64) ounce containers commonly known as “growlers” or in
seven hundred fifty (750) milliliter bottles. The containing or bottle must be sealed in the manner as
described in Minn. Stat. The malt sold at off-sale must be removed from the premises by the latest time
that “off-sale” of liquor may be made pursuant to Minn. Stat. 340A.504.
(S) Culinary Classes On-sale License. In accordance with Minn. Stat. 340A.4041, as amended, the city
may issue a limited on-sale intoxicating liquor license to a business establishment (1) not otherwise
eligible for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license; and (2) that, as part of its business, conducts culinary
or cooking classes for which payment is made by each participant or advance reservation is required.
The license authorizes the license to furnish to each participant in each class, at no additional cost to the
participant, up to a maximum of six ounces of wine or 12 ounces of intoxicating malt liquor, during and
part of the class, for consumption on the licensed premises only.
(T) Caterer’s Permit. The AGE Commission is responsible for issuing Caterer’s Permits to a
restaurant that holds an on-sale intoxicating liquor license issued by the City. The holder of the
Caterer’s Permit may sell intoxicating liquor as an incidental part of a food service that serves prepared
Page 66 of 78
meals at a place other than the premises for which the holder’s on-sale intoxicating license is issued.
(U) Wine or Malt Liquor Tastings. Wine or malt liquor tasting events are permitted in accordance
with Minn. Stat. §340A.418, as it may be amended from time to time.
Penalty, see§ 116.99
§ 116.23 LICENSE FEES; PRO RATA.
(A) No license or other fee established by the city shall exceed any limit established by M.S.340A, as it
may be amended from time to time, for a liquor license.
(B) The Council may establish from time to time the fee for any of the liquor licenses it is authorized
to issue. The license fee may not exceed the cost of issuing the license and other costs directly related to
the enforcement of the liquor laws and this chapter. No liquor license fee shall be increased without
providing mailed notice of a hearing on the proposed increase to all affected licensees at least 30 days
before the hearing.
(C) The fee for all licenses, except temporary licenses, granted after the commencement of the license
year shall be prorated on a monthly basis.
(D) All license fees shall be paid in full at the time the application is filed with the city. If the
application is denied, the license fee shall be returned to the applicant.
(E) A refund of a pro rata share of an annual license fee may occur only if authorized by M.S. §
340A.408, subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to time.
Penalty, see§ 116.99
§ 116.24 COUNCIL DISCRETION TO GRANT OR DENY A LICENSE.
The Council in its sound discretion may either grant or deny the application for any license or for the
transfer or renewal of any license. No applicant has a right to a license under this chapter.
§ 116.25 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
(A) Form. Every application for a license issued under this chapter shall be on a form provided by the
city. Every application shall state the name of the applicant, the applicant's age, representations as to the
applicant's character, with references as the Council may require, the type of license applied for, the
business in connection with which the proposed license will operate and its location, a description of
the premises, whether the applicant is owner and operator of the business, how long the applicant has
been in that business at that place, and other information as the Council may require from time to time.
Page 67 of 78
An application for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license shall be in the form prescribed by the
Commissioner of Public Safety and shall also contain the information required in this section. The form
shall be verified and filed with the city. No person shall make a false statement in an application.
(B) Financial responsibility. Prior to the issuance of any license under this chapter, the applicant shall
demonstrate proof of financial responsibility as defined in M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended
from time to time, with regard to liability under M.S. § 340A.801, as it may be amended from time to
time. This proof will be filed with the city and the Commissioner of Public Safety. Any liability
insurance policy filed as proof of financial responsibility under this section shall conform to M.S. §
340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time. Operation of a business which is required to be
licensed by this chapter without having on file with the city at all times effective proof of financial
responsibility is a cause for revocation of the license.
Penalty, see § 116.99
§116.26 DESCRIPTION OF PREMISES.
The application shall specifically describe the compact and contiguous premises within which liquor
may be dispensed and consumed. The description may not include any parking lot or sidewalk.
§ 116.27 APPLICATIONS FOR RENEWAL.
At least 60 days before a license issued under this chapter is to be renewed, an application for renewal
shall be filed with the city. The decision whether or not to renew a license rests within the sound
discretion of the Council. No licensee has a right to have the license renewed.
§ 116.28 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
No license issued under this chapter may be transferred without the approval of the Council. Any
transfer of stock of a corporate licensee is deemed to be a transfer of the license, and a transfer of stock
without prior Council approval is a ground for revocation of the license. An application to transfer a
license shall be treated the same as an application for a new license, and all of the provisions of this
code applying to applications for a license shall apply.
Penalty, see§ 116.99
§ 116.29 INVESTIGATION.
(A) Preliminary background and financial investigation. On an initial application for a license, on an
application for transfer of a license and, in the sound discretion of the Council that it is in the public
interest to do so, on an application for renewal of a license, the city shall conduct a preliminary
Page 68 of 78
background and financial investigation of the applicant or it may contract with the Commissioner of
Public Safety for the investigation. The applicant shall pay with the application an investigation fee,
which shall be in addition to any license fee. (See Appendix A). If the cost of the preliminary
investigation is less than amount paid, the unused balance shall be returned to the applicant. The results
of the preliminary investigation shall be sent to the Commissioner of Public Safety if the application is
for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license or an on-sale wine license.
(B) Comprehensive background and financial investigation. If the results of a preliminary
investigation warrant, in the sound discretion of the Council, a comprehensive background and
financial investigation, the Council may either conduct the investigation itself or contract with the
Commissioner of Public Safety for the investigation. The investigation fee for this comprehensive
background and financial investigation to be paid by the applicant shall be as established by the
Council from time to time (See Appendix A), less any amount paid for the initial investigation if the
investigation is to be conducted within the state, and amount established by the Council from time to
time (See Appendix A) for out of state investigations, less any amount paid for the initial investigation,
if the investigation is required outside Minnesota. The unused balance of the investigation fee shall be
returned to the applicant whether or not the application is denied. The fee shall be paid in advance of
any investigation and the amount actually expended on the investigation shall not be refundable in the
event the application is denied. The results of the comprehensive investigation shall be sent to the
Commissioner of Public Safety if the application is for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license or an onsale
wine license.
(C) Referral to Chief of Police for recommendation. All applications for a license shall be referred to
the Chief of Police and to such other city departments as the City Administrator shall deem necessary,
for verification and investigation of the facts set forth in the application. The Chief of Police shall
cause to be made such investigation for the information required by this Chapter as shall be necessary
and shall make a written recommendation and report to the Council which shall include a list of
violations of federal or state law or municipal regulations.
(D) Health Department Regulations. Each applicant shall abide by all regulations of the Minnesota
Department of Health, Food and Beverage licensing. A coy of a current licensure shall be submitted to
the City Council that an establishment meets the requirements of law and in the case of an on-sale
intoxicating liquor establishment, has the proper facilities to qualify and be licensed as a restaurant.
When a restaurant, licensed for the sale of intoxicating liquor, is hereafter constructed or remodeled, or
when an existing structure is converted for use as a restaurant, properly prepared plans and
specifications for such construction, remodeling or alteration shall be approved by the Minnesota
Department of Health in insurance that the establishment will meet local and state standards for
restaurants.
§ 116.30 HEARING AND ISSUANCE.
The Council shall investigate, or cause to be investigated, all facts set out in the application and not
investigated in the preliminary or comprehensive background and financial investigations. Opportunity
shall be given to any person to be heard for or against the granting of the license. After the investigation
Page 69 of 78
and hearing, the Council shall in its sound discretion grant or deny the application. No license shall
become effective until the proof of financial security has been approved by the Commissioner of Public
Safety.
§ 116.31 RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE.
(A) Each license shall be issued only to the applicant for the premises described in the application.
(B) Not more than 1 license shall be directly or indirectly issued within the city to any one (1) person.
(C) No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any premises on which taxes, assessments,
utility charges, service charges, or other financial claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid.
(D) No license shall be issued for any place or any business ineligible for a license under state law.
(E) No license shall be issued to any person who is not a resident of the State of Minnesota. If the
applicant is a corporation, all of the shareholders shall be residents of the state. The provisions of this
division (E) shall not apply to any license existing on the effective date of this chapter or to the renewal
of an existing license.
(F) No license shall be granted for a premises that is within 100 feet of any school or church. The
distance is to be measured from the closest side of the school or church to the closest side of the
structure on the premises within which liquor is to be sold.
Penalty, see § 116.99
§116.32 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
The failure of a licensee to meet any 1 of the conditions of the license specified below shall result in a
suspension of the license until the condition is met.
(A) Within 90 days after employment, every person selling or serving liquor in an establishment which
has an on-sale license shall receive training regarding the selling or serving of liquor to customers. The
training shall be provided by an organization approved by the Council. Proof of training shall be
provided by the licensee.
(B) Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of the place of business and the conditions of sobriety
and order in it. The act of any employee on the licensed premises is deemed the act of the licensee as
well, and the licensee shall be liable to all penalties provided by this chapter and the law equally with
the employee.
(C) Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health officer, city employee, or any other person
designated by the Council to conduct compliance checks and to otherwise enter, inspect, and search the
Page 70 of 78
premises of the licensee during business hours and after business hours during the time when customers
remain on the premises without a warrant.
(D) No on-sale establishment shall display liquor to the public during hours when the sale of liquor is
prohibited.
(E) Compliance with financial responsibility requirements of state law and of this chapter is a
continuing condition of any license.
Penalty, see§ 116.99
§ 116.33 HOURS AND DAYS OF SALE.
(A) The hours of operation and days of sale shall be those set by M.S. § 340A.504, as it may be
amended from time to time, except that the City Council may, by resolution or ordinance, provide for
more restrictive hours than state law allows. The City does not further restrict on-sale or off-sale hours
or limit off-sale hours to those of the municipal liquor store than the hours set by Minn. Stat.
§340A.504, as it may be amended from time to time.
(B) No person shall consume nor shall any on-sale licensee permit any consumption of intoxicating
liquor or 3.2% malt liquor in an on-sale licensed premises more than 30 minutes after the time when a
sale can legally occur.
(C) No on-sale licensee shall permit any glass, bottle, or other container containing intoxicating liquor
or 3.2% malt liquor to remain upon any table, bar, stool, or other place where customers are served,
more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur.
(D) No person, other than the licensee and any employee, shall remain on the on-sale licensed premises
more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur.
(E) Any violation of any condition of this section may be grounds for revocation or suspension of the
license.
Penalty, see § 116.99
§ 116.34 MINORS ON PREMISES; EMPLOYMENT OF MINORS.
(A) No person under the age of 18 years shall be employed in any rooms constituting the place in which
intoxicating liquors or 3.2% malt liquor are sold at retail on sale, except that persons under the age of
18 may be employed as musicians or to perform the duties of a bus person or dishwashing services in
places defined as a restaurant, hotel, motel or other multi-purpose building serving food in rooms in
which intoxicating liquors or 3.2% malt liquor are sold at retail on sale.
(B) No person under the age of 21 years may enter a licensed establishment except to work, consume
meals on premises that qualify as a restaurant, or attend social functions that are held in a portion of the
Page 71 of 78
premises where liquor is not sold.
Penalty, see § 116.99
(C) No person under 18 years of age may serve or sell intoxicating liquor in a retail intoxicating liquor
establishment under the provisions of Minn. Stat. §340A.412, subd. 10, as it may be amended from
time to time.
Penalty, see§ 116.99
§ 116.35 RESTRICTIONS ON PURCHASE AND CONSUMPTION.
No person shall mix or prepare liquor for consumption in any public place of business unless it has a
license to sell on-sale, or a permit from the Commissioner of Public Safety under the provisions of
M.S.§ 340A.414, as it may be amended from time to time, which has been approved by the Council,
and no person shall consume liquor in any such place.
Penalty, see § 116.99
§ 116.36 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
(A) The Council shall either suspend for a period not to exceed 60 days or revoke any liquor license
upon finding that the licensee has failed to comply with any applicable statute, regulation, or provision
of this chapter relating to liquor. Except in cases of lapse of proof of financial responsibility, no
suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a
hearing pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act, M.S.§§ 14.57 to 14.69, as it may be amended
from time to time. The Council may act as the hearing body under that act, or it may contract with the
Office of Hearing Examiners for a hearing officer.
(B) The following are the minimum periods of suspension or revocation which shall be imposed by the
Council for violations of the provisions of this chapter or M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from
time to time or any rules promulgated under that chapter as they may be amended from time to time:
(1) For commission of a felony related to the licensed activity, sale of alcoholic
beverages while the license is under suspension, sale of intoxicating liquor where the only license is
for 3.2% malt liquor, or violation of § 116.04, the license shall be revoked.
2) The license shall be suspended by the Council after a finding under division (A) that the licensee has
failed to comply with any applicable statute, rule, or provision of this chapter for at least the minimum
periods as follows:
(a) For the first violation within any 3-year period, at least 1-day suspension in addition to any criminal
or civil penalties which may be imposed.
(b) For a second violation within any 3-year period, at least 3-consecutive days' suspension in addition
Page 72 of 78
to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed.
(c) For the third violation within any 3-year period, at least 7-consecutive days' suspension in addition
to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed.
(d) For a fourth violation within any 3-year period, the license shall be revoked within 60 days
following a violation for which revocation is imposed.
(3) The Council shall select the day or days during which the license will be suspended or revoked,
which shall occur within 60 days following a violation for which revocation is imposed.
(C) Lapse of required proof of financial responsibility shall affect an immediate suspension of any
license issued pursuant to this chapter or state law without further action of the Council. Notice of
cancellation or lapse of a current liquor liability policy shall also constitute notice to the licensee of the
impending suspension of the license. The holder of a license who has received notice of lapse of
required insurance or of suspension or revocation of a license may request a hearing thereon and, if a
request is made in writing to the Administrator, a hearing before the Council shall be granted within 10
days. Any suspension under this division (B) shall continue until the Council determines that the
financial responsibility requirements of state law and this chapter have again been met.
(D) The provisions of§ 116.99 pertaining to administrative penalty may be imposed in addition to or in
lieu of any suspension or revocation under this chapter.
Penalty, see § 116.99
MUNICIPAL LIQUOR STORES
§ 116.50 APPLICATION OF THIS SUBCHAPTER.
This subchapter, consisting of§§ 116.50 through 116.55, applies only the city if it has in existence on
the effective date of this chapter a municipal liquor store.
§ 116.51 EXISTING MUNICIPAL STORES CONTINUED.
If the city has in existence on the effective date of this chapter a municipal liquor store for the sale of
intoxicating liquor, the store is continued. Except as provided in§ 116.55, no intoxicating liquor may be
sold at retail elsewhere in the city.
Page 73 of 78
Penalty, see § 116.99
§ 116.52 LOCATION.
The municipal liquor store shall be located at a suitable place in the city as the Council determines by
motion. However, no premises upon which taxes, assessments, or other public charges are delinquent
shall be leased for municipal liquor store purposes. The Council shall have the right to establish
additional offsale
and on-sale stores at other locations as it may, from time to time, by motion,
determine.
§ 116.53 OPERATION.
(A) Manager. The municipal liquor store shall be in the immediate charge of a Liquor Store Manager
selected by the Council and paid compensation as is fixed by the Council. The Manager shall not be a
person who would be prohibited by law or any provision of this chapter from being eligible for an
intoxicating liquor license. The Manager shall operate the municipal liquor store under the Council's
direction and shall perform those duties in connection with the store as may be established by the
Council. The Manager shall be responsible to the Council for the conduct of the store in full
compliance with this chapter and with the laws relating to the sale of intoxicating liquor and 3.2% malt
liquor.
(B) Other employees. The Council may also appoint additional employees as may be required and shall
fix their compensation. All employees, including the Manager, shall hold their positions at the pleasure
of the Council. No person under the age of 18 shall be employed in the store.
(C) Municipal liquor store fund. All of the revenues received from the operation of a municipal liquor
store shall be deposited in a municipal liquor store fund from which all ordinary operating expenses,
including compensation of the Manager and employees, shall be paid. Surpluses accumulating in the
fund may be transferred to the general fund of the city or to any other appropriate fund of the city by
resolution of the Council, and may be expended for any municipal purpose. The handling of municipal
liquor store receipts and disbursements shall comply with the procedure prescribed by law and charter
for the receipts and disbursements of city funds generally.
(D) Financial statement. The Council shall provide within 90 days following the end of the calendar
year for publication a balance sheet using generally accepted accounting procedures and a statement of
operations of the municipal liquor store for that year. The balance sheet and statement shall be
published in accordance with the provisions of M.S.§ 471.6985, as it may be amended from time to
time.
E) Hours of operation. The hours during which the sale of intoxicating liquor may be sold shall be
within the provisions of Minn. Stat. § 340A.504 or as provided in § 116.33. No person, other than the
Manager or a store employee, may remain in the municipal liquor store longer than 1/2 hour after the
Page 74 of 78
time when the sale of intoxicating liquor must cease.
Penalty, see § 116.99
§ 116.54 PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
The city shall demonstrate proof of financial responsibility required by licensees of retail intoxicating
liquor establishments under the provisions of M.S.§ 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to
time.
§ 116.55 ISSUANCE OF OTHER LICENSES.
(A) On-sale licenses for the sale of intoxicating liquor and wine. The Council may issue in its sound
discretion on-sale licenses (to a club), as limited by the provisions of this Chapter and the provisions of
M.S.§ 340A.404, subd. 1(4), as it may be amended from time to time. If the voters have authorized the
issuance at a special election called for that purpose, the Council may issue, in its sound discretion, onsale
liquor licenses to hotels and restaurants. The number of on-sale licenses issued under this section is
governed by M.S. § 340A.413, as it may be amended from time to time, as limited by the provisions of
this chapter. The issuance of these licenses is governed by the provisions of this chapter.
(B) On- and off-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses. The Council may issue in its sound discretion
on- and off-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses, as limited by the provisions of this Chapter and the
provisions of Minn. Stat. § 340A.403, as it may be amended from time to time.
(C) On- and off-sale brew pub, taproom and micro-distillery licenses. The Council may issue in its
sound discretion on-and off-sale brew pub, taproom and micro-distillery licenses, as limited by the
provisions of this Chapter and the provisions of Minn. Stat. § 340A.22 to 340A.28, as it may be
amended from time to time.
§116.99 PENALTIES
(A) Any person violating the provisions of this Chapter or Minn. Stat. Ch. 340A as it may be amended
from time to time or any rules promulgated under that chapter as they may be amended from time to
time is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided by law.
(B) The Council shall impose a civil penalty of up to $2,000 for each violation of Minn. Stat. Ch.
340A, as it may be amended from time to time, and of this Chapter (See Appendix A). Conviction of a
violation in a court of Jaw is not required in order for the Council to impose the civil penalty. A hearing
under the Administrative Procedures Act, Minn. Stat. § 14.57 to 14.69, as it may be amended from
time to time, is not required before the penalty is imposed, but the Council shall hold a hearing on the
proposed violation and the proposed penalty and hear any person who wishes to speak. Non-payment
of the penalty is grounds for suspension or revocation of the license. The following is the minimum
schedule of presumptive civil penalties which must be imposed in addition to any suspension unless the
Page 75 of 78
license is revoked:
(1) For the first violation within any three-year period, $500.
(2) For the second violation within any three-year period, $1,000.
(3) For the third and subsequent violations within any three-year period, $2,000.
(C) The term "violation" as used in the Chapter includes any and all violations of the provisions in this
Chapter, or of Minn. Stat. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time or any rules promulgated
under that chapter as they may be amended from time to time. The number of violations shall be
determined on the basis of the history of violations for the preceding three-year period.
(D) The provisions of Section 116.36 pertaining to suspension or revocation may be imposed in
addition to of any administrative, or criminal penalties under this Chapter or State law.
(Amended by Ord. 2018-02, passed 01-16-2018)
Page 76 of 78
CHAPTER 117: AMUSEMENTS
Section
117.01 Bowling; billiards and pool
117.02 Circuses, carnivals, shows and other entertainment
117.03 Amusement devices
117.04 Deposit required
117.05 License fee for public entertainment or exhibition
117.06 Public dance permits
' 117.01 BOWLING; BILLIARDS AND POOL.
Each proprietor of a billiard, pool hall, or of a bowling alley, or a combination of both, shall pay an
annual license fee in an amount established in the Ch. 34, as it may be amended from time to time.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 117.02 CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS, SHOWS AND OTHER ENTERTAINMENT.
(A) (1) Each person, desiring to conduct, stage or give a circus, carnival, theatrical exhibition, public
show, athletic game or other entertainment, for which there is a charge for admission, shall first obtain a
license and pay the license fee or fees as established by Ch. 34, as that ordinance may be amended from
time to time.
(2) Local school entertainment, charitable organizations, lecture courses, and lectures on historic,
literary or scientific subjects are not subject to the provisions of this section; provided, that the
entertainment is not for profit.
(B) In addition to any other requirements, the applicant for a license shall give to the City Administrator or
other authorized official written notice at least 1 week in advance of the first day of the event, the stating
the dates of the performances and the location at which the performances are to be presented. The City
Administrator shall give his or her consent to the issuance of the license if he or she deems that the location
is suitable for the purpose; that it will properly accommodate the patrons; that the nature of the performance
or exhibition does not pose a threat to the health, safety or general welfare of the public; and that the use of
the location will not create too great a burden upon the Police Department or the Fire Department.
Page 77 of 78
(C) No circus, carnival, theatrical exhibition, public show, athletic game or other entertainment shall
be given for more than 2 consecutive days, except in cases where the City Council, by resolution, allows a
longer period, or where the exhibition is to be conducted on municipal property and the use thereof for a
longer period shall have been approved by the City Council.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 117.03 AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
(A) The term Acoin-operated mechanical amusement device@ means any machine, which upon the
insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, may be operated by the public generally for use as a game,
entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score. It includes such devices as marble
machines, pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines, mechanical rides intended for use by
children, such as merry-go-rounds, horses, Ferris wheels, and the like; carnival, fair, and/or festival rides,
and all similar games, operations or transactions under whatever name they may be indicated.
(B) A person, firm, corporation or association must not display for public use any coin-operated
mechanical amusement device without obtaining a license for it and paying the fee established Ch. 34, as
that ordinance may be amended from time to time. Applications for a license must be made to the City
Administrator.
(C) The license or licenses obtained must be posted permanently and conspicuously at the location of
the machine in the premises where the machine is to be operated.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 117.04 DEPOSIT REQUIRED.
(A) At the time application for a license is made, where use of municipal grounds is contemplated, the
applicant shall deposit with the City Administrator or other designated municipal official a cash bond in an
amount to be determined by the City Council, conditioned upon the restoration and cleaning up of the
grounds in a manner satisfactory to the Mayor. In the event the grounds are restored and cleaned up
properly following the exhibition, the deposit shall be returned; otherwise the same shall be forfeited to the
city to the extent of actual costs to the city for restoration and cleaning up of the grounds.
(B) No licensee shall fail to restore or clean up the grounds upon which the circus, carnival or other
entertainment has taken place.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
Page 78 of 78
' 117.05 LICENSE FEE FOR PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT OR EXHIBITION.
The license fee for public entertainment or exhibition shall be in an amount as established in the Ch.
34, as it may be amended from time to time.
' 117.06 PUBLIC DANCE PERMITS.
(A) Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to give, hold or conduct a public dance, as
defined herein, unless the owner or the proprietor of the place where the dance is held, or the person giving
the same or in charge thereof, shall first have procured a permit to hold, give and conduct the public dance
from the Council. A public dance shall mean any dance wherein the public may participate by payment,
directly or indirectly, of an admission fee or price for dancing, or a fee for a membership in a club, and shall
include any manner of holding a dance which may be participated in by the public through the payment of
money directly or indirectly.
(B) Permits; single, annual. A permit issued under this chapter may be a single dance permit or an
annual permit. A single dance permit allows the permittee to give, hold or conduct a public dance, or
allows the owner or lessee of a premises to permit such premises to be used for the purpose of holding a
public dance, on a single occasion. An annual dance permit allows the permittee to give, hold or conduct a
public dance, or the owner or lessee of a premises to permit such premises to be used for the purpose of
holding a public dance on an unlimited number of occasions during a calendar year.
(C) Fees.
(1) Single dance permit. The fee for issuance of a single dance permit shall be as established by
the Council from time to time. (See Appendix A).
(2) Annual dance permit. The fee for issuance of an annual dance permit shall be as established by the
Council from time to time. (See Appendix A). Provided that, if an annual permit is first obtained after
January 31 of any calendar year, the annual fee shall be reduced on a monthly pro rata basis for the balance
of the calendar year.
1
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
Chapter
130. GENERAL OFFENSES
131. SOCIAL HOST ORDINANCE
Olivia - General Offenses
2
3
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
General Provisions
130.01 Curfew for minors
130.02 Fireworks
130.03 Damage to public property
130.04 Breeding of animals
130.05 Breach of peace
130.07 Abuse of animals
130.08 Obstructing traffic
130.09 Injury to survey monuments
130.10 Disorderly conduct
130.11 Trespassing
Firearms and Other Dangerous Weapons
130.25 Unlawful discharge
130.26 Concealed weapons
130.27 Silencers
130.28 Prohibited weapons
130.29 Minors
130.30 Exceptions
Hunting
130.40 Hunting by bow and arrow
Obstruction of and Fleeing a Police Officer
130.50 Definitions
130.51 Offenses
130.99 Penalty
Cross-reference:
Health and Safety; Nuisances, see Ch. 92
Police Department, see '' 32.35 et seq.
4
Traffic Code, see Title VII
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 130.01 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
(A) Purpose. The curfew for minors established by this section is maintained for four primary
reasons:
(1) To protect the public from illegal acts of minors committed during the curfew hours;
(2) To protect minors from improper influences that prevail during the curfew hours, including
involvement with gangs;
(3) To protect minors from criminal activity that occurs during the curfew hours; and
(4) To help parents control their minor children.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
EMERGENCY ERRAND. A task that if not completed promptly threatens the health, safety, or
comfort of the minor or a member of the minor's household. The term shall include, but shall not be
limited to, seeking urgent medical treatment, seeking urgent assistance from law enforcement or fire
department personnel, and seeking shelter from the elements or urgent assistance from a utility company
due to a natural or human-made calamity.
OFFICIAL CITY TIME. The time of day as determined by reference to the master clock used
by the Police Department.
PLACES OF AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAINMENT OR REFRESHMENT. Those places that
include, but are not limited to, movie theaters, pinball arcades, shopping malls, nightclubs catering to
minors, restaurants, and pool halls.
PRIMARY CARE or PRIMARY CUSTODY. The person who is responsible for providing
food, clothing, shelter, and other basic necessities to the minor. The person providing primary care or
custody to the minor shall not be another minor.
SCHOOL ACTIVITY. An event which has been placed on a school calendar by public or
parochial school authorities as a school sanctioned event.
5
(C) Hours.
(1) Minors under the age of 16 years. No minor under the age of 16 years shall be in or upon
or loiter at any public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public
buildings; nor in or upon places of amusement, entertainment or refreshment; nor in or upon any vacant
lot, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the following day, official city time.
(2) Minors ages 16 or 17 years. No minor of the ages of 16, but under the age of 18 years,
shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places,
public buildings; nor in or upon places of amusement, entertainment or refreshment; nor in or upon any
vacant lot, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. the following day, official city time.
(D) Effect on control by adult responsible for minor. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
give a minor the right to stay out until the curfew hours designated in this section if otherwise directed by
a parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor; nor shall this
section be construed to diminish or impair the control of the adult person having the primary care or
custody of the minor.
(E) Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply in the following situations:
(1) To a minor accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or other adult person having the
primary care and custody of the minor;
(2) To a minor who is upon an emergency errand at the direction of his or her parent, guardian,
or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor;
(3) To a minor who is in any of the places described in this section if in connection with or as
required by an employer engaged in a lawful business, trade, profession, or occupation; or to a minor
traveling directly to or from the location of the business, trade, profession or occupation and the minor's
residence. Minors who fall within the scope of this exception shall carry written proof of employment
and proof of the hours the employer requires the minor's presence at work.
(4) To a minor who is participating in or traveling directly to or from an event which has been
officially designated as a school activity by public or parochial school authorities; or who is participating
in or traveling directly to or from an official activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a
civic organization, school, religious institution, or similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor
and with the permission of the minor's parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care
and custody of the minor.
(5) To a minor who is passing through the city in the course of interstate travel during the
hours of curfew.
(6) To a minor who is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the
Olivia - General Offenses
6
exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly, or freedom of religion.
(7) To minors on the sidewalk abutting his or her residence or abutting the residence of a nextdoor
neighbor if the neighbor does not complain to the city's designated law enforcement provider about
the minor's presence.
(8) To a minor who is married or has been married, or is otherwise legally emancipated.
(F) Duties of person legally responsible for minor. No parent, guardian, or other adult having the
primary care or custody of any minor shall permit any violation of the requirements of this section by the
minor.
(G) Duties of other persons. No person operating or in charge of any place of amusement,
entertainment, or refreshment shall permit any minor to enter or remain in his or her place of business
during the hours prohibited by this section unless the minor is accompanied by his or her parent,
guardian or other adult person having primary care or custody of the minor, or unless one of the
exceptions to this section applies.
(H) Defense. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that the owner, operator, or
employee of an establishment promptly notified the city's designated law enforcement provider that a
minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
(I) A law enforcement officer must look into whether a minor has an affirmative defense before
making an arrest.
(J) Curfew penalties.
(1) Minors. Any minor found to be in violation of this section may be adjudicated delinquent
and shall be subject to the dispositional alternatives set forth in M.S. Chapter 260B, as it may be
amended from time to time.
(2) Adults. Any adult person found to be in violation of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
7
' 130.02 FIREWORKS.
(A) The use, display, possession, discharge or sale of any fireworks not expressly permitted by
M.S. ' 624.20, subd. 1(c), as it may be amended from time to time, is strictly prohibited.
(B) All use, display or discharge of those non-explosive, non-aerial pyrotechnic entertainment
devices only containing the limited amounts of pyrotechnic chemical compositions described in and
permitted by M.S. ' 624.20, subd. 1(c), as it may be amended from time to time, hereinafter referred to
as Apermitted consumer fireworks,@ is strictly prohibited in:
(1) The area on, below, above or within or in close proximity to: recreational areas, roadways,
streets, highways, bicycle lanes, pedestrian paths, sidewalks, rights-of-way, lakes, rivers, waterways and
all other property owned or leased by the city, the county in which the city is located, the State of
Minnesota or the federal government and located in whole or in part within the city limits;
(2) Private property within the city limits that has conspicuously posted a written sign or notice
that no fireworks discharge is allowed;
(3) Within 300 feet of any consumer fireworks retail sales facility or storage area that has
posted a written sign or notice that no fireworks discharge is allowed; and
(4) Any property, area, or structure that, by its physical condition or the physical conditions in
which it is set, would constitute a fire or personal safety hazard.
(C) All other use, display or discharge of permitted consumer fireworks must be conducted in a
manner that minimizes the risk of fire or injury to other persons or property.
Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.03 DAMAGE TO PUBLIC PROPERTY.
Any person driving any vehicle, equipment, object or contrivance upon any street, road, highway or
structure shall be liable for all damages which the surface or structure thereof may sustain as a result of
any illegal operation, or driving or moving of such vehicle, equipment or object or contrivance; or as a
result of operating, driving or moving of such vehicle, equipment or object or contrivance; or as a result
of operating, driving or moving any vehicle, equipment, object or contrivance weighing in excess of the
maximum weight permitted by statute or this code. When such driver is not the owner of such vehicle,
equipment, object or contrivance, but is so operating, driving or moving the same with the express or
implied permission of the owner, then the owner and driver shall be jointly and severally liable for any
such damage. Any person who willfully acts or fails to exercise due care and by that act damages any
public property shall be liable for the amount thereof, which amount shall be collectible by action or as a
lien under M.S. ' 514.67, as it may be amended from time to time.
Olivia - General Offenses
8
' 130.04 BREEDING OF ANIMALS.
No person shall permit the copulation of horses or asses, or either with the steer or any bull with any
cow, within the limits of the City of Olivia, unless in some enclosed place out of public view.
(1957 Code, ' 510:06) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.05 BREACH OF PEACE.
No person shall make, aid, or assist in making any noise, riot, breach of the peace, use obscene,
abusive, or indecent language to another person or persons or language tending or having a tendency to
provoke a breach of the peace; or any other disorderly conduct whatever within the limits of the City of
Olivia.
(1957 Code, ' 510:07) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.07 ABUSE OF ANIMALS.
No person shall unnecessarily, cruelly, or wantonly beat, torture, mutilate, injure, overload, or
otherwise abuse any domestic or dumb animal within the limits of the City of Olivia.
(1957 Code, ' 510:13) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.08 OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC.
No person shall obstruct the streets or street crossings or the sidewalks within the City of Olivia, or
shall store or leave upon the sidewalk any kerosene, gasoline, or other inflammable substance.
(1957 Code, ' 510:18) Penalty, see ' 130.99
9
' 130.09 INJURY TO SURVEY MONUMENTS.
No person shall willfully or maliciously displace, remove, injure, or destroy any tree, rock, post,
marker, or other monument which has been erected or marked for the purpose of designating a point in
the boundary of the City of Olivia, or of any tract, block, or lot of land in the city, or any mark or
inscription thereon.
(1957 Code, ' 510:21) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.10 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
(A) Every person who shall do the following shall be guilty of the crime of disorderly conduct:
(1) Willfully disturb any assembly or meeting not unlawful in its character, or the peace and
quiet of any family or neighborhood;
(2) Willfully and lewdly expose his or her person or the private parts thereof, or procure
another to so expose himself or herself, or commit any open and gross lewdness or lascivious behavior,
or any act of public indecency;
(3) Strike or attempt to strike, or in any unlawful manner offer to do, or do, any bodily harm to
another person, or unlawfully make any attempt to apply any degree of force or violence to the person of
another; or in a violent, rude, angry, or insolent manner, touch or lay hands upon the person of another;
(4) In any manner willfully damage any building or part thereof, or throw any stone or other
missile at, or break any window therein, or aid, counsel, hire, or procure any person to do so;
(5) Willfully resist, delay, or obstruct a public officer or police officer discharging or
attempting to discharge his or her duty, and or any duty of his or her office;
(6) Directly or indirectly address any threat or intimidation to a police officer with intent to
induce him or her, contrary to his or her duty, to do or make, or to omit or delay any act, decision, or
determination; or resist arrest, or strike or attempt to strike, or in any unlawful manner offer to do or do
badly harm, or unlawfully make and attempt to apply any degree of force or violence, or in a violent,
rude, angry, or insolent manner, touch or lay hands upon any police officer, while the police officer is
performing the duties of his or her office;
(7) Without the consent of the owner, in case of private property, or public authority in the case
of public property, drive, lead, or ride, or cause to be driven, led, or ridden, any horse, or other animal,
without authority of law, into any private or publicly owned property or premises;
Olivia - General Offenses
10
(8) Use in reference to and in the presence of another, or in reference to or in the presence of
any member of the family of another, abusive or obscene language, intended, or naturally intending to
provoke an assault or any breach of the peace;
(9) During the hours of darkness, peek or attempt to peek in the window or windows of any
dwelling; and/or
(10) Unlawfully threaten, frighten, or molest any other person.
(1957 Code, ' 511:01)
(B) Disorderly conduct as herein defined is hereby prohibited, and anyone doing or committing any
of the above acts shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1957 Code, ' 511:03)
Penalty, see ' 130.99
§ 130.11. TRESPASSING
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to allow an owner of real property to which the public has
some implicit right of access to exclude a person from that property if the person has committed a crime
on the property or has violated the properly posted or otherwise disturbed the peace or provided rules of
conduct for the property.
(B) Definitions. For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
(1) Covered Premises. Any improved real property, or portion thereof, within the City of Olivia, to
which the public has an implicit right of access, including, but not limited to, places of worship,
shopping malls, retail sales facilities, hotels, motel, nursing homes, restaurants, multiple dwellings,
hospitals, medical and dental offices, clubs, lodges, office buildings, banks and financial institutions,
transit stations, athletic and recreational facilities, personal service establishments, theaters, and day care
facilities.
(2) Tenant. Any authorized occupant of a covered premises, or the agent thereof, but excluding an
occupant of a domestic use, such as a renter of lessee of a dwelling or apartment, resident in a nursing
home, or a hotel or motel guest.
(3) Property Manager. Any owner of a covered premises, or the agent of the owner or any tenant
who is authorized by the owner to exercise control over the covered premises, including its public
common areas.
(4) Public Common Areas. All areas of the covered premises, other than private common areas,
maintained for the common use of its tenants or of the general public incidental to normal and legitimate
activities upon the covered premises, including, but not limited to: the curtilage; parking lots and ramps;
private roadways, sidewalks, and walkways; recreational facilities; reception areas; rotundas; waiting
11
areas; hallways; restroom facilities; elevators; escalators; and staircases.
(5) Private Common Areas. Other common areas within the covered premises normally within the
exclusive control of a tenant, but subject to reasonable regulation by the property manager, including,
but not limited to, sales floors, store restroom facilities accessible to customers or clients, checkout
lanes, and customer service areas.
(6) Private Areas. Areas within the covered premises not normally accessible to members of the
public without explicit permission of the person in direct control of the area, including, but not limited
to, individual apartment units, employee rest areas and facilities, banquet halls, meeting rooms, and
private offices.
(C) Trespass Notice. A written notice that contains minimally the following information:
(1) Verbatim copies of Sections (F) and (G) of this Chapter.
(2) The name, and if known, the date of birth, and address of the person to whom the notice is
issued and the name of the person's custodial parent or guardian if the person is a juvenile.
(3) A description of the specific conduct that forms the basis for the issuance of the notice.
(4) A description of the specific covered premises or portion thereof to which the notice applies.
(5) The period during which the notice is in effect, including the date of its expiration.
(6) The name, title, address, and telephone number of a person with authority to modify, amend, or
rescind the notice.
(D) Issuance of Trespass Notice. A property manager or tenant may issue a trespass notice to a
person only if there is probable cause to believe the person has, no more than thirty (30) days before the
issuance of that notice:
(1) Committed an act prohibited by State statute or City ordinance while on the covered premises;
or
(2) Caused a disturbance or violated any rule of conduct for the covered premises that has been
conspicuously posted at all public entrances to the covered premises or that the property manager or
tenant has provided to the person in writing.
(E) Coverage of Trespass Notice.
(1) A property manager may issue a trespass notice as to the entire property under manager's
control, or limit the notice to specific public common areas, private common areas, and/or private areas
within the property manager's control. Such a trespass notice must state that the tenant or tenants of the
covered premises are precluded from inviting onto the covered premises any person to whom a trespass
notice has been issued under this Chapter.
(2) If issued by a tenant, the trespass notice is effective only as to those private common areas and
private areas over which the tenant has control.
(3) A notice broader in coverage than authorized by this Section shall not be invalid.
Olivia - General Offenses
12
(F) Prohibited Conduct.
(1) No person shall trespass in or upon any covered premises of another and, without claim of right,
refuse to depart therefrom on demand of the property manager, or a tenant authorized to exercise control
over the covered premises or portion involved.
(2) No person served with a trespass notice in conformity with this Chapter shall enter in or upon the
premises described therein during its effective period without the written permission of the notice issuer,
agent, or assign.
(3) No person shall enter any public facility, utility, or grounds thereto, or any covered premises or
portion thereof in violation of conspicuously posted signs prohibiting of restricting access thereto,
including, but not limited to, the following: " Trespassing", "Authorized Personnel Only", "Private",
"Employees Only", "Emergency Exit Only".
(G) Violations. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(H) Service. All trespass notices issued pursuant to this Chapter must be properly served upon the
person named therein as follows:
(1) Personal service documented by either a receipt signed by the person to whom it was issued or
an affidavit of the issuer; or
(2) By certified U.S. Mail, Return Receipt Requested; or
(3) If the person is arrested or detained by a police officer, the officer may personally serve the
notice on behalf of the property manager or tenant and document service in the officer's official police
report detailing the incident.
(I) Enforcement Period. No trespass notice shall be effective for more than one year from the date
of service.
(J) Severability. If any section or portion of any section of this Chapter is deemed invalid or
unconstitutional by a Court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not
affect the validity of other sections or portions of sections of this Chapter.
(Ord. 2019-03, passed 4-1-2019)
FIREARMS AND OTHER DANGEROUS WEAPONS
' 130.25 UNLAWFUL DISCHARGE.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any pistol, rifle, gun, or other firearm, or fire or
13
explosives, bows and arrows, or other weapon within or into the city limits except as permitted
otherwise. It shall further be unlawful to throw any deadly missile into or within any public or private
place where there is any person, livestock or property to be endangered, even if no injury actually
results.
' 130.26 CONCEALED WEAPONS.
(A) Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry concealed in any manner on his or her
person any weapon of the kind commonly known as a sling-shot, sand-club, metal knuckles, switchblade,
dagger, dirk, revolver, pistol, firearm or other dangerous weapon.
(B) Concealed or dangerous weapons. No person shall carry any concealed or dangerous weapon
within the limits of the City of Olivia. This section does not apply to sheriffs, constables, and police
officers while in discharge of their duty, or others authorized by law to so carry.
(1957 Code, ' 510:14) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.27 SILENCERS.
No person shall use, own or possess any firearm equipped so that a silencer may be attached to the
firearm. No person shall have in his or her possession any device designed to silence or muffle the
discharge of a firearm.
' 130.28 PROHIBITED WEAPONS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture or cause to be manufactured, sell, keep for sale,
offer or dispose of any instrument or weapon of the kind usually known as a sling-shot, sand club or
metal knuckles.
' 130.29 MINORS.
No minor age 14 or under shall handle, or have in his or her possession or under his or her control,
except while accompanied by or under the immediate charge of a parent or guardian, any firearm of any
kind for hunting or target practice or any other purpose. Any minor having attained the age of 15 shall
be the holder of a valid firearm safety permit. Anyone born on or after January 1, 1980, must have a
safety certificate, or equivalent, or other evidence of successfully completing a hunter safety course to
hunt or trap in the City.
Olivia - General Offenses
14
' 130.30 EXCEPTIONS.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to any of the armed forces of the United States of
America, or to any member thereof, while engaged in the performance of duty in compliance with any of
the articles of war of the United States, a statute of the United States, or any regulation, rule or order
duly promulgated and issued under authority of the United States; nor to the militia of the State of
Minnesota, or any member thereof, while in the performance of duty prescribed by law; nor to any
sheriff, police officer, constable, marshal, highway patrol officer or any other officer or individual
authorized by law to possess and carry firearms; nor to any gun club or shooting gallery of duly licensed
as such by the city nor to the holding of exhibitions of sportsmanship or to other contests involving the
use of firearms where the exhibitions or contests shall be held in and upon public grounds owned by the
city under the regulations, restrictions and safeguards as the city may provide.
HUNTING
' 130.40 HUNTING BY BOW AND ARROW.
The provisions of this chapter shall prohibit the use of any bow and arrow for archery except for
school or community education sponsors training.
OBSTRUCTION OF AND FLEEING A POLICE OFFICER
' 130.50 DEFINITIONS.
(A) The term PEACE OFFICER or PUBLIC OFFICIAL means any duly authorized individual
authorized by law or a department, agency, municipality to conduct or engage in investigations of or
prosecutions of the laws of United States, State of Minnesota, or the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Olivia.
(B) The term MISLEADING CONDUCT means:
(1) Knowingly making a false statement;
(2) Intentionally omitting information from a statement and thereby causing a portion of such
statement to be misleading, or intentionally concealing a material fact, and thereby creating a false
impression by such statement;
(3) With the intent to mislead, knowingly submitting or inviting reliance on a writing or
15
recording that is false, forged, altered, or otherwise lacing in authenticity;
(4) Knowingly using a trick, scheme, or device with intent to mislead.
' 130.51 OFFENSES.
(A) No person shall intentionally do an act which he or she should reasonably expect will obstruct or
interfere with, or induce another to obstruct or interfere with a peace officer or other public official in
discharging or attempting to discharge a duty of his or her office. For purposes of this section, the duties
of the public officer shall include, but not necessarily be limited to:
(1) Apprehending a criminal or suspected criminal;
(2) Serving legal process, executing or serving an arrest warrant or search warrant;
(3) Transferring a criminal or suspected criminal;
(4) Investigating a crime which has been committed or conduct which the police officer or
public official reasonably believes may constitute a crime or violation of the Olivia City Code or other
regulation; and,
(5) Directing vehicular or pedestrian traffic or controlling a crowd of people.
(B) No person shall flee from a police officer or police vehicle in disregard of any visible or audible
notice to halt given by or from such police officer or police vehicle when such person knows or
reasonably should know the same to be a police officer or police vehicle.
(C) No person shall physically resist arrest by a peace officer or aid another in physically resisting
an arrest by a peace officer, regardless of whether or not such arrest is lawful.
(D) No person shall resist, obstruct, interfere with, or induce another to resist, obstruct or interfere
with, a lawful citizen arrest.
(E) No person shall intentionally engage in misleading conduct directed at a police officer or public
official in the course of an investigation or the exercise of the police officer's or public official's official
duties.
' 130.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any provision of this chapter for which no penalty is set out, shall be subject to ' 10.99.
(B) Any persons convicted of violating '' 130.50 et seq. is guilty of an ordinance violation and
shall be punished by a fine of $300 together with the appropriate surcharge and library fee or other fine
as recommended by the City Council from time to time in adopting by resolution a recommended fine
schedule for single and multiple occurrence offenses of the Olivia City Code.
17
CHAPTER 131: SOCIAL HOST
131 Section 1 Title and Authority
131 Section 2 Purpose and Findings
131 Section 3 Definitions
131 Section 4 Prohibited Acts
131 Section 5 Exceptions
131 Section 6 Enforcement
131 Section 7 Severability
131 Section 8 Penalty
131 Section 9 Effective Date
Section 1. Title and Authority. The City of Olivia desires to protect the health, safety and
welfare of all persons living in and visiting the City. The use of alcohol by persons under the age of
twenty-one (21) is prohibited by State statute. This ordinance prohibits, and establishes penalties for
any person hosting an event or gathering where alcohol is present and being possessed or consumed by
persons less than twenty-one (21) years of age. This ordinance is enacted pursuant to Minn. Stat. §
412.221, subdivision 32.
Section 2. Purpose and Findings. The Olivia City Council intends to discourage underage
possession and consumption of alcohol, even if done within the confines of a private residence, and
intends to hold persons criminally responsible who host events or gatherings where persons under 21
years of age possess or consume alcohol regardless of whether the person hosting the event or gathering
supplied the alcohol. The Olivia City Council finds that:
(a) Prohibiting underage consumption acts to protect underage persons, as well as the general
public, from injuries related to alcohol consumption, such as alcohol overdose or alcohol-related
traffic collisions.
(b) Often, events or gatherings involving underage possession and consumption occur outside the
presence of parents. However, there are times when the parent(s) is/are present and, condone the
activity, and in some circumstances provide the alcohol.
(c) Even though giving or furnishing alcohol to an underage person is a crime, it is difficult to
prove, and an ordinance is necessary to help further combat underage consumption.
(d) A deterrent effect will be created by holding a person criminally responsible for hosting an
event or gathering where underage possession or consumption occurs.
Section 3. Definitions. For purposes of this ordinance, the following terms have the following
meanings:
(a) Alcohol. "alcohol" means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, whiskey,
rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits including dilutions and mixtures thereof from whatever
source or by whatever process produced.
(b) Alcoholic Beverage. "Alcoholic beverage" means alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every
liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains on-half of one percent or
more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed,
or combined with other substances.
(c) Event or Gathering. "Event or gathering" means any group of three or more persons who have
assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.
(d) Host. "Host" means to aid, conduct, allow, entertain, organize, supervise, control, or permit a
gathering or event, whether that host is present or not.
(e) Parent.” “Parent" means any person having legal custody of a juvenile:
(1) As natural, adoptive parent, or step-parent;
(2) As a legal guardian; or
(3) As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the court.
(f) Person. "Person" means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, corporation, or any
association of one or more individuals.
(g) Residence or Premises. "residence or premises" means any home, land, apartment,
condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting room, or any other
places of assembly, public or private, whether occupied as a dwelling or for any social function, and
whether owned, leased, or rented.
(h) Underage Person. "Underage person" is any individual under twenty-one (21) years of age.
Section 4. Prohibited Acts.
(a) It is unlawful for any person(s) to;
(1) Host or allow an event or gathering;
(2) at any residence, premises, or on any other private or public property;
(3) where alcohol or alcoholic beverages are present;
(4) when the person knows or reasonably should know that an underage person will or does
(a) consume any alcohol or alcoholic beverage; or
(b) possess any alcohol or alcoholic beverage with the intent to consume it; and
(5) the person fails to take reasonable steps to prevent possession or consumption by the underage
person(s).
(b) A person is criminally responsible for violating this Section of this ordinance if the person
intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels, or conspires with or otherwise procures another to commit
19
the prohibited act.
Section 5. Exceptions.
(a) This ordinance does not apply to conduct solely between an underage person and his or her parents
while present in the parent's household.
(b) This ordinance does not apply to legally protected religious observances.
(c) This ordinance does not apply to retail intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor licensees,
municipal liquor stores, or bottle club permit holders who are regulated by Minn. Stat. § 340A.503,
subd. 1(a)(1).
(d) This ordinance does not apply to situations where underage persons are lawfully in possession of
alcohol or alcoholic beverages during the course and scope of employment.
Section 6. Enforcement. This ordinance can be enforced by any MN licensed police officer.
Section 7. Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, word, or other portion of
this ordinance is for any reason, held to be unconstitutional or invalid, in whole, or in part, by any court
of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed severable, and such unconstitutionality or
invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this law, which remaining portions
shall continue to in full force and effect.
Section 8. Penalty. Violation of Section 4 of this ordinance is a misdemeanor and is punishable by a
maximum of 90 days jail and/or a $1,000 fine.
Section. 9. Effective Date. This ordinance shall be in full force and effective upon its publication.
(Ord. 295, passed 4-4-2011, Codified by Ordinance 2017-04, passed 9-18-2017)
1
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
150. BUILDING CODE AND PLUMBING CODE
151. SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
152. ZONING CODE
2
3
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING CODE AND PLUMBING CODE
Section
Building Code, General Provisions, and Rental Dwelling License Code
150.01 Minnesota State Building Code adopted
150.03 Permits and special requirements for moving buildings
150.09 Completion of Work
150.10 Rental Dwelling Licensing Code
Plumbing Code
150.15 Minnesota State Plumbing Code adopted
150.16 Plumber=s bond
150.17 Enforcement
150.18 Sewer and water regulations
150.19 Permits
150.20 Separate drainage on every building
150.22 Plumbing unsanitary
150.23 Inspection of plumbing
150.24 State laws
150.25 Special cases
Housing Maintenance Code
150.35 Title
150.36 Purpose
150.37 Discrimination and privacy
150.38 Definitions
150.39 Applicability
150.40 General responsibilities of owners
150.41 Smoke and carbon monoxide detection
150.42 Conditions of components or systems of existing residential structures
150.43 Conditions of residential housing other than components and systems
Violations
150.98 Violations
4
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 150.01 MINNESOTA STATE BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.
(A) Codes adopted by reference. The Minnesota State Building Code, as adopted by the
Commissioner of Administration pursuant to M.S. '' 326B.101 to 326B.151, as they may be amended
from time to time, including all of the amendments, rules, and regulations established, adopted, and
published from time to time by the Minnesota Commissioner of Administration, through the Building
Codes and Standards Division, is hereby adopted by reference with the exception of the optional
chapters, unless specifically adopted in this section. The Minnesota State Building Code is hereby
incorporated in this section as if fully set out herein.
(B) Application, administration, and enforcement. The application, administration, and enforcement
of the code shall be in accordance with Minnesota State Building Code. The code shall be enforced
within the extraterritorial limits permitted by M.S. ' 326B.121, subd. 2, as it may be amended from time
to time, when so established by this section. This code shall be enforced by the Minnesota Certified
Building Official designated by this municipality to administer the code, as it may be amended from time
to time.
(C) Permits and fees. The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as authorized in
M.S. ' 326B.121, as it may be amended from time to time. Permit fees shall be assessed for work
governed by this code in accordance with the fee schedule annually adopted by the municipality. In
addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits issued for work governed by this code in
accordance with M.S. ' 326B.148, as it may be amended from time to time.
(D) Violations. A violation of the building code is a misdemeanor.
(E) Building Code optional chapters. The Minnesota State Building Code, as it may be amended
from time to time, allows the municipality to adopt by reference and enforce certain optional chapters of
the most current edition of the Minnesota State Building Code. The following optional provisions
identified in the most current edition of the State Building Code are hereby adopted and incorporated as
part of the building code for this municipality:
(1) 2003 International Residential Building Code (for 1- and 2-family dwellings);
(2) International Building Code, 2003 Edition;
(3) International Fire Code, 2003 Edition;
(4) International Mechanical Code, 2003 Edition; and
(5) International Fuel Gas Code 2003 Edition.
5
(F) Effective date. This section shall become effective after passage and publication.
(Ord. 274, passed 5-22-2003) Penalty, see ' 10.99
§ 150.03 PERMITS AND SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR MOVING BUILDINGS.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
COMBINED MOVING PERMIT. A permit to move a building on both a street and a highway.
HIGHWAY. A public thoroughfare for vehicular traffic which is a state trunk highway, county
state-aid highway or county road.
HIGHWAY MOVING PERMIT. A permit to move a building on a highway for which a fee is
charged which does not include route approval, but does include regulation of activities which do not
involve the use of the highway; which activities include, but are not limited to, repairs or alterations to a
municipal utility required by reason of the movement.
MOVING PERMIT. A document allowing the use of a street or highway for the purpose of
moving a building.
STREET. A public thoroughfare for vehicular traffic which is not a state trunk highway, county
state-aid highway or county road.
STREET MOVING PERMIT. A permit to move a building on a street for which a fee is charged
which does include route approval, together with use of the street and activities including, but not limited
to, repairs or alterations to a municipal utility required by reason of the movement.
(B) Application. The application for a moving permit shall state the dimensions, weight and
approximate loaded height of the structure or building proposed to be moved, the places from which and
to which it is to be moved, the route to be followed, the dates and times of moving and parking, the
name and address of the mover, and the municipal utility and public property repairs or alterations that
will be required by reason of the movement. In the case of a street moving permit or combined moving
permit, the application shall also state the size and weight of the structure or building proposed to be
moved and the street alterations or repairs that will be required by reason of the movement. All
applications shall be referred to the Public Works Department. All applications for street and combined
moving permits shall also be referred to the Police Department and no such permits shall be issued until
route approval has been obtained from the Departments.
(C) Permit and fee. The moving permit shall state date or dates of moving, hours, routing, movement
and parking. Permits shall be issued only for moving buildings by building movers licensed by the state,
6
except that a permit may be issued to a person moving his or her own building, or a person moving a
building which does not exceed 12 feet in width, 25 feet in length or 16 feet in loaded height. Fees to be
charged shall be separate for each of the following: a moving permit fee to cover use of streets and route
approval; and a fee equal to the anticipated amount required to compensate the city for any municipal
utility and public property (other than streets) repairs or alterations occasioned by the movement. All
permit fees shall be paid in advance of issuance.
(D) Building permit and code compliance. Before any building is moved from one location to another
within the city, or from a point of origin without the city to a destination within the city, regardless of
the route of movement, it shall be inspected and a building permit shall have been issued for at least the
work necessary to bring it into full compliance with the State Building Code.
(E) Unlawful acts.
(1) It is unlawful for any person to move a building on any street without a moving permit from the
city.
(2) It is unlawful for any person to move a building on any highway without a highway moving
permit from the city.
(3) It is unlawful to move any building (including a manufactured home) if the point of origin or
destination (or both) is within the city, and regardless of the route of movement, without having paid in
full all real and personal property taxes, special assessments and municipal utility charges due on the
premises of origin and filing written proof of the payment with the city.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.09 COMPLETION OF WORK.
(A) Any person or entity constructing, altering, repairing, remodeling or adding to any structure,
including single-family, multiple-family dwellings or other structures located within the city limits and
areas subject to the provisions of this Code, including an attached or detached garage or accessory
structure, shall complete all work with respect to the same within 180 days after the date required for
completion of the work as authorized by the terms of the original building permit, in accordance with
Minnesota State Building Code, Rule 1300.0120 subp. 9-12, as it may be amended from time to time.
(1) Completion of work includes completing the structure and all interior and exterior finishes,
including, but not limited to, siding, windows, roofing, driveways, retaining walls, decks, patios,
interior finishes, to include plumbing, wiring and all related matters.
(2) The City Building Official may extend the time for completion upon written request by the
permitee establishing that circumstances beyond the control of the permitee prevented the completion of
the work for which the building permit was initially authorized, in accordance with Minnesota State
Building Code, Rule 1300.0120 subp. 9.
(3) In the event a building permit has initially been issued and expires or is revoked and the
structure remains in the same condition for a period beyond 90 days after the expiration or revocation of
the permit and the failure to obtain an extension, then in the event a complaint is filed, the structure may
be declared by the City Building Inspector to be a public nuisance and in addition to any and all other
7
remedies as may be provided by law, the structure may then be ordered removed or other actions taken.
(B) The continued violation of this provision shall constitute a separate offense for each and every day
that the violation shall continue. In addition to other remedies as may be provided by this Code and the
State Building Code for violation, the city shall not be precluded from other criminal, civil or injunctive
relief, to include enforcement of each and every day that a violation continues as a misdemeanor pursuant
to the terms of this Code.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.10 RENTAL DWELLING LICENSING CODE.
(A) Inspection and licensing of rental dwellings.
(1) Rental dwellings license. No person may operate, let or cause to be let, a rental dwelling unit
without first having obtained an operating license or temporary permit to do so from the city as
hereinafter provided.
(a) The owner of a rental dwelling unit must obtain a temporary permit if he, she or they have
not received an operating license. There is no fee necessary for a temporary permit. The City Building
Official may waive the need for an inspection at his or her discretion. A temporary permit is valid until
an operating license is obtained or for a period of time after its issuance as authorized in its issuance by
the City Building Official, whichever is earlier. In no case shall a temporary permit be issued for a
period longer than 24 months, subject, however, to the enforcement officer’s authority to extend the
permit expiration date in those cases as the enforcement officer/Building Official deems appropriate in
his or her sole discretion.
(b) Each operating license shall be valid for a period of five years (60 months) and shall expire at
the end of the five years (60 months).
(c) A license renewal application shall be filed at least 60 days prior to license expiration date,
unless the city has already renewed that license based upon a scheduled inspection conducted pursuant to
division (A)(3)(a) below.
(2) Permit and license exemption.
(a) The owner of a rental dwelling unit is exempted from the permitting and licensing
requirements of this section if the renter of the dwelling unit is related to the owner as a parent, child,
sibling, grandparent, grandchild, stepparent, stepchild, step-grandparent or step-grandchild and the
owner files an affidavit with the city, stating that the renter is one of these relations. The affidavit
required in this division (A)(2)(a) must also state the address of the dwelling and must be renewed at
least every five years (60 months).
(b) The owner must notify the city in writing within 30 days of this exemption being lost because
the renter is not related to the owner as one of the above referenced relations.
(3) Rental dwelling inspections. No operating license may be issued or renewed unless the city
determines, following an inspection conducted pursuant to this section, unless otherwise waived by the
city enforcement officer for good cause or as otherwise determined by the officer in his or her discretion,
that the rental dwelling unit and its premises conform to the Housing Maintenance Code, §§ 150.35-
150.43 (“HMC”). As more specifically provided below, the enforcement officer and his or her agents
may cause inspections, follow up inspections and re-inspections on rental dwelling units on all classes of
8
property within the city on a scheduled basis, and on rental dwelling units or owner occupied residential
units on all classes of property when reason exists to believe that a violation of an applicable subdivision
of the HMC exists, has been or is being committed.
(a) The city enforcement officer and his or her agents are authorized to contact owners, tenants
and managers of rental dwellings to schedule inspections of rental dwellings at reasonable times. They
are also authorized to conduct those inspections once scheduled. These scheduled inspections will be
conducted to determine whether the unit and its premises conform to the HMC so as to inform the city’s
decision of whether to issue an operating license. The authority to schedule and to conduct these
inspections is available even if the owner or owner’s agent holds a temporary permit, and without regard
to whether the owner or owner’s agent has filed an application for an operating license.
(b) In addition, except as herein provided above, upon receipt of a properly executed application
for an operating license, the enforcement officer shall cause an inspection to be made of the premises to
determine whether the structure is in compliance with the HMC. Inspections performed pursuant to the
authority in divisions (A)(3)(a) above or (A)(3)(c) below are hereinafter described as “Licensing
Inspections”.
(c) In addition, the city enforcement officer and his or her agents are authorized to conduct
inspections on rental dwelling units or owner-occupied residential units on all classes of property when
reason exists to believe that a violation of an applicable subdivision of the HMC exists, has been or is
being committed. A complaint or complaints from a tenant of a rental dwelling unit shall be an adequate
basis for a reinspection of a rental dwelling unit.
(d) To increase the awareness by owners of the likely timing of requested inspections and to
conserve public resources, the city enforcement officer may schedule and conduct inspections pursuant to
division (A)(3)(a) above according to the area of the city in which the unit is located, dividing the city
into zones and endeavoring to perform inspections pursuant to division (A)(3)(a) above in one zone
before beginning them in a different zone.
(e) If a structure or rental dwelling unit is not in compliance, one or more follow up inspections
or re-inspections may be conducted to verify that conditions and any corrections conform to the
provisions of the HMC.
(f) When the basis for the inspection pursuant to this section is information observed or obtained
during a licensing inspection, the reinspection or follow up inspection shall be conducted on a scheduled
basis.
(g) Owners of rental dwelling units shall report to the city the full names, telephone numbers and
addresses of the principal tenant of all rental dwelling units under their ownership or control, and update
information as needed to ensure that it is accurate and current.
(h) When scheduling licensing inspections pursuant to this section, the city enforcement officer or
his or her agents will seek the consent of the owner of the property (if not already received) to inspect
those areas outside of rental dwelling units that are not accessible to the general public (including any
internal rooms that are inaccessible to the public, such as storage or mechanical rooms) and to unrented
dwelling units, and the consent of the primary tenant of the rental dwelling unit (if not already received)
to inspect that unit. If the property owner demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city enforcement officer
or his or her agents that one or more tenants have consented in writing to the inspection of their units,
individual contacts by the city with those tenants may be deemed unnecessary.
(i) If the city is unsuccessful in securing consent for an inspection pursuant to this section, the
9
city shall seek permission from a judicial officer through an administrative warrant, for its enforcement
officer or his or her agents to conduct an inspection. Nothing in this Code shall limit or constrain the
authority of the judicial officer to condition or limit the scope of the administrative warrant.
(j) The scope of a licensing inspection shall be limited to what is necessary to determine in
accordance with this division (A)(3)(j), whether the unit and its premises conform to the HMC. This
shall not preclude the enforcement officer from relying upon observations from a licensing inspection in
seeking one or more of the remedies provided in division (B) below.
(k) A licensing inspection must be scheduled during ordinary business hours (or as otherwise
arranged with the owner or tenant). Owners and their agents and tenants may, at their option, request
that licensing inspections above take place only when they are present, so long as the request identifies at
least one date or time within the two weeks following the date of the request when the requesting party
agrees to be present.
(l) During inspections conducted pursuant to an administrative warrant, photographs and video
recordings may not be taken of areas inside the building, absent further court permission or consent of
the tenant (for areas inside the unit) or the landlord (for areas inside the building but outside a tenant’s
unit, and areas inside an unoccupied unit).
(m) Inspectors are not authorized to open containers, drawers or medicine cabinets, unless the
containers, drawers or medicine cabinets are opened with the consent of the tenant (for areas inside the
unit) or the landlord (for areas inside the building but outside a tenant’s unit, and areas inside an
unoccupied unit). For purposes of this division (A)(3)(m), a medicine cabinet is a covered cabinet located
in a dwelling unit’s bathroom.
(n) Inspectors are authorized to open cabinets (other than medicine cabinets) or closets only when
it is reasonably necessary in order to inspect for the existence of one or more conditions that violates the
HMC, or when the cabinets or closets are opened with the consent of the tenant (for areas inside the unit)
or the landlord (for areas inside the building but outside a tenant’s unit, and areas inside an unoccupied
unit).
(o) The information regarding the condition of the unit or its occupants that inspectors retain after
recording it in any inspection logs or forms shall be limited to descriptions of conditions constituting a
violation of the HMC. Inspectors may record a list of conditions that the landlord or tenant is encouraged
to repair or change but which do not constitute a violation of the HMC, if that list is not retained by the
inspector or city but is instead simply given to the landlord or tenant.
(p) The city may not upload to a GIS system any data regarding the results of inspections
conducted pursuant to this section.
(q) The city will not share information regarding the condition of the unit or its occupants
obtained through inspections conducted pursuant to this section with any current member of the City
Police Department or any law enforcement agency of another jurisdiction, or enable their discovery by
the person or agency, unless:
1. The disclosure is required by law;
2. The disclosure to the person or agency is needed to abate an active or inactive
methamphetamine lab, mistreatment of one or more minors in violation of M.S. §§ 609.377 or 609.378,
as they may be amended from time to time, mistreatment of one or more vulnerable adults in violation of
M.S. §§ 609.23 through 609.233, as they may be amended from time to time, or mistreatment of one or
more animals in violation of M.S. § 343.21, as it may be amended from time to time; or
10
3. If an owner or occupant of a unit has made an express or implied threat of bodily harm,
causing the inspector to be concerned for his or her welfare, and the disclosure is made for the purpose
of enabling one or more law enforcement officers to accompany the inspector in the completion of the
inspection or the full performance of his or her duties.
(4) Inspection not required. Inspection for the issuance or renewal of a license may be waived by
the city if the owner of a dwelling unit proves that within the previous 12 months the dwelling unit
passed an inspection required by the city, state or federal regulations that is at least as stringent as the
inspection required under this section. The city has sole discretion to determine when an inspection
program is at least as stringent as the inspection required under this section. Inspections conducted as the
result of a complaint made to the city may not be waived under this provision.
(5) Application contents. Owners of one or more rental dwelling units who have not yet received a
temporary permit or operating license are responsible for applying with the city for either a temporary
permit or an operating license. Before any portion of a property is used as a rental dwelling unit, the
owner must first secure either a temporary permit or an operating license. With either application, the
owner must supply:
(a) Name, address and telephone number of dwelling owner, owning partners if a partnership,
corporate officers if a corporation;
(b) Name, address and telephone number of designated resident agent, if any;
(c) Name, address and telephone number of vendor, if the dwelling is being sold through a
contract for deed;
(d) Legal address of the dwelling;
(e) Number of dwelling units within the dwelling;
(f) At least one emergency telephone number; and
(g) The names, telephone numbers and addresses of principal tenants, if any, are required in
division (A)(3) above.
(6) Following acquisition. A new owner must register a newly acquired rental residential property
within ten days after acquiring it, by applying for either a temporary license or an operating license. The
enforcement officer must be notified of any address change within ten days.
(7) Administrative charge. Failure to obtain either a temporary permit as required by this section,
or an operating license, will subject the owner of a dwelling unit to an administrative service charge up
to $250.
(8) License and inspection fees. The license and inspection fees are charged at the time of the
issuance of the respective license and are due within 30 days of the date of the invoice; in the cases of
newly constructed residential unlicensed rental dwelling units, license fees are due upon issuance of the
certificate of occupancy; in the cases of licensing periods of less than two years, license fees will be pro
rated monthly. A license fee paid later than ten working days after the prescribed date is subject to an
additional administrative service charge double the amount of the license. Once issued, a license is
nontransferable and the licensee is not entitled to a refund of any license fee upon revocation or
suspension, or transfer of ownership. License and inspection fees shall be as established by the City
Council by resolution as adopted and/or modified from time to time.
(9) Resident agent required. An operating license may not be issued or renewed for a nonresident
owner of rental dwelling units (one who does not reside within the city limits) unless the owner
designates in writing to the enforcement officer the name, address and telephone number of his or her
11
resident agent (one who does reside within a 50-mile radius of the city limits) who is responsible for
maintenance and upkeep and who is legally constituted and empowered to receive service of notice of
violation of the provisions of the city code and to receive orders or process pursuant to law. The
enforcement officer must be notified in writing of any change of resident agent or agent address or
telephone number change within ten days. This requirement may be waived if, in the enforcement
officer’s determination, the owner not living within the city limits is nonetheless sufficiently accessible
for the purposes of the HMC.
(10) Posting of permit or license. The current temporary permit or operating license of a multiple
dwelling unit, or a legible copy thereof, must be conspicuously posted in the main entry way or a
conspicuous exterior location of the respective multiple dwelling unit. In the case of one-family and twofamily
dwelling units, a legible copy of the current temporary permit or operating license must be given
to the renter of each unit.
(11) License not transferable. A temporary permit or operating license is not transferable to another
person or to another rental dwelling. Every person holding a temporary permit or operating license must
give notice in writing to the enforcement officer within 72 hours after having legally transferred or
otherwise disposed of the legal control of any permitted or licensed rental dwelling. The notice must
include the name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of the rental dwelling
or dwellings. The person succeeding to the ownership or control of the rental dwelling or dwellings must
obtain a temporary permit or operating license in order to continue operating the rental dwelling or
dwellings. An inspection is not required to obtain this temporary permit or operating license unless the
rental dwelling or dwellings have not been inspected within five years (60 months) of the transfer of
ownership or control.
(12) Violation. Any person that maintains a rental dwelling unit without having either a valid
temporary permit or a valid operating license, or permits new occupancy in violation of this subdivision,
is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction is subject to a fine and imprisonment as prescribed by
state law. In addition to, or in lieu of, charging a misdemeanor, the city may impose an administrative
fee in an amount set in the city fee schedule. An administrative fee may be appealed pursuant to division
(C) below. Upon the failure to appeal an administrative fee within the period established in division (C)
below, the city may post the dwelling unit as illegal for habitation. Thereafter, the dwelling unit may not
be occupied by anyone other than the primary homestead owner and that person’s immediate family until:
the administrative fee has been paid; and a rental license is obtained or the city is satisfied that the
dwelling unit will not be used as a rental dwelling unit. Each day of each violation constitutes a separate
offense.
(B) Administration and enforcement.
(1) Administration and enforcement. The enforcement officer and his or her agents administer and
enforce the provisions of the HMC. They may enforce the standards of the HMC through the licensing
and inspection programs set forth in division (A) above and, where appropriate, through the powers set
forth below.
(2) Authority. In the absence of a timely appeal under the HMC or any other applicable provision
of law, the enforcement officer is the final authority in the determination of a violation under the HMC.
(3) License suspension and revocation. A temporary permit or operating license is subject to
suspension or revocation by the City Council if the holder fails to operate or maintain permitted or
12
licensed rental dwellings and units therein consistent with the provisions of the city code and the laws of
the state. In the event that a permit or license is suspended or revoked by the City Council, or expires
without renewal, it is unlawful for the owner or his or her duly authorized agent to thereafter permit any
new occupancy of vacant or thereafter vacated rental dwelling units until a time as a valid license may be
obtained or restored by the City Council.
(4) Compliance order. Whenever an enforcement officer determines that any rental dwelling unit,
or the premises surrounding any of these, fails to meet the provisions of the HMC, the officer may issue
a compliance order setting forth the violations of the code and ordering the owner, occupant, operator or
agent to correct the violations. The compliance order must:
(a) Be in writing;
(b) Describe the location and nature of the violations of the HMC;
(c) Establish a reasonable time, not to exceed 90 days, for the correction of the violations.
1. When a violation of the HMC constitutes an imminent peril to life, health or property, an
immediate and exact time for the correction of the violation constitutes a “reasonable time” for
correction for purposes of this subchapter. When this is the case, no stay of proceedings in furtherance of
action will be granted on appeal.
2. A reasonable time may be longer than 90 days if correction is not possible because of
prevailing weather conditions or other mitigating circumstances as determined by the enforcement
officer;
(d) Include information regarding the owner’s right to appeal the order and the procedure to be
followed in filing such an appeal pursuant to division (C) below;
(e) State that in the event the violations are not corrected within the time set in the compliance
order, the license may be suspended or that the necessary work may be performed by the city at the
expense of the owner and that if the owner does not pay for the expense, the cost of the work will be
assessed against the property; and
(f) Be served upon the owner or his or her agent or the occupant, as the case may require. The
notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner or agent, or upon any such occupant, if a
copy thereof is:
1. Served personally;
2. Deposited in the U.S. Post Office addressed to the owner at his or her last known address
with postage prepaid; or
3. Upon failure to affect notice by personal service or by mail, posted at a conspicuous place in
or about the dwelling which is affected by the notice.
(5) Emergency cases. For purposes of division (B)(4)(c) above, situations which constitute an
imminent peril to life, health or property include, but are not limited to the following:
(a) Heating systems that are unsafe as defined in § 150.38, due to burned out or rusted out heat
exchanges (fire box); burned out or plugged flues; not being vented; being connected with unsafe gas
supplies; or being incapable of adequately heating the living space;
(b) Water heaters that are unsafe as defined in § 150.38, due to burned out or rusted out heat
exchanges (fire box); burned out, rusted out or plugged flues; lack of proper venting; being connected
with unsafe gas supplies; or lack of temperature and pressure relief valves;
(c) Electrical systems that are unsafe as defined in § 150.38, due to dangerous overloading;
damaged or deteriorated equipment; improperly tapped or spliced wiring; improper or overloaded fuses;
13
expose uninsulated wires; distribution systems of extension cords or other temporary methods;
ungrounded appliances in a hazardous condition;
(d) Plumbing systems that are unsanitary as defined in § 150.38, due to:
1. Leaking waste systems fixtures and traps;
2. Lack of a water closet;
3. Lack of washing and bathing facilities; and/or
4. Cross-connection of pure water supply with fixtures or sewage lines.
(e) Structural systems, walls, chimneys, ceilings, roofs, foundations and floor systems that are
unsafe as defined in § 150.38;
(f) Refuse, garbage, human waste, decaying vermin or other dead animals, animal waste, other
materials rendering it that are unsanitary as defined in § 150.38; and
(g) Infestation of rodents, insects and other vermin.
(6) Follow-up inspection. At the end of the period allowed for the correction of a violation
specified in the compliance order, the enforcement officer shall make, or attempt to make, a follow up
inspection of the premises to determine whether corrective actions have been sufficient to bring the
violation(s) into compliance.
(a) If the premises are in compliance with the requirements of this section at the time of the
follow up inspection, a license may be issued in accordance with the requirements of this section.
(b) If the enforcement officer determines that the violation(s) has not been corrected and the
rental unit(s) has not been vacated, the enforcement officer shall suspend any existing license. The
enforcement officer also may issue a citation or may file a formal complaint summoning the responsible
party into court. The citation shall reiterate the charge and the ordinance section(s) violated. The city
may also take action to correct violations under the provisions of division (B)(9) below.
(c) After a suspension, the property owner may pay a re-inspection fee and request a reinspection
and reinstatement of the license. If the enforcement officer determines that the violation(s) has
been corrected and the rental unit(s) and building comply with HMC, the license shall be reinstated. Fees
for a reinspection may apply as outlined in the city fee schedule.
(7) Execution of compliance orders by public authority. Upon the failure to comply with a
compliance order within the time set therein, the rental unit(s) not being vacated, and no appeal having
been taken, the criminal penalty established hereunder notwithstanding, the City Council may by
resolution direct the enforcement officer to remedy the deficiency (deficiencies) cited in the compliance
order. The cost of the remedy shall be a lien against the subject real estate and may be levied and
collected as a special assessment in the manner provided by M.S. Chapter 429, as it may be amended
from time to time. The action will not be taken, however, without a good faith effort on the part of the
city to provide the property owner with advance notice of its intention to proceed with repairs and
assessment of the costs of repairs to taxes.
(8) No warranty by city. By enacting and undertaking to enforce the HMC neither the city nor its
Council, agents or employees warrant or guarantee the safety, fitness or suitability of any dwelling in the
city. Owners or occupants should take whatever steps they deem appropriate to protect their interests,
health, safety and welfare. A warning in substantially the foregoing language shall be printed on the face
of the license.
14
(C) Appeals.
(1) Right of appeal. Any person aggrieved by a compliance order may appeal the compliance order
to the City Council. The appeals must be in writing, must specify the grounds for the appeal, must be
accompanied by a filing fee in cash or cashier’s check and must be filed with the City Clerk within ten
business days after service of the compliance order. If an appeal is not filed within the timelines and in
the manner specified herein, the enforcement officer’s decision shall be final. The filing fee is set by
Council resolution. The filing of an appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from, unless such a stay would cause imminent peril to life, health, property or public safety.
(2) City Council decision. Upon at least five business days’ notice to the appellant of the time and
place for hearing the appeal, and within 30 days after the appeal is filed, the City Council or the
individual or committee designated by the Council as the appeal body, must hold a hearing thereon, at
which the applicant may appear and present evidence as to why the compliance order, or any portion
thereof, should not be issued. If an individual or committee other than the City Council hears the appeal,
it shall make a recommendation to the City Council. The City Council may reverse, modify or affirm, in
whole or in part, the compliance order and shall order return of all or part of the filing fee if the appeal
is upheld. The City Council or appeal committee or officer may postpone a meeting and hold a hearing at
a later date, not to exceed 60 days after the appeal is filed, when it is necessary to do so.
Penalty, see § 10.99
15
PLUMBING
' 150.15 STATE PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED.
The Minnesota State Plumbing Code, as prescribed by the Plumbing Board of the Minnesota
Department of Health, pursuant to Minn. Stat. ' 326B.43, as it may be amended from time to time,
including all of the amendments, rules, and regulations established, adopted, and published from time to
time by the Minnesota Department of Health, is hereby adopted by reference with the exception of the
optional chapters, unless specifically adopted in this section. The Minnesota State Plumbing Code is
hereby incorporated in this section as if fully set out herein.
' 150.16 PLUMBER’S BOND
Before a permit shall be granted to any person, he or she shall provide proof of a bond as required by
Minn. Stat. section 326B.46.
' 150.17 ENFORCEMENT.
It shall be the duty of the City Plumbing Inspector designated by the Council to enforce the
provisions of '' 150.15 et seq. All plumbing work hereafter constructed shall be inspected, and if found
not to be in accordance with the code shall be corrected. If after written notice to the person installing
work requiring correction thereof the person neglects or refuses to conform to the order, the city or any
duly appointed inspector may remove the work and charge the cost thereof to the person installing the
same. Any person covering work without its being duly inspected or refusing to correct work when so
ordered by the city inspector shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1957 Code, ' 410:03) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 150.18 SEWER AND WATER REGULATIONS.
(A) No part of any plumbing or drainage system shall be installed, constructed, altered, or repaired
in any building or on any premises in the city except in conformity with the provisions of '' 150.15 et
seq. and every system shall be maintained in a sanitary condition.
(B) The installation of any plumbing or drainage system shall be in conformity also to the ordinance
governing the use and connections to the city sewers and to the rules and regulations of the water
commission.
(1957 Code, ' 410:04) Penalty, see ' 10.99
16
' 150.19 PERMITS.
(A) No work on any plumbing or drainage system shall be commenced unless a permit be first
obtained from the City Council.
(B) This provision shall not apply, however, to ordinary repairs to faucets and fixtures or to the
removal of obstructions therein which are usually considered as maintenance work, but shall apply to all
change in the location or renewal of fixtures.
(C) Nothing herein contained shall conflict with any city ordinance regarding house sewer
connections or rules of the water commission with respect to water services.
(D) Permits for water services must also be obtained from the City.
(1957 Code, ' 410:05) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 150.20 SEPARATE DRAINAGE ON EVERY BUILDING.
Every building shall be separately connected with the sewer where there is any the sewer in the
street adjoining the building. The plumbing and drainage system of any building shall be separate and
independent from that of any other building, except where there are 2 buildings on 1 lot.
(1957 Code, ' 410:07) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 150.22 PLUMBING UNSANITARY.
The City Council may, upon good and sufficient proof thereof, condemn the plumbing in any
building because of unsanitary conditions, in which case all the plumbing shall be removed or placed in
proper condition.
(1957 Code, ' 410:26) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 150.23 INSPECTION OF PLUMBING.
The City Council shall have the right to appoint competent inspectors and to have all plumbing work
inspected and tested by him or her before it may be put into service.
(1957 Code, ' 410:27)
17
' 150.24 STATE LAWS.
In all places of employment, theatres, assembly halls, school houses, and the like, the state laws or
regulations governing the installation of plumbing fixtures or devices shall be followed and the plans and
specifications for same shall be approved by the various state department officers.
(1957 Code, ' 410:28) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 150.25 SPECIAL CASES.
Where existing conditions make the adherence to these regulations impracticable, the matter shall be
brought before the City Council, who may allow the modifications thereof in any particular case as may
be deemed necessary and proper.
(1957 Code, ' 410:30)
18
HOUSING MAINTENANCE CODE
§ 150.35 TITLE.
This section may be known, cited and referred to as the “City of Olivia Housing Maintenance Code”
or “HMC”.
§ 150.36 PURPOSE.
The purpose of the HMC is to protect, preserve and promote the public health, safety and the general
welfare of the people of the city, to prevent housing conditions that adversely affect or are likely to
adversely affect the life, safety, general welfare and health, including the physical, mental and social well
being of persons occupying dwellings within the city, and to provide, to the extent permitted by state
law, for the enforcement of minimum standards for components or systems of residential structures; to
provide for the use and location and amount of space for human occupancy; and to preserve the value of
land and buildings throughout the city.
§ 150.37 DISCRIMINATION AND PRIVACY.
The HMC is to be enforced in a nondiscriminatory manner and exclusively for the purpose of
promoting public as opposed to private welfare. Except as may be specifically provided herein or
incidental to the enforcement hereof, the HMC is not intended to interfere with personal privacy or with
private legal rights and liabilities, including, without limitation, landlord/tenant and lessor/lessee
relationships, and in enacting and enforcing the HMC, the city neither expressly nor by implication
assumes any obligations or liabilities respecting the private rights or disputes, including those which
involve or arise out of the nonconformity of any premises in the city to the provisions of the HMC.
§ 150.38 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning. If a term used herein is not defined herein but is defined in an applicable
State Building Code, that term shall have the meaning as defined in that Code. Terms that are not defined
in this subchapter, or as otherwise referred to in other sections of this Code or not defined in an
applicable State Building Code section, shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context in
which they are used, with reference to the most recent unabridged Webster’s Dictionary of the English
Language.
ABANDONMENT. Unless otherwise defined more strictly within city code, abandonment means the
consequence of ceasing to assert or exercise an interest, right or title to that building or structure, with
the intent of never again resuming or reasserting it.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure not greater than 1,400 square feet in floor area and not
19
over two stories in height, the use of which is customarily accessory to and incidental to that of the
dwelling(s) and which is located on the same lot.
ADEQUATE. Sufficient.
BASEMENT. The portion of a building or structure located either totally or partially underground.
BUILDING. A constructed edifice designed to stand more or less permanently, covering a space of
land, designed for occupancy and intended for use in one place.
COMMON AREAS. Halls, corridors, passageways, utility rooms, recreational rooms and
extensively landscaped areas in or adjacent to a multiple dwelling, not under the exclusive control of one
person or family.
COMPONENT. A constituent part.
CONDOMINIUM. A form of individual ownership within a multi-family building which entails joint
responsibility for maintenance and repairs; in the CONDOMINIUM each apartment or townhouse is
owned outright by its occupant.
CORRECTED. Brought into conformance with all applicable standards of the HMC and all other
applicable standards of the city code.
COOPERATIVE HOUSING. A multi-family dwelling owned and maintained by the residents: the
entire structure and real property is under common ownership as contrasted to a condominium dwelling
where individual units are under separate individual occupant ownership.
DAMAGE. Injury or harm.
DEGRADATION. Impairment in respect to some physical property, including damage by weakening
or loss of some property, quality or capability.
DILAPIDATION. A condition of decay or partial ruin.
DISASTER. A sudden or great misfortune.
DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more
persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
EXCLUDE DAMPNESS. To shut out moisture.
EXIT. A continuous and unobstructed means of egress to the outdoors and includes intervening doors,
doorways, corridors, ramps, stairways, smoke-proof enclosures, horizontal exits, exit passageways, exit
20
courts and yards.
EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by eliminating
their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that serve as their food; by
poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods
approved by the designated city official, and in the absence of a specifically designated health officer.
FIRE HAZARD. A thing or condition that might operate against safety from fire, including a
possible source of peril, danger, duress or difficulty, or that tends to create or increase the possibility of
loss due to fire.
GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes, including those resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food, as well as otherwise defined within the city code.
HABITABLE ROOM. A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living,
sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, but excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries,
furnace rooms, pantries, utility rooms, foyers, corridors, stairways, closets, storage spaces, workshops,
hobby and recreation areas, and basements lacking required ventilation, required electrical outlets or
required exit facilities.
HAZARD. A thing or condition that might operate against safety, including a possible source of peril,
danger, duress or difficulty, or that tends to create or increase the possibility of loss.
HEALTH OFFICER. The legally designated health officer of the city, or his or her authorized
representative.
HOTEL or MOTEL. Except as otherwise defined within the city code, means a building or structure
or enclosure, or any part thereof, kept, used as, maintained as or advertised as, or held out to the public
to be an enclosure where sleeping accommodations are furnished to the public and furnishing
accommodations for periods of less than one week.
INADEQUATE. Not adequate.
INFESTATION. The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects, rodents or pests.
KITCHEN. A space used or intended to be used for food preparation, which contains a sink,
adequate space for installing cooking and refrigeration equipment, and space for the storage of cooking
utensils.
MAINTAINED. Preserved from failure or decline.
MAINTENANCE. Preservation from failure or decline.
21
NUISANCE.
(1) A public nuisance which may prove detrimental to children, whether in a building, on the
premises of a building or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes, but is not limited to, the abandonment
of any well, cistern, shaft, basement or excavation; the abandonment of any refrigerator or freezer in a
hazardous condition; an unlicensed or inoperable motor vehicle; or any lumber, garbage, rubbish or
debris which may become a hazard for inquisitive minors; or
(2) Overcrowding a room or portion of a dwelling with long term storage so as to prevent upkeep,
maintenance or regular housekeeping. A room may be considered “overcrowded” when storage covers
an excessive amount of the floor area of a room, constitutes a potential excessive fire load, prevents
access to windows or doors, prevents access to or obstructs mechanical systems or air movement,
effectively eliminates use and access to required electrical devices, impedes access and movement of
emergency personnel, blocks hallways or limits the operation of doors or provides potential pest
harborage.
OBSOLESCENCE. The process of becoming neglected or the condition of being nearly neglected or
worn out.
OCCUPANT. Any person, over one year of age, (including owner or operator) living, sleeping,
cooking or eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
OPERATOR or RESIDENT AGENT. The owner or owner’s agent who has charge, care, control or
management of a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let or offered for
occupancy.
OWNER. A person who alone, jointly or severally with others:
(1) Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual
possession thereof; or
(2) Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the
owner, or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the
owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions
of this subchapter, and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he or
she were the owner.
OWNER OCCUPIED DWELLING. A dwelling unit occupied by the property owner, including for
purposes of the HMC, a single-family dwelling or the discrete portion of a two-family or multi-family
dwelling where the owner resides in one unit.
PREMISES. Platted lot(s) or unplatted parcel(s) of land, or any portion thereof, either occupied or
unoccupied by any dwelling or non-dwelling structure, including the building, accessory structure or
other structure thereon.
PUBLIC AREAS. Those areas which are normally open to the general public or the occupants of
more than one dwelling unit of a multi-family dwelling.
22
RENTAL DWELLING or RENTAL DWELLING UNIT. Any dwelling unit not occupied by the
primary homestead owner of record. Such a unit may be a single-family dwelling, a separate and
independent housekeeping unit within a single-family dwelling, a group home, one unit of a two-family
dwelling or a portion of a multi-family dwelling, any of which are provided or available for actual or
potential occupancy whether occupied or vacant by lease, by use, by rent or for any other good and
valuable consideration, excluding the portion of a homestead property occupied by a qualified relative, or
residential property seasonally occupied by what is commonly referred to as a “house sitter” while the
owner of the property is residing elsewhere for a period not to exceed six months. Manufactured homes
that are occupied by the owner of the home do not constitute RENTAL DWELLING UNITS even
though the underlying lot may be leased by the owner occupant.
RODENT HARBORAGE. A place where rodents are living, nesting or seeking shelter, or likely to
live, nest or seek shelter.
RODENT-PROOF. A condition where a structure and all parts thereof are protected from rodent,
insect and vermin Infestation by eliminating ingress and egress openings such as cracks in walls and
holes in screens. For the purpose of the HMC, the term RODENT-PROOF shall be construed as though
it included “insect-proof’ and “vermin-proof”.
ROOMING UNIT. A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be
used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking and eating purposes.
RUBBISH. Non putrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes,
such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, grass and shrubbery clippings, wood, glass, brick, plaster, bedding,
crockery and similar materials.
SAFE. Secure from threat of danger, harm or loss, including, but not limited to, the threat of unsafe
conditions as defined below.
SAFETY. The condition of being safe.
SANITARY. Free from or effective in preventing or checking an agent (such as filth or infection)
injurious to health.
SUPPLIED. Paid for, furnished or provided, by or under the control of, the owner or operator.
SYSTEM. A group of devices or artificial objects or an organization forming a network especially for
distributing something or serving a common purpose.
UNSAFE. Not safe, and includes, but is not limited to, the following applications:
(1) When referring to a building or structure, one that is structurally unsafe or not provided with
adequate egress, that constitutes a fire hazard, or that is otherwise dangerous to human life;
23
(2) When referring to a use of a building or a structure, a use that constitutes a hazard to safety,
health or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard,
disaster, damage or abandonment; and
(3) When referring to parapet walls, cornices, spires, towers, tanks, statuary or other appendages
or structural members that are supported by, attached to or a part of a building, one that is in deteriorated
condition or otherwise unable to sustain the design loads that are specified in the Guidelines for
Rehabilitation of Existing Structures as modified by Minn. Rules Chapter 1300.
YARD. All ground, lawn, court, walk, driveway or other open space constituting part of the same
premises.
§ 150.39 APPLICABILITY.
(A) A building and its premises used in whole or in part as a residence, or as an accessory structure
thereof, except rest homes, convalescent homes, nursing homes, hotels and motels, must conform to the
requirements of this subchapter and all other applicable provisions of the city code.
(B) Licensing and inspections of rental dwellings and their premises are governed by § 150.10.
(C) Enforcement action, under the HMC, against owner occupied dwellings is limited to violations of
§ 150.43(B) through (F).
(D) This limit does not apply to rental dwellings, rented portions of dwellings, common areas or
areas that are under the exclusive control of a rental dwelling owner, such as mechanical rooms, storage
rooms or vacant rental units.
(E) These rental dwellings, portions of dwellings, common areas, areas under the exclusive control of
a rental dwelling owner and vacant rental dwelling units, shall comply with this section in its entirety.
(F) Condominium and cooperative housing public areas shall be subject to the requirements
applicable to rental dwellings if one or more dwellings in such a building is a rental dwelling.
(G) Except as otherwise provided in this subdivision, the HMC establishes minimum standards for
erected dwelling units, accessory structures and related premises, which may also be subject to other and
additional provisions of city code.
§ 150.40 GENERAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS.
The owner of a structure is responsible for ensuring that it meets the applicable provisions of the
HMC. The duty to comply with the HMC cannot be transferred to another person. A contract purporting
to transfer the duty of compliance with the HMC to another person does not relieve the owner, operator
24
or occupant of any duty imposed by the HMC.
§ 150.41 SMOKE AND CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTION.
(A) For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
(1) Those terms defined in M.S. § 299F.362(1), as it may be amended from time to time, shall also
carry those meanings when they appear below in smoke detector regulations.
(2) Those terms defined in M.S. § 299F.50, as it may be amended from time to time, shall also
carry those meanings when they appear below in carbon monoxide detector regulations.
(3) For purposes of this section only, the phrases SINGLE-FAMILY HOME and SINGLEFAMILY
DWELLING UNIT mean a dwelling unit occupied by a person living alone, or any of the
following groups living together as a single non-profit housekeeping unit and sharing common living,
sleeping, cooking and eating facilities:
(a) Any number of people related by blood, marriage, adoption, guardianship or other duly
authorized custodial relationship;
(b) Three unrelated people; or
(c) Two unrelated people and any children related to either of them.
(4) When inspecting for compliance with this section, city inspectors shall presume that any
dwelling with only one dwelling unit is a single-family home and a single-family dwelling unit for
purposes of this subdivision and will not inquire regarding the relationships between occupants, but this
presumption may be rebutted by information volunteered by an owner or occupant.
(B) In single-family homes or single-family dwellings.
(1) Single and multiple station smoke alarms shall be installed in the following locations:
(a) In each room used for sleeping purposes;
(b) On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of
bedrooms; and
(c) In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements, but not including crawl spaces and
uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door
between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent
lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full story below the upper level.
(2) Smoke detectors improperly located or mounted may be required to be relocated or remounted;
and
(3) The dwelling must have an approved and operational carbon monoxide alarm installed within
ten feet of each room lawfully used for sleeping purposes.
(C) In residential structures other than single-family homes:
(1) For every other dwelling unit within an apartment house or within a dwelling that is not a
single-family home:
(a) Each dwelling unit must be provided with a smoke detector meeting the requirements of the
State Fire Code, Minn. Rules Chapter 7511;
(b) Smoke detectors must be mounted in the location or locations set forth in division (B)(1)
above;
25
(c) When actuated, the detector must provide an alarm in the dwelling unit; and
(d) Where the occupant is not the owner of the dwelling unit, the owner is responsible for
maintenance of the smoke detectors. The occupant of a dwelling unit must inform the owner of the
dwelling unit of a non-functioning smoke detector within 24 hours of discovering that the smoke detector
in the dwelling unit is not functioning.
(2) The following regulations apply to multi-family dwellings:
(a) Subject to the exception in division (C)(2)(b) below, every dwelling unit in a multi-family
dwelling must satisfy at least one of these two standards:
1. It must have an approved and operational carbon monoxide alarm installed within ten feet of
each room lawfully used for sleeping purposes; or
2. It must have approved and operational carbon monoxide alarms installed between 15 and 25
feet of carbon monoxide producing central fixtures and equipment, provided there is a centralized alarm
system or other mechanism for responsible parties to hear the alarm at all times.
(b) An owner of a multi-family dwelling that contains minimal or no sources of carbon monoxide
may be exempted from the requirements of division (C)(2)(a) above, provided that the owner has
certified to the Commissioner of Public Safety that the multi-family dwelling poses no foreseeable carbon
monoxide risk to the health and safety of the dwelling units.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.42 CONDITIONS OF COMPONENTS OR SYSTEMS OF EXISTING RESIDENTIAL
STRUCTURES.
(A) Scope. This section shall govern the conditions of components and systems of existing residential
structures.
(B) Certified historic structures. In a certified historic structure as defined in Minn. Rules part
1311.0301, the requirements of this section are subject to modifications specifically set forth in Chapter 6
of the Guidelines for Rehabilitation of Existing Buildings, as modified by Minn. Rules Chapter 1311.
(C) Modifications. Where there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of
this section, the city may accept compliance alternatives or grant modifications for individual cases,
provided the city shall first find that a special individual reason makes the strict compliance impractical
and that the compliance alternative or modification is in conformance with the intent and purpose of this
subchapter and any and all other applicable code provisions and that the compliance alternative or
modification does not lessen health, life and the intent of any fire safety requirements or any degree of
structural integrity of the property. The details of any action granting modification or the acceptance of a
compliance alternative shall be recorded and entered in city files.
(D) Safe and sanitary condition required. All buildings and structures and all parts thereof shall be
maintained in a safe and sanitary condition.
(E) Additional requirements applicable to electrical components or systems.
26
(1) The electrical service, lines, switches, outlets, fixtures and fixture coverings, and supports in
every building or structure shall be in good repair.
(2) Broken, loose, frayed, inoperative, defective or missing portions of electrical components or
systems shall be repaired or replaced.
(3) All unsafe conditions shall be corrected.
(F) Additional requirements applicable to plumbing components or systems.
(1) Leaking drain or supply lines shall be repaired or replaced.
(2) All unsafe conditions shall be corrected.
(3) Any cross connections or siphonage between fixtures shall be corrected.
(G) Additional requirement applicable to mechanical systems. Mechanical systems shall have any
unsafe conditions corrected.
(H) Means of egress. The structure must meet those requirements of §§ 403.1 through 403.18 of
GREB as modified by Minn. Rules Chapter 1311 that, by their wording or phrasing, apply to existing
structures without regard to whether alteration, repair or other work is being performed on the structure.
(I) Boiler/central heating plant equipment rooms and storage rooms. In residential occupancies
containing more than two dwelling units (including apartment buildings):
(1) Rooms containing boilers or central heating plants, and storage rooms with floor area exceeding
100 square feet in size, shall be separated from the rest of the building by not less than a one hour
occupancy separation.
(a) When approved by a Building Official, existing wood lath and plaster in good condition or
two-inch (12.7-mm) gypsum wallboard may be accepted where one hour occupancy separations are
required.
(b) In a certified historic structure as defined in Minn. Rules part 1311.0301, where the existing
wall and ceiling finish is wood lath and plaster, one hour fire resistant construction is not required and
need not be provided.
(2) A separation need not be provided for the rooms with equipment serving only one dwelling
unit.
(J) Structural safety.
(1) The minimum design loads for the structure shall be the loads applicable at the time the building
was constructed, provided that no dangerous condition is created. Structural members that are found to
be unsound or dangerous shall comply with the applicable requirements of the State Building Code for
new construction.
(2) A building, structure or an individual structural member that has any of the conditions or
defects described below, as determined by a licensed design professional, shall be replaced or
strengthened when:
(a) The stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more
than one and one half the working stress or stresses allowed in the State Building Code for new buildings
of similar structure, purpose or location;
27
(b) Any portion of the building, structure or member has been damaged by fire, earthquake,
wind, flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that its structural strength or stability is materially
less than it was before the catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the State Building
Code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location;
(c) Any portion of the building, structure or member has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to
such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or
earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction;
(d) The building or structure, or any portion of it, is likely to partially or completely collapse
because of: dilapidation, deterioration or decay; faulty construction; the removal, movement or
instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting the building; the
deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or any other cause;
(e) The exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent
that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one third of the
base;
(f) The building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows 33% or more damage or
deterioration of its supporting member or members, or 50% damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting
members, enclosing or outside walls, or coverings; or
(g) Any building or structure, which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable
laws and ordinances, has in any non-supporting part, member or portion less than 50%, or in any
supporting part, member or portion less than 66% of the strength; fire-resisting qualities or
characteristics; or weather resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of newly
constructed building or like area, height and occupancy in the same location.
(K) Weather protection.
(1) Every building shall be weather protected to provide shelter for the occupants against the
elements and to exclude dampness.
(2) The roof of every building or structure shall provide weather protection for the building.
(3) All devices that were provided or are required to prevent ponding or flooding or to convey the
roof water shall be capable of fulfilling that purpose.
(4) All weather exposed surfaces of every existing building or structure shall provide weather
protection.
(L) Maintenance and degradation.
(1) All systems, devices or safeguards that were required by a State Building Code under which the
building was constructed shall be maintained in conformance with the requirements of that Code.
(2) Failure to correct degradation of any system, device or equipment that a State Building Code
required at the time of its construction is prohibited.
§ 150.43 CONDITIONS OF RESIDENTIAL HOUSING OTHER THAN COMPONENTS AND
SYSTEMS.
(A) Scope. This section shall govern the conditions in residential housing other than components and
28
systems of a structure.
(B) Accumulation of dirt, filth, rubbish or garbage. An owner, operator or occupant of a dwelling
unit may not allow the accumulation of dirt, filth, rubbish or garbage on the premises occupied or
controlled in a manner that could create a health hazard to the dwelling occupants or the general public.
(C) Rodent harborages in occupied areas.
(1) Joint responsibility. An owner, occupant or operator may not allow formation of rodent
harborages in or about the premises he or she occupies or controls.
(2) Occupant responsibility for extermination. The occupant of a dwelling containing a single
dwelling unit is responsible for the extermination of rodents, insects or vermin on the premises. Every
occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit is responsible for the
extermination whenever the dwelling unit is the only one infested.
(3) Owner responsibility for extermination. Whenever infestation is caused by the failure of the
owner to maintain a dwelling in a reasonable rodent-proof condition, extermination is also the
responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any
dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling units,
extermination thereof is also the responsibility of the owner.
(4) Standard. Where divisions (C)(2) or (C)(3) above give rise to a duty to undertake extermination,
it is a violation of this code if the inspection does not demonstrate that the extermination has been
undertaken at least to a degree that is proportionate to the need for it.
(D) Nuisance. An owner, operator or occupant of any dwelling unit may not allow the formation or
presence of any nuisance in or about the premises.
(E) Yard cover. Exposed areas surrounding (or within) a principal or accessory structure, including
street boulevards which are not devoted to parking, drives, sidewalks, patios or other such uses, must be
landscaped with grass, shrubs, trees or other ornamented landscape material. The landscaping shall be
maintained in good condition and free of noxious weeds.
(F) Snow, ice and storm water management.
(1) Property owners and occupants shall be responsible to abate the snow and ice from the public
sidewalk located on the city boulevard that abuts or fronts their property within 12 hours after the snow
or ice has ceased to be deposited.
(2) In no case may storm water be channeled into the sanitary sewer system. Storm water, ice or
snow may not be directed onto, or channeled across walkways or streets where it is likely to be a safety
hazard.
(G) Minimum temperature standards for rental properties. When the temperature outside the structure
is below 60°F, it is the responsibility of the owner that a minimum temperature of 68°F be maintained in
a dwelling unit at a point three feet above the floor and two feet from exterior walls in all habitable
rooms, unless the occupant of that unit chooses to maintain a lower temperature. The installation of one
or more portable space heaters shall not be used to achieve compliance with this section.
29
(H) Electrical cords in rental properties. Temporary wiring, extension cords or drop cords may not
be used as permanent wiring.
(I) Discontinuance of basic services or utilities in rental properties. An owner, operator or occupant
may not permit any service or utility needed for a furnace to provide heat to be shut off from or
discontinued for any occupied dwelling or dwelling unit let or occupied, except for the temporary
interruptions as may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in process, or during temporary
emergencies.
(J) Occupancy standards. The maximum permissible occupancy of a rental dwelling unit is
determined as follows.
(1) Minimum space. For the first two occupants, 220 square feet of habitable room floor space and
for every additional occupant thereof, at least 100 square feet of habitable room floor space.
(2) Maximum occupancy. The total number of occupants may not exceed two times the number of
habitable rooms, less kitchen, in the dwelling unit.
VIOLATIONS
' 150.98 VIOLATIONS.
Any person who shall, without a proper permit or willfully in violation of '' 150.15 et seq., shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
30
31
CHAPTER 151: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
151.001 Title
151.002 Purpose
151.003 Legal authority
151.004 Administration
151.005 Decisions
151.006 Land suitability
151.007 Definitions
151.008 Fees
151.009 Enforcement
151.010 Amendments
151.011 Validity; effective date
Procedure for Submission of Plats
151.025 Official submission date
151.026 Classification of subdivision
151.027 Sketch plan
151.028 Minor subdivisions; application
151.029 Preliminary plat
151.030 Final plat
151.031 Documentation requirements
Assurance for Completion and Maintenance of Improvements
151.045 Development agreement may be required
151.046 Improvements may be partial
151.047 Inspection of improvements
151.048 Maintenance of improvements
151.049 Deferral or waiver of required improvements
151.050 Off-tract improvements
Subdivision Regulations
32
Subdivision Design Standards
151.065 Generally
151.066 Street design
151.067 Intersections
151.068 Alleys
151.069 Easements and dedications
151.070 Blocks
151.071 Walkways
151.072 Lots
151.073 Conservation
Required Improvements
151.085 Minimum improvements
151.086 Financing of improvements
151.087 Monuments
151.088 Utility improvements
Off-Tract Improvements
151.100 Purpose
151.101 Definition; principles
151.102 Cost allocation
Dedications and Reservations
151.115 Dedication requirement
151.116 Dedication reservation allowance
Variances
151.130 Variance request
151.131 Conditions
151.132 Board of Adjustment
Subdivision Regulations
33
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 151.001 TITLE.
(A) This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the Subdivision Ordinance for the City of
Olivia, Renville County, Minnesota and its provisions shall apply to all lands to be subdivided within the
municipal limits as they exist on the date the municipality adopts this chapter, or within the limits as they
may be extended in the future.
(B) Hereafter, this chapter shall be referred to as the Subdivision Ordinance.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998)
' 151.002 PURPOSE.
(A) (1) Any person platting, replatting, or dividing property for purposes of transfer of title or
separate description shall do so under the provisions of this chapter.
(2) The Subdivision Ordinance sets forth the minimum requirements deemed necessary to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
(B) More specifically, the provisions of this chapter are designed to:
(1) Assure that, to the maximum extent possible, all lands will be developed for the best
possible use with adequate protection against becoming deteriorated or obsolete;
(2) Assure that effective protection is given to the natural resources of the community,
especially ground water and surface waters;
(3) Encourage well-planned subdivision through the establishment of adequate design standards;
(4) Discourage inferior developments that might adversely affect the local tax base;
(5) Create neighborhoods that will be of lasting credit to the community;
(6) Facilitate adequate provisions for transportation and other public facilities;
(7) Secure the rights of the public with respect to public lands and waters;
(8) Improve land records by the establishment of standards for surveys and plats;
(9) Safeguard the interests of the public, the homeowner, the subdivider, and units of local
Subdivision Regulations
34
government;
(10) Provide a common ground for understanding between developers and local units of
government;
(11) Prevent, where possible, excessive governmental operating and maintenance costs; and
(12) Assure the availability of utilities adjacent to planned development.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998)
' 151.003 LEGAL AUTHORITY.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to ' 462.358, Laws of Minnesota 1997, as it may be amended from
time to time.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998)
' 151.004 ADMINISTRATION.
The Subdivision Ordinance shall be administered by the City Council after review and
recommendation by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998)
' 151.005 DECISIONS.
Unless otherwise provided by statute or this chapter, all actions of the City Council and Planning
Commission pertaining to this chapter shall require the vote of a majority of the members of the entire
Council or Commission.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998)
' 151.006 LAND SUITABILITY.
No land shall be subdivided which is held unsuitable by the city for the proposed use because of
flooding, inadequate drainage, soil and rock formations with severe limitations for development, severe
erosion potential, unfavorable topography, inadequate water supply or sewage disposal capabilities, or
any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety, or welfare of future residents of the proposed
subdivision.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998)
Subdivision Regulations
35
' 151.007 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
APPLICANT. The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or its representative who shall have
express written authority to act on behalf of the owner and has executed an application form and
professional fee responsibility agreement with the city. Consent shall be required from the legal owner
of the premises.
ATTORNEY. The attorney employed by the city, unless otherwise stated.
BLOCK. Any combination of land ownership bounded by streets, roads, or highways or a
combination thereof or by a combination of streets, roads, or highways and public parks, cemeteries,
railroad rights-of-way, streams, lakes, or similar manmade or natural physical barriers.
BOND. Any form of a surety bond in an amount and form satisfactory to the governing body. All
bonds shall be approved by the governing body whenever a bond is required by these regulations.
BUILDABLE AREA. The part of the lot not included within the open areas required by the Zoning
Ordinance, or other official controls.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT. A public facility with a life expectancy of 3 or more years, to be
owned and operated by or on behalf of the local government.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM. A plan setting forth, by category of public facilities,
those capital improvements, and that portion of their costs which are attributable to serving new
development within designated service areas for the public facilities over a period of specified years
(from 10 to 20 years). CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM may refer either to the plan for a
particular service area or to the aggregation of capital improvements and the associated costs
programmed for all service areas for a particular category of public facilities.
CITY. The City of Olivia.
CITY ENGINEER. A professional engineer working for the city, unless otherwise stated.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. A comprehensive plan prepared by the city, including a compilation of
policy statement goals, standards, and maps indicating the general locations recommended for the various
functional classes of land use, places, and structures, and for the general physical development of the
city, including any unit or part of the plan separately adopted and any amendment to the plan or parts
thereof.
Subdivision Regulations
36
CONSTRUCTION PLAN. The maps or drawings accompanying a subdivision plat and showing the
specific location and design of improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the
requirements of the City Council as a condition of the approval of the plat.
CUL-DE-SAC (COURT). A short street having 1 end open to traffic and being permanently
terminated by a circular turn-around for vehicles.
DESIGN STANDARD. The specifications for the preparation of preliminary plans indicating
minimums and maximums in the dimensions, magnitude, and capacity in the features as the layout of
streets, lots, blocks, drainage, and required improvements.
DEVELOPER. The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or its representative who is
responsible for any undertaking that requires review and/or approval under these regulations.
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT.
(1) Agreement between the City Council and developer through which the City Council may
agree to vest development use or intensity or refrain from interfering with subsequent phases of
development through new legislation, in exchange for agreement to construct any and all improvements
to existing city standards, or a higher standard in some cases, abide by all conditions of the City Council,
perform all required tasks within the established time frame, warranty all improvements, and provide
security in an amount acceptable to the city to ensure performance of the agreement and all warranties.
(2) The agreement shall be recorded at the same time or prior to the final plat.
EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land by the public or any person
for any specific purpose or purposes.
ESCROW. A deposit of cash with the local government or escrow agent to secure the promise to
perform some act.
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN. The general development plan shall mean a map showing
property boundaries with a proposed street layout and desirable lot layouts.
GOVERNING BODY. A group of persons elected by voters of the municipality to govern the
public affairs thereof, the Olivia City Council.
LOT. A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended as a unit for transfer of ownership
or for development.
LOT OF RECORD. Any lot which is 1 unit of a plat heretofore duly approved and filed, or 1 unit
of an Auditor's Subdivision or a Registered Land Survey that has been recorded in the office of the
County Recorder for Renville County, Minnesota, prior to the effective date of this chapter.
Subdivision Regulations
37
METES AND BOUNDS DESCRIPTION. A description of real property which is not described by
reference to a lot or block shown on a map, but is described by starting at a known point and describing
the bearings and distances of the lines forming the boundaries of the property or delineating a fractional
portion of a section, lot, or area by described lines or portions thereof.
MONUMENT. Concrete and/or metal markers utilized to establish survey points and lot
boundaries.
MUNICIPALITY. The governmental unit or area described in and governed by the provisions of
this chapter, the City of Olivia.
OFFICIAL MAP. A map of the municipality and/or any portion thereof lying within the
incorporated limits, which shows the exact alignment, gradients, dimensions, and other pertinent data for
highways and major streets and including specific controls for setbacks from the right-of-way of
buildings or other physical structures or facilities.
OPEN SPACE. An area of land preserved from building development and reserved for the use of
general public or a homeowners association for the purpose of active and passive recreation and certain
necessary community facilities.
PARKS. Area of public land developed and maintained primarily as pleasurable landscaped areas
providing for both active and passive recreational pursuits, including tot-lots, playgrounds, neighborhood
parks, playfields, and special purpose areas.
PEDESTRIAN WAY. A right-of-way dedicated to public use, 10 feet or more in width, which cuts
across or into a block to facilitate pedestrian access to adjacent streets and properties.
PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission is a governmental agency appointed by the
City Council.
PLAT, FINAL. A drawing of map of a subdivision, meeting all the requirements of the city and in
the form as required by the county for purposes of recording.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY. The preliminary drawings described in this regulation, indicating the
proposed manner or layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning Commission and City
Council for approval.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL. The official action taken by a municipality on an application to
create a subdivision which established the rights and obligations set forth in M.S. Ch. 462, as it may be
amended from time to time, and the applicable subdivision regulation. In accordance with M.S. Ch.
462, as it may be amended from time to time, and unless otherwise specified in the applicable
Subdivision Regulations
38
subdivision, regulations, preliminary approval may be granted only following the review and approval of
a preliminary plat of other map or drawing establishing without limitation the number, layout, and
location of lots, tracts, blocks, and parcels to be created, location of streets, and lands to be dedicated for
public use.
PUBLIC HEARING. An adjudicatory proceeding held by the City Council, generally attended by
the Planning Commission, preceded by published notice and actual notice to certain persons and at which
certain persons, including the applicant, may call witnesses and introduce evidence for the purpose of
demonstrating that plat approval should or should not be granted. The hearing may be combined with
other adjudicatory or legislative hearings to address related issues such as a comprehensive plan
amendment, a zoning map or text amendment, or a variance.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. Any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, street, sanitary sewer, storm
sewer, water system, sidewalk, pedestrian way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement, or
other facility for which the city may ultimately assume ownership, responsibility for maintenance and
operation, or which may affect an improvement for which local government responsibility is established.
RESUBDIVISION. A change in a recorded subdivision if the change affects any street layout,
affects any area reserved for public use, or diminishes the size of any lot.
SERVICE AREA.
(1) The area for a particular category of public facilities within the jurisdiction of the local
government and within which fees for capital improvements may be collected for new development
occurring within such an area and within which fees so collected will be expended for those types of
improvements for that category of public facility identified in the public facility improvements program.
(2) SERVICE AREAS may be subdivided into subareas for purposes of assuring that fees
collected and expended therein reasonably benefit new development within the areas.
SKETCH PLAN. A sketch preparatory to the preliminary plat (or final plat in the case of minor
subdivisions) to enable the subdivider to save time and expense in reaching general agreement with the
Planning Commission as to the form of the plat and the objectives of these regulations.
STREETS AND ALLEYS.
(1) ALLEYS. Minor trafficways affording a secondary means of access to abutting properties
that are not intended for general traffic circulation.
(2) COLLECTOR STREETS. Streets which carry traffic from local streets to major streets and
highways, including the principal entrance streets of a residential subdivision and streets used for
circulation within the developments.
Subdivision Regulations
39
(3) HIGHWAYS. Routes carrying large volumes of relatively fast-moving traffic and are
designated as either county, county state aid, federal, or state highways.
(4) LOCAL STREETS. Streets that are used principally for access to abutting properties,
especially residential properties.
(5) MAJOR STREETS. Arterials carrying large volumes of local traffic between widely
separated areas of the community; typically a heavy traffic carrying capacity and may be designated as a
truck route by the city.
(6) RIGHT-OF WAY (ROW). A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street
roadway, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm
sewer main, shade trees, or some other public or utility use.
(7) ROADWAY. The portion of a street, cartway, or alley surfaced for vehicular travel.
(8) SERVICE ACCESS STREETS (SERVICE ROADS). Trafficways that are adjacent and
parallel to highways or major streets and provide access to abutting properties.
SUBDIVIDER. A person, persons, or corporation responsible for initiating a subdivision proposal
for themselves or others.
SUBDIVISION. The separation of an area, parcel, or tract of land under single ownership into 2 or
more parcels, tracts, lots, or long-term leasehold interests where the creation of the leasehold interest
necessitates the creation of streets, roads, or alleys, for residential, commercial, industrial, or the use of
any combination thereof, except the following separations:
(1) Where all the resulting parcels, tracts, lots, or interests will be 20 acres or larger in size and
500 feet in width for residential uses and 5 acres or larger in size for commercial and industrial uses;
(2) Creating cemetery lots; and
(3) Resulting from court orders, of the adjustment of a lot line by the relocation of a common
boundary.
VARIANCE. Any departure from the requirements of these regulations that is granted by the
appropriate governmental agency.
ZONING ORDINANCE. The Zoning Ordinance or resolution controlling the use of land as adopted
by the city.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998)
Subdivision Regulations
40
' 151.008 FEES.
(A) A filing fee payable to the City Planning and Zoning Administrator shall accompany the
application for final review by the City Council.
(B) The amounts of the filing fees shall be established by resolution of the City Council. Until all
fees have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998)
' 151.009 ENFORCEMENT.
(A) Misdemeanor. Violation of the provisions of this chapter or deliberate failure to comply with
any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each day that a violation exists or continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
(B) Compliance required. It shall be the duty of all developers, subdividers, architects, contractors,
subcontractors, and other persons responsible for constructing, altering, changing, or removing any
street or alley, park, monument, utility improvement, sanitary sewer, storm sewers and drainage
facilities, or any other improvement or alteration contemplated under this chapter, before beginning or
undertaking any such work, to see that the work does not conflict with and is not in violation of the final
subdivision plat and the terms of this chapter. Any developers, subdividers, architects, contractors,
subcontractors, or other persons doing or performing the work of construction, altering, repairing,
changing, or removing any street or alley, park, monument, utility improvement, sanitary sewer, storm
sewers and drainage facilities, or any other improvement or alteration contemplated under this chapter, in
violation of or in conflict with the terms of this chapter, shall be deemed guilty of a violation hereof and
shall be held accountable for the violation.
(C) Violations. Any construction, improvement, alteration, repair, or removal of any street and
alley, park, monument, utility improvement, sanitary sewer, storm sewers and drainage facility, or any
other improvement or alteration made or permitted in violation of this chapter is hereby declared
unlawful. In the event of violation or threatened violation of this chapter or other official control adopted
pursuant to M.S. ' 462.358, as it may be amended from time to time, Laws of Minnesota, 1997, in
addition to other remedies, the City Council or any member thereof may institute appropriate actions or
proceedings to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate the violation or threatened violations and it is the duty
of the City Attorney to institute the actions.
(D) Penalties. Any person, firm, agent, or corporation found guilty of violating any of the
provisions of this chapter upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment for a
misdemeanor as currently set by state statute, plus the costs of prosecution for each violation. Each day
that a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense. The imposition of any fine or
sentence shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the requirements of this chapter, and the
city may pursue by appropriate actions or proceedings, any or all additional remedies.
Subdivision Regulations
41
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 151.010 AMENDMENTS.
(A) The Planning Commission may, of its own motion or upon petition, cause to be prepared
amendments supplementing or changing the regulations herein established. All proposed amendments,
together with the recommendation of the Planning Commission, shall be submitted to the City Council
for adoption in accordance with established procedures.
(B) Procedures and rules for amending this chapter shall be the same as those outlined in the City
Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998)
' 151.011 VALIDITY; EFFECTIVE DATE.
(A) Validity. Whenever any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions that are more restrictive
than those imposed by provisions of existing laws or ordinances, the provisions of this chapter shall
govern.
(B) Effective date. This chapter became effective on 9-21-1998.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998)
PROCEDURE FOR SUBMISSION OF PLATS
' 151.025 OFFICIAL SUBMISSION DATE.
For the purpose of meeting the statutory timelines, the date on which the applicant has submitted a
complete application containing all information requirements of this chapter, has properly executed all
required application forms and a fee responsibility agreement, and any additional requests of the
Planning and Zoning Administrator, in addition to all appropriate fees having been paid, shall constitute
the official submission date of the plat on which the statutory period required for formal approval,
conditional approval, or disapproval shall commence to run.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998)
Subdivision Regulations
42
' 151.026 CLASSIFICATION OF SUBDIVISION.
Before any land is subdivided, the owner of the property proposed to be subdivided, or his or her
authorized agent, shall apply for and secure approval of the proposed subdivision in accordance with the
following procedures, based upon whether the proposal is classified a minor subdivision or a major
subdivision:
(A) Minor subdivision (see ' 151.028):
(1) Sketch plan; and
(2) Final plat.
(B) Major subdivision (all subdivision proposals not classified as minor subdivisions):
(1) Sketch plan;
(2) Preliminary plat; and
(3) Final plat.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 151.027 SKETCH PLAN.
(A) In order to insure that all applicants are informed of the procedural requirements and minimum
standards of this chapter and the requirements or limitations imposed by other city code provisions or
plans, and prior to the submission of a plat, all applicants shall submit a sketch plan to the Planning and
Zoning Administrator for review.
(B) Applicants seeking review of a sketch plan shall submit the items stipulated in ' 151.031. This
submission requirement is needed for the developer, Planning and Zoning Administrator, and other
participants, as needed, to review and discuss the development proposal in its formative stages. The
Planning and Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the development proposal is a major or
minor subdivision and shall provide the developer with a list of submission requirements for the
appropriate development type as well as the expected process flow and timetable.
(C) The applicant shall not be bound by any sketch plan for which review is requested, nor shall any
representatives of the city be bound by that review.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Subdivision Regulations
43
' 151.028 MINOR SUBDIVISIONS; APPLICATION.
(A) Minor subdivision defined:
(1) In the case of a request to divide a portion of a lot where the division is to permit the adding
of a parcel of land to an abutting lot so that no additional lots are created and both new lots conform to
zoning ordinance lot size standards;
(2) In the case of a request to combine 2 existing platted lots;
(3) In the case of a request to divide no more than 2 lots from a larger tract of land thereby
creating no more than 3 lots. To qualify, the parcel of land should not have been a part of a minor
subdivision within the last 5 years and all lots to be created have frontage on a public road; and
(4) In the case of a request to divide a base lot, which is a part of a recorded plat upon which
has been constructed a 2-family dwelling, townhouse, or quadraminium, where the division is to permit
individual private ownership of a single dwelling unit within the structure and the newly created property
lines will not cause any of the unit lots or structure to be in violation of this chapter or the zoning
ordinance.
(B) Content and data requirements for minor subdivisions:
(1) The requested minor division shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor in the form of
a certificate of survey;
(2) The data and supportive information to be submitted for the proposed subdivision is
specified in ' 151.031. Exceptions, stipulated in writing, may be granted by the Planning and Zoning
Administrator; and
(3) The minor subdivision shall conform to all design standards as stipulated in this chapter.
Any proposed deviation from the standards requires the processing of a variance request.
(C) Processing:
(1) If the subdivision application involves property which meets the definition specified in
division (A) above, the City Planning and Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to approve the
subdivision, provided that it complies with applicable provisions of this chapter; and
(2) In the case of applications involving property not previously platted, applicable processing
provisions of ' 151.030 shall be followed.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Subdivision Regulations
44
' 151.029 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
(A) The application shall:
(1) Be filed with the Planning and Zoning Administrator at least 2 weeks prior to the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission;
(2) Be made on forms available at the city offices, submission of an executed fee responsibility
form, and accompanied by a fee, as established by the City Council. The City Treasurer shall deposit
any money received as fees hereunder to the credit of the general fund of the City of Olivia. No money
shall be refunded to the applicant. The fee is not intended to cover specialized engineering, planning, or
site analysis reviews. Fees for additional technical services such as these will become the responsibility
of the subdivider;
(3) An up-to-date certified abstract of title, a boundary survey and report showing title in the
applicant=s name, a copy of the most current recorded warranty deed for the parcel(s), or an option to
buy the property by the applicant as shown on the preliminary plat;
(4) The application shall include the items specified in ' 151.031 which constitutes a checklist
of items to be submitted for subdivision review; and
(5) Be accompanied by a minimum of 9 copies of the preliminary plat and 1 reduced copy of
the plat no larger than 11 inches by 17 inches.
(B) The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall submit copies of the preliminary plat to the
Planning Commission, and may, at their discretion, submit 1 copy to the City Engineer, 1 copy to the
City Attorney, and copies to major utilities, as needed. The remaining copies shall be placed in the
city's files.
(C) The Planning and Zoning Administrator may instruct the appropriate staff to prepare technical
reports and provide general assistance in preparing a recommendation on the action to the City Council.
This may include the City Engineer, City Building Official, the City Attorney, or others as deemed
needed.
(D) (1) Upon receipt of the completed application as outlined above, the City Planning and Zoning
Administrator shall set a public hearing for public review of the preliminary plat. The hearing shall be
held within 30 days of the official submission date of the application. The applicant and/or his or her
representative shall appear at the public hearing before the City Council in order to answer questions
concerning the proposal.
Subdivision Regulations
45
(2) Notice of the public hearing may consist of a legal property description, shall contain a
description of the request, and shall be advertised in the official newspaper at least 10 days before the
day of the hearing. Property owners within 350 feet of the proposed subdivision shall also be notified
through the mail of the hearing. Failure of any property owner to receive the notice shall not invalidate
the public hearing.
(E) (1) No later than 15 days after the close of the public hearing described above, the Planning
Commission shall submit the plat to the City Council with its own recommendations, including any
conditions it recommends be placed upon the plat prior to approval. The City Council may approve,
approve with conditions, or disapprove the plat by a majority vote of its members regardless of the
recommendations made by the Planning Commission.
(2) If the Planning Commission has not acted upon the preliminary plat within 15 days
following the close of the public hearing on such and in compliance with this chapter, the Council may
act on the preliminary plat without the Planning Commission's recommendation, and may approve,
approve with conditions, or disapprove the plat by a majority vote of its members after the required
public hearing.
(F) The City Council shall take final action within 60 days of the application's official submission
date. The subdivision application shall be preliminarily approved or denied by the City Council. If the
City Council fails to approve or disapprove the preliminary plat in this review period, the application
shall be deemed preliminarily approved.
(G) At any time during this process, either the applicant or the city may request an extension of the
imposed time limits. Both the applicant and the city must agree to the time extension and must execute a
time extension form that will become a part of the subdivision file.
(H) If the City Council requires changes to the preliminary plat, and if the changes are determined to
be minor changes in the opinion of the City Council, then the changes may be noted on the plat and
approved as such.
(I) If the changes to be made are major changes in the opinion of the City Council, then a new
preliminary plat must be prepared and resubmitted, along with the payment of new fees, based upon the
procedures and time lines established in this section.
(J) No preliminary plats shall be approved unless the applicant proves by clear and convincing
evidence that:
(1) The application for a preliminary plat is not premature and conforms to the Olivia
Comprehensive Plan;
(2) The uses in the subdivision will be connected to and served by public utilities for the
provision of water supply and sewage collection and treatment facilities;
Subdivision Regulations
46
(3) The subdivider has the financial ability to complete the proposed subdivision in accordance
with all applicable laws and regulations;
(4) The proposed subdivision will not result in the scattered subdivision of land that leaves
undeveloped parcels of land lacking urban services between developed parcels; and
(5) The subdivider has taken every effort to mitigate the impact of the proposed subdivision on
public health, safety, and welfare.
(K) Requirements governing approval of preliminary plats:
(1) The Planning Commission may recommend and the City Council may require the changes
or revisions as deemed necessary for the health, safety, general welfare, and convenience of the city;
(2) The approval of a preliminary plat by the Planning Commission and the City Council is
tentative only, involving merely the general acceptability of the layout submitted; and
(3) Subsequent approval will be required of the proposals pertaining to water supply, storm
drainage, sewage and sewage disposal, gas and electric service, grading, gradients and roadway widths,
and the surfacing of streets.
(L) If the preliminary plat is approved, the approval shall not constitute final acceptance of the
layout. Subsequent approval will be required of the engineering proposals and other features and
requirements as specified by this chapter to be indicated on the final plat. The City Council may impose
the conditions and restrictions as it deems appropriate or require the revisions or modifications in the
preliminary plat or final plat as it deems necessary to protect the health, safety, comfort, general welfare,
and convenience of the city.
(M) If the preliminary plat is not approved by the City Council the reasons for the action shall be
recorded in the proceedings of the Council and shall be transmitted to the applicant.
(N) Any resubmission of a plat application that has been denied by the City Council shall be
prohibited for 1 year following denial unless the City Council votes to allow the resubmission either
unanimously or by super majority.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Subdivision Regulations
47
' 151.030 FINAL PLAT.
(A) After approval of the preliminary plat, the applicant shall prepare and submit a final plat to the
city for study and recommendation. This plat must be submitted within 1 year from approval of the
preliminary plat, or as specified in an approved development contract. If the final plat is not submitted
within this time period and the applicant has not requested a time extension, the approved preliminary
plat becomes null and void within 1 year of its approval date.
(B) In some development proposals the city may agree to review the preliminary and final plats
simultaneously.
(C) (1) The procedure for filing the final plat is that which is established for submission of the
preliminary plat under this section, except as specified below. Nine copies of the final plat shall be
provided to the city by the applicant, and 1 reduced copy no larger than 11 inches by 17 inches.
(2) All final plats shall comply with the provisions of Minnesota Statutes and the requirements
of this chapter. An applicant shall submit with the final plat a current abstract of title, along with any
unrecorded documents and an opinion of title.
(D) Review of a final plat:
(1) Upon receipt of a final plat, the Planning and Zoning Administrator shall refer 1 copy each
to the City Council, appropriate city staff, the County Surveyor, and to all applicable utility companies,
and 1 copy with abstract of title and opinion title to the City Attorney;
(2) The City Council may refer the final plat to the Planning Commission for recommendation
if they feel the proposed final plat is substantially different from the approved preliminary plat. The
Planning Commission shall submit a report thereon to the City Council within 30 days;
(3) The city staff receiving a copy of the final plat shall submit reports through the Planning
and Zoning Administrator to the City Council within 15 days of receiving the plat expressing their
recommendation on the final plat;
(4) The County Surveyor shall review the final plat and notify the subdivider's surveyor or
final plat preparer of corrections that are to be made to the final plat; and
(5) Prior to approval of a final plat, the applicant, shall have executed a development agreement
with the city controlling the installation of all required improvements, when determined as needed by
administration. The agreement will require all improvements to comply with approved engineering
standards and applicable regulations, and may set forth an amount and form of security required by the
city to insure proper installation and warranty of all improvements.
Subdivision Regulations
48
(E) (1) The City Council, after receiving the final plat and any recommendations from the Planning
Commission, shall either approve, approve with attached conditions, or disapprove the final plat within
60 days of its official submission date. This action taken by the City Council is dependent upon the final
plat's conformance with the preliminary plat, as approved by the City Council.
(2) If the final plat is not approved, the reasons for the action shall be recorded in the official
proceedings of the city and shall be transmitted to the applicant.
(F) At any time during this process, either the applicant or the city may request an extension of the
imposed time limits. Both the applicant and the city must agree to the time extension and must execute a
time extension form that will become a part of the subdivision file.
(G) The final plat, when approved, shall be submitted by the applicant to the Renville County
Recorder for recording. The development agreement, when required by administration, must be
recorded prior to or simultaneously with the plat. The final plat must be recorded within 180 days from
the date of approval or it will become null and void. If recording is not accomplished according to these
procedures, the city may require another review of the proposed subdivision according to these
regulations and state law. Prior to recording, the final plat must be signed by representative of the city
and the applicant must have paid all required fees. If a final plat is submitted for a portion of the area
encompassed in the preliminary plat and it is recorded within 180 days from the date of approval, the
remaining portion of the preliminary plat will remain valid for 2 years. That portion of a preliminary
plat for which a final plat is not submitted and recorded or for which a time extension form has not been
executed between the applicant and the city within this 2-year period shall become null and void.
(H) (1) Fees for final recording by the County shall be paid by the applicant.
(2) The applicant shall furnish the City Planning and Zoning Administrator with a reproducible
copy of the recorded plat, either chronoflex or its equivalent and 2 prints.
(3) The city may also request an electronic version of the plat in a format the city specifies.
(4) Failure to furnish the copies shall be grounds for a refusal to issue building permits for the
lots within a plat.
(I) Any resubmission of a plat application that has been denied by the City Council shall be
prohibited for 1 year following denial unless the City Council votes to allow the resubmission either
unanimously or by super majority.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998; Am. Ord. 261, passed 5-17-1999) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Subdivision Regulations
49
' 151.031 DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Plat information.
Information Description
Sketch
Plan
Preliminary
Plat
Final
Plat
Name, address of owner and/or applicant (application page)
X
X
X
Name, signature, license number, seal, and address of land
surveyor, engineer architect, or other person who is involved in
preparing the plat (application page)
X
X
Name of subdivision - which shall not duplicate the name of any
plat previously recorded in Renville County (on plat)
X
X
X
Title block, denoting type of application, county name, and
name of city (on plat)
X
X
X
A key map at specified scale showing location of tract with
reference to surrounding properties, streets, municipal
boundaries, school district boundaries, other public uses, or
other key geographic references within 500 feet of the
development property and the date of the survey (on plat)
X
X
X
Location of boundary lines in relation to a known section,
quarter section, or quarter-quarter section lines comprising a
legal description of the property (on plat)
X
X
X
North arrow and a minimum scale of 1 inch = 100 feet or as
agreed upon (on plat)
X
X
X
Proof of property title (attachment)
X
X
Title opinion and abstract (attachment)
X
Signature blocks for Mayor, Planning and Zoning
Administrator, and Municipal Engineer (on plat)
X
Certification blocks:
For registered land surveyor indicating that all the
monuments shown on the plat actually exist, and their
location, size, and material are correctly shown (signature
page on plat)
X
Notarized certification by owner, and by any mortgage
X
Subdivision Regulations
50
Information Description
Sketch
Plan
Preliminary
Plat
Final
Plat
holder by record, of the adoption of the plat and the
dedication of streets, easements, other rights-of-way, and
any lands for public use (signature page on plat)
For the Renville County Treasurer indicating that all taxes
and special assessments against the property have been paid
in full prior to recording of the plat (signature page on plat)
X
Approval and review blocks to be signed by the Planning
Commission Chairperson, the City Mayor, and the Planning
and Zoning Administrator (signature page on plat)
X
A statement certifying the environmental condition of the
site is suitable for the proposed use and that there are no
hazardous substances located on the site. The statement
may be required to be based upon an environmental
assessment of the site by a qualified environmental
engineering firm, which is acceptable to the city
(attachment)
X
X
Space for a certificate of review and approval to be signed
by the Planning Commission, such as: AThis plat of _____
was approved and accepted by the Planning Commission of
Olivia at a meeting held this day of _____, 20__.@ (on plat)
X
Space for a certificate or review and approval to be signed
by the City Council, such as: AThis plat of _____ was
approved and accepted by the City Council of the City of
Olivia at a regular meeting held this _____ day of _____,
20__.@ (on plat)
X
Boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or subdivided land
within 100 feet, identified by name and ownership, including all
continuous land owned or controlled by subdivider (attachment)
X
X
Boundary line survey, including measured distance and angles,
which shall close by latitude and departure with an error of
closure not exceeding 1 foot in 7,500 feet (on plat)
X
X
Acreage of tract to the nearest tenth of an acre (on plat)
X
X
Existing zoning classification for land in and abutting the
subdivision and a schedule of zoning district requirements
X
X
Subdivision Regulations
51
Information Description
Sketch
Plan
Preliminary
Plat
Final
Plat
including lot area, width, depth, yard setbacks, lot coverage
regulations, open space and parking requirements, other
information as needed (attachment)
Monumentation (on plat)
X
Plat shall be on 20 inches by 30 inches sheets or larger (plat
size)
X
X
Date of original and all revisions (on plat)
X
Location and dimensions of any existing or proposed streets (on
plat)
X
X
X
Dimensions, bearings, curve data, length of tangents, radii,
arcs, central angles for all centerlines and/or rights-of-way (on
plat)
X
Existing rail lines and/or rail rights-of-way (on plat)
X
X
X
Existing gas and oil pipelines (on plat)
X
X
Existing buildings and structures, size, location, setbacks, and
existing powerlines (on plat)
X
X
Easements, existing and proposed (on plat)
X
X
X
All proposed lot lines (on plat) and area of lots (preliminary
plat)
X
X
Development stages or staging plans (attachment)
X
List of required regulatory approvals or permits (attachment)
X
X
Payment of application fees (attachment)
X
X
X
Copies of restrictive covenants (attachment)
X
(B) Environmental information.
Information Description
Sketch
Plan
Preliminary
Plan
Final
Plan
All existing wetlands on and within 100 feet of the site (on plat)
X
Subdivision Regulations
52
Information Description
Sketch
Plan
Preliminary
Plan
Final
Plan
Two copies of a complete topographic map with contour
intervals not greater than 2 feet, superimposed on at least 1 print
of the preliminary plat that extends at least 100 feet beyond the
subject property. United States Geologic Survey datum shall be
used for all topographic mapping (on plat)
X
Complete drainage concept including proposed grading and
drainage of site (on plat)
X
The following information may be required to be submitted by
the Planning Commission: the boundary, limits, nature, and
extent of wooded areas, specimen trees, other significant
physical features, or other environmentally sensitive areas, on or
within 100 feet of the site (attachment or on plat as requested by
the PC)
X
(C) Improvements and construction information.
Information Description
Sketch
Plan
Preliminary
Plan
Final
Plat
Proposed street names (on plat)
X
X
New block and lot numbers (on plat)
X
X
Proposed utility infrastructure plans, including sanitary sewers,
water supply, storm water management, fire hydrants,
telephone, electric, natural gas, and cable TV (attachment)
X
X
Soil erosion and sediment control plan (attachment)
X
X
Road and paving cross-sections and profiles (attachment)
X
X
Sight triangles (attachment)
X
X
Site identification signs, traffic-control signs, and directional
signs (attachment)
X
X
Vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns (attachment)
X
X
Lighting plan (attachment)
X
X
Landscaping plan (attachment)
X
X
Subdivision Regulations
53
Information Description
Sketch
Plan
Preliminary
Plan
Final
Plat
Parking plan (attachment) X X
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998)
ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS
' 151.045 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT MAY BE REQUIRED.
(A) Prior to the submission of a preliminary plat, the administration shall inform the developer
whether an executed development agreement with the city will be required. The determination of this
requirement will be an administrative decision based upon the complexity of the development proposal
and the extent of the needed public improvements. When required and before a final plat is approved by
the Council, the owner and subdivider of the land covered by the plat shall execute and submit to the
Council a written development agreement, which shall be binding on their heirs or personal
representative of the property owners, that they will cause no private construction to be made on the plat
or file or cause to be filed any application for building permits for the construction until all required
improvements have been made or have been arranged for.
(B) The agreement shall provide that all of the required improvements will be made in accordance
with standards established by the City Engineer. This shall include provision for supervision of details of
construction by the City Engineer and shall grant to the City Engineer authority to coordinate the work
and improvements to be done under the contract by any subcontractor authorized to proceed thereunder
and with any other work being done or contracted by the city in the vicinity.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998; Am. Ord. 261, passed 5-17-1999)
Subdivision Regulations
54
' 151.046 IMPROVEMENTS MAY BE PARTIAL.
It is not the intent of this chapter to require the subdivider to develop the entire plat and make all
required improvements at 1 time, but no building permits shall be granted except on the lots having
access to streets on which the required improvements have been made.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998)
' 151.047 INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
(A) The City Council shall provide for inspection of required improvements during construction and
ensure their satisfactory completion.
(B) The applicant shall pay to the city an inspection fee based on the estimated cost of inspection.
Where the improvements are completed, prior to final plat approval, the subdivision plat shall not be
signed by the Mayor or City Planning and Zoning Administrator unless the inspection fee has been paid
at the time of the application, the City Engineer certifies the existing improvements conform to
applicable standards, and evidence of payment for the work that has been completed is presented in the
form as the city reasonably requires. These fees shall be due and payable upon demand of the city and
no building permits shall be issued until all fees are paid. If the City Engineer finds upon inspection that
any 1 or more of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the city's
construction standards and specifications, the applicant shall be responsible for properly completing the
improvements.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998)
' 151.048 MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS.
(A) The developer shall be required to maintain all public improvements on the individual
subdivided lots and provide for snow removal on streets and sidewalks until acceptance of the
improvements by the City Council.
(B) Following the acceptance of the dedication of any public improvement by the local government,
the city may, in its sole discretion, require the subdivider to maintain the improvement for a period of 1
year from the date of acceptance.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998)
' 151.049 DEFERRAL OR WAIVER OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
The City Council may defer or waive at the time of final approval, subject to appropriate conditions,
the provision of any or all public improvements as, in its judgment, are not requisite in the interests of
the public health, safety, and general welfare, or which are inappropriate because of the inadequacy of
Subdivision Regulations
55
or nonexistence of connecting facilities. Any determination to defer or waive the provision of any public
improvement must be made on the record and the reasons for the deferral or waiver also shall be
expressly made on the record.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998)
' 151.050 OFF-TRACT IMPROVEMENTS.
A developer's responsibility for contributing to off-tract improvements may be required. Refer to
'' 151.100 et seq. for the standards related to this requirement.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998)
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
' 151.065 GENERALLY.
(A) The subdivision design standards contained in this chapter are to assure that the style, character,
and form of new developments will conform to minimum requirements promoting the health, safety, and
general welfare of the public.
(B) In addition to these regulations and to insure that future developments are consistent with the
growth objectives and goals of the community, subdivisions shall conform to the comprehensive
development plan of the municipality, or any part thereof, the zoning ordinance, and any other applicable
ordinances of the municipality.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998)
' 151.066 STREET DESIGN.
(A) The street system of a proposed subdivision shall be designed to facilitate adequate traffic
circulation within the subdivision and from the subdivision to adjacent areas.
(B) Street arrangement, character, width, grade, location, sight distance, and surface material shall
conform to the specified standards below, to existing city street development standards, be related to
existing or planned streets, topography, convenience, and safety, their intended ultimate function, or as
specified in the development agreement.
(1) The arrangement of major streets in a subdivision shall provide for the continuation of
existing streets in adjacent areas; or conform to a plan approved by the Planning Commission where
topographic or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impractical.
Subdivision Regulations
56
(2) Collector streets shall be properly related to major streets and designed in a manner so as to
supplement the major street system, but not to serve in lieu thereof.
(3) Collector streets and local streets shall be required to provide either 70 feet or 80 feet of
right-of-way, both options providing 44 feet of roadway and either 13 feet or 18 feet on both sides of the
roadway for boulevard space, depending upon the right-of-way width selected.
(4) Local streets shall be designed to benefit from the topography, to discourage through
traffic, and to provide the minimum amount of streets necessary for safe access to adjacent properties.
The reasonable and intelligent use of curvilinear streets (street design in something other than a straight
line) is allowed where necessary.
(5) Where a subdivision abuts upon or contains an existing or proposed highway, major
thoroughfare, or railroad right-of-way, the Planning Commission may require reverse frontage lots with
appropriate screen plantings on the nonaccess lot boundaries. Also, it may require the provision of
suitable access roads parallel to and on either side of the highway, major thoroughfare or railroad
right-of-way providing access to adjacent properties and affording separation of through and local traffic.
(6) Streets designed and laid out so as to have 1 end permanently closed shall not exceed 600
feet in length, except where the Planning Commission has approved additional length due to property
limitations or large lot size.
(7) Turnarounds (cul-de-sacs) shall be provided at the permanently closed end of all streets and
shall have a minimum right-of-way radius of 60 feet. The Planning Commission may approve a AT@ type
turn around when unusual circumstances make a cul-de-sac inappropriate.
(8) When service roads are required, they shall be provided with a minimum of 24 feet of
roadway width.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 151.067 INTERSECTIONS.
(A) All streets shall intersect at right angles or as close thereto as possible. No street shall intersect
another at an angle of less than 70 degrees. More than 2 streets intersecting at the same location shall be
prohibited. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet shall be avoided.
(B) When the Planning Commission or City Council finds it necessary for reasons of safety and the
protection of property, property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a radius of from 10 to
15 feet, or as specified by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Subdivision Regulations
57
' 151.068 ALLEYS.
(A) Alleys may be required in commercial and industrial districts where the needs for loading and
unloading space cannot be met any other way.
(B) The City Council may waive this requirement where the commercial or industrial district is
designed as a comprehensive unit and adequate provisions for service access, off-street-loading and
unloading areas, and parking space is a part of the overall development plan.
(1) (a) Dead-end alleys are prohibited except where natural or other features makes it
impossible to continue them.
(b) Where dead-end alleys are unavoidable, they shall be provided with adequate
turnaround facilities at the dead-end as determined by the City Council.
(2) Alleys shall be required to provide 20 feet of easement and/or roadway.
(3) Alleys shall not be required in 1- and 2-family residential areas unless a secondary means of
access to certain property is necessary due to topography or other exceptional circumstances.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 151.069 EASEMENTS AND DEDICATIONS.
(A) Easements for public utilities shall be required.
(B) Except when topographic conditions or other exceptional circumstances make it impossible, the
easements shall be provided along the rear and side lot lines and shall be 20 feet in width with 10 feet of
the easement on each adjacent property being subdivided, or as determined by the City Engineer.
(1) (a) Where a water course, drainage way channel, or stream traverse a subdivision, there
shall be provided a storm water easement for drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the
lines of the water course.
(b) If it is deemed advisable by the Planning Commission, such water course or drainage
way may be re-established to conform with the proposed street pattern, in which case suitable storm
drainage facilities shall be installed as directed by the city.
(2) Upon consideration of the particular type of development proposed in the subdivision, and
especially in large scale neighborhood unit developments, the City Council may require the dedication or
reservation of areas or sites suitable to the needs created by the development for schools, parks, and
other neighborhood purposes.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Subdivision Regulations
58
' 151.070 BLOCKS.
The length, width, and shape of blocks shall be determined with due regard to the following:
(A) The provision of adequate building sites available to the particular needs of the type of use
contemplated;
(B) Zoning requirements as to lot size and dimensions;
(C) Needs for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of traffic; and
(D) Limitations and opportunities afforded by topography and other natural features.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998)
' 151.071 WALKWAYS.
Pedestrian walkways not less than 10 feet wide shall be required where deemed essential to provide
circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, and other community
facilities.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 151.072 LOTS.
The size, width, shape, and orientation of lots and the building setback line shall be appropriate for
the type of development and use contemplated.
(A) Reserve strips controlling access to interior or adjacent property will not be allowed by private
ownership.
(B) Parcel remnants smaller in area than allowed by zoning are not allowed and must be made part
of another lot.
(C) Lot dimensions shall conform to the Zoning Ordinance.
(D) Side lot lines shall be as near to right angles or radial to street lines as possible.
(E) Every lot shall front on a public street, thus providing access for fire protection, utilities, and
other necessary services.
Subdivision Regulations
59
(F) (1) Lots shall not be so excessive in depth that they block desirable access to adjacent property.
(2) The City Council may require dedication of land for future streets in excessively deep lots.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 151.073 CONSERVATION.
Efforts shall be made to conserve natural resources and advantageously utilize all natural features
and vegetation on the property to minimize soil erosion. Consideration will be given to eliminate any
form of underground or surface water pollution.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998) Penalty, see ' 10.99
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
' 151.085 MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS.
As a minimum, the following improvements shall be provided for all new subdivisions in accordance
with the current city design standards as determined by the City Engineer or as specified in the
development agreement:
(A) Sanitary sewer and appurtenances including sewer service connections to the property line;
(B) Water mains and appurtenances, including hydrants and valves, and water service connections to
the property line;
(C) Street grading the full width of the right-of-way, and the installation of a MnDOT Class 5 gravel
driving surface to a thickness and width determined by the city; and
(D) A temporary turnaround where a street terminates at the edge of a plat and future extension is
planned. The temporary turnaround must be constructed to the standard referred to in division (C)
above, and easements shall be provided to meet the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 151.086 FINANCING OF IMPROVEMENTS.
Unless otherwise stipulated in the development agreement, all required improvements shall be paid
for on a cost share basis, 50% by the city and 50% to be assessed to the property owner(s).
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998)
Subdivision Regulations
60
' 151.087 MONUMENTS.
Durable iron monuments shall be placed at all block lot corners, all intermediate points on blocks
where there is a change in the direction of the block line, at points of curves in streets, at each angle and
curve point on the exterior boundary lines of the plat, and at the other points as may be required by the
City Council. All monuments shall be an iron rod, a minimum of 1/2 inch in diameter and 15 inches in
length, and set in concrete 6 inches to 8 inches in diameter.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 151.088 UTILITY IMPROVEMENTS.
All electric and gas distribution lines or piping, roadways, curbs, walks, and similar improvements
shall be constructed only on a street, alley, or other public way or easement which is designated on an
approved plat or which has otherwise been approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998) Penalty, see ' 10.99
OFF-TRACT IMPROVEMENTS
' 151.100 PURPOSE.
Sections 151.100 et seq. are intended to ensure a pro rata share allocation of the costs for off-tract
improvements necessitated by new development.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998)
' 151.101 DEFINITION; PRINCIPLES.
(A) As a condition of final subdivision approval, the City Council may require an applicant to pay a
pro rata share of the cost of providing reasonable and necessary circulation improvements, water,
sewerage, or other improvements, including land and easements, located off-tract of the property limits
of the subdivision or development, but necessitated or required by the development.
(B) For the purpose of '' 151.100 et seq., the following definition(s) shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
NECESSARY. Necessary improvements are those clearly and substantially related to the
development in question.
Subdivision Regulations
61
(C) (1) The City Council shall provide in its resolution of approval the basis of the required
improvements.
(2) The proportionate or pro rata amount of the cost of the facilities within a related or common
area shall be based on the criteria in the following section.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998)
§ 151.102 COST ALLOCATION.
(A) Full allocation. In cases where off-tract improvements are necessitated by the proposed
development, and where no other property owner(s) receive(s) a special benefit thereby, the applicant
may be required at his or her sole expense and as a condition of approval, to provide and install the
improvements.
(B) Proportionate allocation. Where it is determined that properties outside the development
will also be benefited by the off-tract improvement, the following criteria shall be utilized in determining
the proportionate share of the cost of the improvements to the developer.
(1) For sanitary sewers. The applicant's proportionate share of distribution facilities
including the installation, relocation, or replacement of collector, trunk, and interceptor sewers, and
associated appurtenances, shall be computed as follows:
(a) The capacity and the design of the sanitary sewer system shall be based on
the standards specified by the City Engineer;
(b) The City Engineer shall provide the applicant with the existing and
reasonably anticipated peak hour flows as well as capacity limits of the affected sewer system; and
(c) If the existing system does not have adequate capacity to accommodate the
applicant's flow given existing and reasonably anticipated peak-hour flows, the pro rata share shall be
computed as follows:
Developer sCost
Total t of enl ement or improvement
Development generated gallons per day tobe
accompanied by theenl ement or immprovement
Capacity of enl ement or improvement gals per day
'
cos arg
arg
arg ( . )
=
Subdivision Regulations
62
(2) For water supplies. The applicant's proportionate share of water distribution
facilities including the installation, relocation, or replacement of water mains, hydrants, valves, and
associated appurtenances shall be computed as follows:
(a) The capacity and the design of the water supply system shall be based on
the standards specified by the City Engineer;
(b) The City Engineer shall provide the applicant with the existing and
reasonably anticipated capacity limits of the affected water supply system in terms of average demand,
peak demand, and fire demand; and
(c) If the existing system does not have adequate capacity as defined above to
accommodate the applicant's needs, the pro rata share shall be computed as follows:
Developer sCost
Total t of enl ement or improvement
Development generated gallons per day tobe
accompanied by theenl ement or improvement
Capacity of enl ement or improvement gals per day
'
cos arg
arg
arg ( . )
=
(3) For streets or roads. The applicant's proportionate share of street improvements,
alignment, channelization, barriers, new or improved traffic signalization, signs, curbs, sidewalks, trees,
utility improvements not covered elsewhere, the construction or reconstruction of new or existing streets,
and other associated street or traffic improvements shall be as follows:
(a) The City Engineer shall provide the applicant with the existing and
reasonably anticipated future peak-flows for the off-tract improvement; and
(b) If the existing system does not have adequate capacity as defined above, the
pro rata share shall be computed as follows:
Developer sCost
Total t of enl ement or improvement
Development peak hour traffictobe
accompanied by theenl ement or improvement
Capacity of enl ement or improvement peak hour traffic
'
cos arg
arg
arg ( )
=
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998)
Subdivision Regulations
63
DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS
' 151.115 DEDICATION REQUIREMENT.
Where deemed appropriate by the Planning Commission, open spaces suitably located and of
adequate size for parks, playgrounds, or other recreational activities for local or neighborhood use, shall
be provided for in the proposed subdivision. The city's dedication standard is hereby set as being 7% of
the tract proposed for development to be set aside for use as developed and/or undeveloped open space.
This amount of land is the city's best estimate of need for open space to accommodate the increased
usage of the space by the population of the proposed development. If the parcels are not dedicated to the
city, the Planning Commission may recommend they be reserved by covenant or deed restriction for the
common use of all property owners in the subdivision. If a cash contribution is to be used in lieu of land
dedication, the cash payment shall equal the value of the land dedication requirement as determined by a
certified appraiser who shall determine the current market value of the property with development
potential. The cost of the appraisal shall be borne by the developer. The cash contribution amount
specified above is the city's best estimate for undertaking needed improvements to its open space
facilities based upon the increased usage resulting from new development.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998)
' 151.116 DEDICATION RESERVATION ALLOWANCE.
When a park, school, or other public use site shown in the Comprehensive Development Plan of the
city lies wholly or partly within the boundaries of the proposed subdivision, and such a park, school, or
other public use site is not dedicated for public use to the city, the Planning Commission may
recommend that the area be reserved for acquisition by the city or school district for a period of 1 and
1/2 years from the date of recording of the subdivision.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998)
VARIANCES
' 151.130 VARIANCE REQUEST.
Where the Board of Adjustment finds that unnecessary difficulty may result from strict compliance
with the provisions of this chapter, it may vary the regulations to the extent that substantial justice may
be done and the public interest secured, provided that the variation may be granted without detriment to
the public interest and will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter.
Variances cannot be granted which relate to other ordinances.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998)
64
' 151.131 CONDITIONS.
In the granting of variances, the Board of Adjustment shall weigh the benefits or hardships against
the general standards that will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or
requirements so varied or modified.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998)
' 151.132 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
The City Council shall serve as the Olivia Board of Adjustment and shall act upon all questions as
they may arise in the administration of this chapter. The Board shall hear and decide appeals from and
review any order, requirement, decision, or determination made in the enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 256, passed 9-8-1998)
65
CHAPTER 152: ZONING CODE
Section
General Provisions
152.001 Title
152.002 Intent and purpose
152.003 Relation to city=s comprehensive plan
152.004 Standard, requirement
152.005 Conformity with this chapter
152.006 Building compliance
152.007 Reduction of yards or lots not permitted
152.008 Authority
152.009 Establishment of districts
152.010 Zoning map
152.011 District boundaries
152.012 Boundary interpretations
152.013 Property not included, annexations
152.014 Definitions
Non-Conformities
152.025 Nonconforming structures
152.026 Repairs and maintenance
152.027 Nonconforming use, land
152.028 Nonconforming use, change
152.029 Nonconforming use, discontinuance
152.030 Nonconforming use, zone change
General Regulations and Performance Standards
152.045 General regulations and performance standards
152.046 Accessory buildings and uses
152.047 Adjacent lots and lots of continuous frontage in single ownership
152.048 Lot area requirements
152.049 Use regulations
152.050 Building access
152.0501 Access Driveways
152.051 Building area
Zoning Code
66
152.052 Buildings under construction
152.053 Drainage
152.054 Dwelling unit restriction
152.055 Front yard exceptions
152.056 Greenbelts
152.057 Structures, not included in height of building
152.058 Lot, double frontage
152.059 Lot, corner
152.060 Lot of record
152.061 Maintenance
152.062 Setback measurements
152.0621 Property line location
152.063 Fences, hedges, shrubbery, walls and obstructions in all districts
152.064 Retaining walls
152.065 Sewer and water provisions
152.066 Storage standards
152.067 Traffic control
152.068 Building relocation
152.069 Interference with traffic signals
152.070 Dumping and disposal of excavated materials
152.071 Essential services
152.072 Telecommunication towers and antennae performance standards
152.073 Adult use business
Home Occupations
152.085 Intent and purpose
152.086 Standards
152.087 Enforcement procedures
152.088 Penalty
152.089 Bed and breakfast inns
Child Day Care Facilities
152.105 Intent
152.106 Family day care home and group family day care home
152.107 Child day care centers
152.108 Declaration of conditions
152.109 General provisions
152.110 Inspection
Zoning Code
67
Off-Street Parking and Loading
152.120 Off-street parking facilities
152.121 Off-street parking location
152.122 Off-street parking requirements
152.123 Loading space
Manufactured Homes/Mobile Home Parks
152.135 Park permit required
152.136 Procedure
152.137 Additional regulations
Signs
152.150 Purpose
152.151 Definitions of specific terms and phrases
152.152 General regulations
152.153 Zoning classifications
152.154 Construction and maintenance standards
152.155 Illegal signs
152.156 Sign administration and enforcement
152.157 Sign variances
152.158 Nonconforming signs
PUD Planned Unit Development Regulations
152.175 Purpose
152.176 Use regulations
152.177 Procedures, requirements, and standards
152.178 Approval and requirements prior to construction
Site Plan
152.190 Site plan required
152.191 Procedure
152.192 Performance
Administration, Permits and Fees
152.205 Zoning Administrator duties
152.206 Appeals
152.207 Fees
Zoning Code
68
Conditional Uses
152.220 Conditional uses
Variances
152.230 Purpose
152.231 Procedure
Changes and Amendments (Including Re-Zoning Requests)
152.245 Annual reviews
152.246 Amendment procedure
City Council
152.260 Powers and duties
152.261 Decisions
Board of Appeals
152.275 Establishment
152.276 Records
152.277 Powers and duties
City Planning Commission
152.290 Establishment
152.291 Meetings
152.292 Records
152.293 Powers and duties
AG - Agricultural District
152.305 Purpose
152.306 Permitted uses
152.307 Conditional uses
152.308 Bulk regulations
Zoning Code
69
R-1 Low Density Residential District
152.320 Purpose
152.321 Permitted uses
152.322 Conditional uses
152.323 Bulk regulations
R-2 High Density Residential District
152.335 Purpose
152.336 Permitted uses
152.337 Conditional uses
152.338 Bulk regulations
B-3 Central Business District
152.350 Purpose
152.351 Uses permitted
152.352 Commercial restrictions
152.353 Conditional uses
152.354 Building height
152.355 Lot area, frontage, lot coverage, yard size and loading space
B-1 Highway Business District
152.365 Purpose
152.366 Uses permitted
152.367 Conditional uses
152.368 Building height
152.369 Lot area and yard requirements
152.370 Lot coverage
I-1 Light Manufacturing/Industrial
152.380 Purpose
152.381 Permitted principal uses
152.382 Permitted accessory uses
152.383 Conditional uses
152.384 Light Manufacturing/Industrial District special requirements
152.385 Bulk regulations
Zoning Code
70
I-2 Heavy Manufacturing/Industrial
152.395 Purpose
152.396 Permitted principal uses
152.397 Permitted accessory uses
152.398 Conditional uses
152.399 Heavy Manufacturing/Industrial District special requirements
152.400 Bulk regulations
“HMU” Healthcare Mixed Use District
152.401 Purpose
152.402 Principal uses
152.403 Conditional uses
152.404 Accessory uses
152.405 Building height
152.406 Lot area and yard requirements
152.407 Lot coverage
Olivia Regional Airport Zoning Ordinance
152.500 Introduction
152.501 Purpose and authority
152.502 Short title
152.503 Definitions
152.504 Airport obstruction zones
152.505 Land use safety zone boundaries
152.506 Use restrictions in zones
152.507 Boundary limitations
152.508 Airport zoning map
152.509 Nonconforming uses
152.510 Permits, future uses
152.511 Permits, existing uses
152.512 Permits, nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed
152.513 Variances
152.514 Hazard marking and lighting
152.515 Airport zoning administrator
152.516 Board of Appeals
152.517 Appeals
152.518 Judicial review
152.519 Penalties
152.520 Conflicts
Zoning Code
71
152.521 Severability
152.522 Effective date
152.523 Exhibit A
152.524 Exhibit B
152.525 Exhibit C
152.526 Exhibit D
152.527 Exhibit E
Miscellaneous
152.640 Compliance required
152.641 Relief from personal responsibility
152.998 Violations
152.999 Penalty
Zoning Code
72
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 152.001 TITLE.
This chapter shall be known as the Olivia Zoning Ordinance except as referred to herein, where it
shall be known as this chapter.
(Am. Ord. 144, passed 1-29-1972; Am. Ord. 153, passed 8-25-1975; Am. Ord. 175, passed 4-6-1981;
Am. Ord. 177, passed 6-15-1981; Am. Ord. 185, passed 8-2-1982; Am. Ord. 187, passed 11-15-1982;
Am. Ord. 189, passed 3-21-1983; Am. Ord. 191, passed 3-21-1983; Am. Ord. 194, passed 1-16-1984;
Am. Ord. 199, passed 8-20-1984; Am. Ord. 203, passed 3-18-1985; Am. Ord. 208, passed 9-9-1985;
Am. Ord. 213, passed 5-18-1987; Am. Ord. 225, passed 5-21-1990; Am. Ord. 226, passed 9-17-1990;
Am. Ord. 227, passed 9-17-1990; Am. Ord. 232, passed 10-21-1991; Am. Ord. 233, passed 6-8-1992;
Am. Ord. 260, passed 3-1-1999; Res. 99-62, passed 7-7-1999; Am. Ord. 277, passed 3-18-2004; Ord.
280, passed 7-21-2005; Ord. 2016-04, passed 09-19-2016; and re-incorporated into Code by Ord. 2018-
04, passed 03-05-2018; Title 15 Amended by Ordinance 2018-03, passed 02-05-2018)
' 152.002 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
(A) The intent of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the
community and its people through the establishment of minimum regulations in regard to location,
erection, construction, alteration and use of structures and land.
(B) The regulations are established to assist the city in:
(1) Implementing its Comprehensive Plan,
(2) Protecting and enhancing the natural environment and resources that currently exist within
the city,
(3) Ensuring orderly and quality development and redevelopment,
(4) Protecting the quality and diversity of the city's tax base,
(5) Protecting the quality of residential neighborhoods,
(6) Providing opportunities for an affordable and diverse housing supply,
(7) Managing traffic,
(8) Ensuring compatibility between different land uses, and
(9) Regulating businesses that may have adverse secondary effects on the quality of life of
Zoning Code
73
Olivia residents.
(C) These regulations are also established to provide for administration of this chapter, to provide
for amendments; to prescribe penalties for violation of such regulations; and to define powers and duties
of the city staff, the Zoning Board of Appeals, the Planning Commission and the City Council in relation
to the Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.003 RELATION TO CITY'S COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
It is the policy of the city that the enforcement, amendment, and administration of this chapter be
accomplished consistent with the recommendations contained in the City Comprehensive Plan, as
developed and amended from time to time by the Planning Commission and City Council. The Council
recognizes the City Comprehensive Plan as the official policy for the regulation of land use and
development in accordance with the policies and purpose herein set forth. In accordance with M.S. Ch.
473, as it may be amended from time to time, the city will not approve any rezoning or other changes in
these regulations that are inconsistent with the City Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.004 STANDARD, REQUIREMENT.
Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this chapter are either more or less restrictive
than comparable conditions imposed by other law, ordinance, rule, or regulation of the city, state or
federal government, the law, ordinance, rule or regulation which imposes the more restrictive condition,
standard, or requirement shall prevail.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.005 CONFORMITY WITH THIS CHAPTER.
No structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or altered, and no structure or land
shall be used for any purpose or in any manner which is not in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.006 BUILDING COMPLIANCE.
Except as herein provided, no building, structure or premises shall hereafter be used or occupied and
no building permit shall be granted that does not conform to the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
Zoning Code
74
' 152.007 REDUCTION OF YARDS OR LOTS NOT PERMITTED.
No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this chapter shall be reduced in dimension or area
below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of the
ordinance creating this chapter shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this chapter.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.008 AUTHORITY.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the Municipal Planning Act, M.S.
'' 462.351 to 462.365, as they may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.009 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the City of Olivia, Renville County, Minnesota, is divided into the
following districts:
(A) AG District - Agricultural District.
(B) R-1 District - Low Density Residential District.
(C) R-3 District - High Density Residential District.
(D) B-1 District - Central Business District.
(E) B-2 District - Highway Business District.
(F) I-1 District - Light Manufacturing Industrial District.
(G) I-2 District - Heavy Manufacturing Industrial District.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.010 ZONING MAP.
The location and boundaries of the districts established by this chapter are set forth on the map
entitled Zoning District Map for the City of Olivia, Renville County, Minnesota, dated April, 2009. The
original of this map shall be signed and dated by the Mayor and the City Clerk. The map and all the
information and amendments shown on the map shall be incorporated by reference as if appearing in total
Zoning Code
75
and shall be a part of this chapter.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.011 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
The following rules shall apply with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on
the zoning district map:
(A) District boundary lines are the center lines of highways, streets, alleys, streams and trails; or
right-of-way lines of railroads; or U.S. Public Land Survey lines; or lot or property lines; or shorelines;
or such lines extended, unless otherwise indicated.
(B) In areas not subdivided into lots and blocks, where a district is indicated as a strip adjacent to
and paralleling a street or highway, the depth shall be in accordance with dimensions shown on the map
measured at right angles from the center line of the street or highway.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.012 BOUNDARY INTERPRETATION.
Questions concerning district boundary lines on the zoning map shall be decided by the Board of
Appeals.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.013 PROPERTY NOT INCLUDED, ANNEXATIONS.
When no decision has been reached as to what district the annexed territory should be placed,
annexations or consolidations with the city shall be placed in the AG District. Within 1 year the Planning
Commission shall evaluate and recommend a permanent district classification to the City Council.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.014 DEFINITIONS.
(A) Intent. Captions, headings, titles and key words used in sections and articles are defined herein
for convenience to facilitate the use of this chapter.
(B) Word usage.
(1) Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted
so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage and so as to give this chapter its
Zoning Code
76
most reasonable application.
(2) For the purpose of this chapter, the words MUST and SHALL are mandatory and not
permissive.
(3) The word MAY is permissive.
(4) The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter.
(5) All distances, unless otherwise specified, shall be measured horizontally over vertically as
specified.
(6) Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular number includes the
plural; the plural includes the singular.
(C) Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ABANDONMENT. To cease or discontinue a use or activity without intent to resume, but
excluding temporary or short-term interruptions to a use or activity during periods of remodeling,
maintaining or otherwise improving or rearranging a facility, or during normal periods of vacation or
seasonal closure.
ABATEMENT. Whenever the Building Official or Chief of Police are charged with
enforcement and determine that a public nuisance is being maintained or exists on premises in the city,
they shall notify in writing the owner and occupant of the premises of such fact and order that such
nuisance be terminated and abated. The owner and occupant of the premises shall be served such notice
in person or by U.S. mail. If the premises are not occupied and the owner is unknown, the notice may be
served by posting it on the premises. The notice shall specify the steps to be taken to abate the nuisance
and the time, not exceeding 30 days shall elapse between the day of posting and the hearing.
ABUTTING. Having a common border with, adjacent to, or being separated from such a
common border by a right-of-way, alley, or easement.
ACCESSORY BUILDING. A subordinate building or structure on the same lot or a part of the
principal building, occupied by or devoted exclusively to an accessory use.
ACCESSORY USE. A structure or portion of a structure subordinate to serving the principal
use of a structure on the same lot and devoted exclusively to a supplementary use.
AGRICULTURE. The use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming, dairying,
pasturage agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and animal and poultry husbandry and the
necessary uses for packing, treating, or storing the produce; provided however, that the operation of any
such accessory uses shall be secondary to the normal agricultural activities.
Zoning Code
77
AIRPORT. Any area of land or water designated and set aside for the landing and takeoff of
aircraft, including all necessary facilities for the housing and maintenance of aircraft.
ALLEY. A public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as secondary access to
land or structures on a property whose principal frontage is on a street.
ALTERATION. Any change, addition or modification in construction or occupancy of an
existing structure.
APARTMENT. A single room or set of rooms occupied as a dwelling unit which is part of a
multiple-family dwelling.
BASEMENT. That portion of a building which is 1/2 or more below grade. If the height of the
ceiling is 5 feet or more above grade such basement shall be considered a story.
BED AND BREAKFAST INN. A house, or portion thereof, where short-term lodging rooms
and meals are provided to transient guests. The owner or manager of the inn shall live on the premises.
BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets, or a combination of streets and public parks,
cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of waterways, municipal boundary lines, township lines or
county lines.
BOARD, LODGING OR ROOMING HOUSE. Any residential building, or portion thereof,
containing lodging rooms which accommodate 3 or more unrelated persons who are not members of the
keeper's family. Lodging or meals or both are provided for compensation on a weekly or monthly basis.
Motels, hotels, bed and breakfast inns or apartment hotels are not included in this category.
BUILDABLE AREA. The part of a lot remaining after required yards have been provided by
this chapter.
BUILDING. Any structure, permanently affixed to a lot, used for the support, shelter,
protection or enclosure of persons, animals, equipment, machinery, materials or property of any kind.
When any portion of a building is completely separated from every other part by division walls from the
ground up and is without openings, each portion of such building shall be deemed as a separate building.
The connection of 2 buildings by means of an open porch, breezeway, passageway or other such open
structure, with or without a roof, shall not be deemed to make them 1 building.
BUILDING, DETACHED. A building surrounded by an open space on the same lot as another
building.
BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance from the average elevation of the adjoining ground
level to the top of the highest point of the structure.
Zoning Code
78
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building or structure in which is conducted the main or primary
use of the lot on which said building or structure is situated.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE. The front line of the building or the legally established line that
determines the location of the building with respect to the lot line. See setback, building.
BUILDING SITE. Any lot or portion thereof, or 2 or more contiguous lots or portions thereof,
or a parcel of land upon which an industrial or commercial building(s) and incidental structures may be
erected in conformance with the requirements of these protective covenants, the size and the dimensions
of which are determined by the legal descriptions in the original conveyance from the city to the first fee
owner of each parcel.
BUSINESS. Any occupation, employment or enterprise wherein merchandise is exhibited or
sold, or which occupies time, attention, labor and materials, or where services are offered for
compensation.
CELLAR. A portion of a building located partly underground and having more than 1/2 of the
floor to ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
CHILD DAY CARE. CHILD DAY CARE means the provision of supplemental parental care
and supervision:
(a) For a nonrelated child or children;
(b) On a regular basis;
(c) For less than 24 hours a day; and
(d) Under license by the Minnesota State Department of Human Services.
As used in this chapter, the term is not intended to include babysitting services of a casual,
nonrecurring nature or in the child's home. Likewise, the term is not intended to include cooperative,
reciprocative child care by a group of parents in their respective domiciles.
CHILD DAY CARE FACILITY. A building or structure wherein an agency, person or persons
regularly provides care for a group of children for periods of less than 24 hours a day. CHILD DAY
CARE FACILITIES include family day care homes, group family day care homes and child day care
centers. They do not include preschools or nursery schools.
(a) FAMILY DAY CARE HOME means a licensed family abode of a person or persons
who regularly provides direct care of children during part of a 24-hour day. There may be no more than
10 children at 1 time, of which no more than 6 are under school age. The licensed capacity must include
Zoning Code
79
all children of any caregiver when the children are present in the residence.
(b) GROUP FAMILY DAY CARE HOME means a licensed facility for no more than 14
children at any 1 time, of which no more than 10 are under school age. The total number of children
includes all children of any caregiver when the children are present in the residence. The direct care of
the children is for part of a 24-hour day.
(c) CHILD CARE CENTER means a facility in which a child care program is operated
when the facility is not excluded by M.S. ' 245A.03, subd. 2, as it may be amended from time to time,
and is not required to be licensed under parts 9502.0315 to 9502.0445 as a family or group family day
care home.
CHURCH or PLACE OF RELIGIOUS WORSHIP. A building, together with its accessory
buildings and uses, where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which building, together
with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to
sustain public worship.
CLINIC. A public or proprietary institution providing diagnostic or preventive treatment for
ambulatory patients by a group of doctors or dentists, or both, who have their offices in the same
building.
CLUB or LODGE. Structures and facilities owned and/or operated by an association of
persons, for a social, educational or recreational purpose but not primarily for profit and not primarily to
render a service which is customarily carried on as a business. Said persons shall be bona fide members
paying annual dues and the use of such premises is restricted to members and their guests. It shall be
permissible to serve food, meals and beverages on such premises provided it is secondary and incidental
to some other common objective of the organization and all applicable local and state laws are complied
with.
COLUMBARIUM. A structure of vaults lined with recesses for cinerary urns.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION. Bowling alley, golf, pool hall, vehicle racing or amusement,
dance hall, skating, tavern, theater, firearms range, and similar uses.
COMMERCIAL USE. The principal use of land or buildings for the sale, lease, rental or trade
of products, goods and services.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. Unless otherwise stated, it is the general plan for land use,
transportation, and community facilities prepared and maintained by the Planning Commission.
CONDITIONAL USE. A use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction
throughout the zoning district but which, if controlled as to number, area, location, or relation to the
neighborhood, would not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or general welfare. If granted, a
Zoning Code
80
permit would be issued specially and individually for conditional uses permitted in any district. They
may be of such variable nature allowed by conditions established to control or regulate the use.
COUNCIL (CITY). The duly elected and qualified governing body of the City of Olivia,
Minnesota.
CREMATORY. A furnace for cremation.
DEVELOPMENT. The division of land into 2 or more parcels, the construction,
reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure; any mining,
excavation, landfill or land disturbances; and any use or extension of the use of land.
DISTRICT (ZONING). Any section of the incorporated area of the city within which certain
uniform regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this
chapter.
DOG KENNEL. Any lot or parcel of land where small animals are boarded for compensation
or where dogs are bred or raised on a commercial site.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT. Any place or premises used for sale, dispensing or serving of
food, refreshments, or beverages in automobiles including those establishments where customers may
serve themselves and may eat or drink the food, refreshments or beverages on the premises.
DWELLING. Any building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for residential
occupancy but not including a tent, cabin, trailer, hotel or motel.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A residence designed for or occupied by 3 or more
families, in separate dwelling units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A residential building containing not more than 1 dwelling
unit entirely surrounded by open space on the same lot.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A residence designed for or occupied by 2 families only, having
a common or party wall, in separate dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms which are arranged, designed or used as living
quarters for 1 family only. Independent cooking facilities, permanently installed and individual sanitary
facilities shall always be included for each DWELLING UNIT.
EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land for the purpose of
construction and maintaining utilities, including but not limited to sanitary sewers, water mains, electric
lines, telephone lines, storm sewer or storm drainage ways and gas lines.
Zoning Code
81
ESSENTIAL SERVICES. The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public
utilities or municipal departments or commissions of utilities such as underground or overhead gas,
electrical or water transmission or distribution systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers,
pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar
equipment and accessories reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by public utilities
or governmental agencies or for the public health or safety or general welfare, but not including
buildings.
FAMILY. A family is any number of persons living together in a room or rooms comprising a
single housekeeping unit and related by blood, marriage, adoption or any unrelated person who resides
thereon as though a member of the family including the domestic employees thereof. Any group or
persons not so related but inhabiting a single house shall, for the purpose of this chapter, be considered
to constitute 1 family for each 5 persons, exclusive of domestic employees, contained in each such group.
FARMING. An area which is used for the growing of the usual farm products such as
vegetables, fruits and grains and their storage on the area, as well as for the raising thereon of the usual
farm poultry and farm animals. The term farming includes the operating of such area for 1 or more of
the above uses with the necessary accessory uses for treating or storing the produce, provided, however,
that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the normal farming activity.
FENCE. Any artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials
erected to enclose or screen areas of land.
FLOOD. The temporary overflowing of water onto land which is usually devoid of surface
water.
FLOODPLAIN. Flood plain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source.
FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas that
must be reserved in order to reasonably carry and discharge the 100-year flood.
FLOODWAY FRINGE. All that land in a floodplain not lying within the delineated floodway.
Land within a FLOODWAY FRINGE is subject to inundation by relatively low velocity flows and
shallow water depths.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The sum of the areas of the several floors of a building, measured
from the exterior faces of exterior walls. The term gross floor area shall include basements; elevator
shafts; stairwells at each story; floor space used for mechanical equipment with structural headroom of 7
feet, 6 inches or more; penthouses; attic space, whether or not a floor has actually been laid, providing
structural headroom of 6 feet, 6 inches or more; interior balconies; and mezzanines.
FLOOR AREA, GROUND. The area within the exterior walls of the main building or structure
Zoning Code
82
as measured from the outside walls at the ground level, not including garages or enclosed or un-enclosed
porches and not including attached utility or accessory rooms having 3 or more exterior sides.
FLOOR AREA RATIO. Determined by dividing the gross floor area of all buildings on a lot by
the area of that lot.
GARAGE, COMMUNITY. An accessory building or series of structures for the storage of
motor vehicles by 2 or more occupants of property or dwellings in the vicinity and having no public shop
or service therein.
GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building designed or used for the storage or shelter of
vehicles by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory.
GARAGE, PUBLIC. A building, or portion thereof, other than a private customer and
employee garage or private residential garage, used primarily for the parking and storage of vehicles and
available to the general public.
GARAGE, REPAIR. A building or space for the repair or maintenance of motor vehicles but
not including factory assembly of such vehicles, auto wrecking establishments or junkyards.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS. A building or structure designed or used for the retail sale
or supply of fuels, lubricants, air, water, and other operating commodities for motor vehicles, and
including the customary space and facilities for the installation of such commodities on or in such
vehicles, but not including special facilities for the painting, major repair or similar servicing thereof.
GLARE. A sensation of brightness within the visual field that causes annoyance, discomfort or
loss in visual performance and visibility.
GOVERNING BODY. See City Council.
GRADE. The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls
of the building or structure.
GREENBELT. A planting strip of grass, trees or shrubs established and maintained for the
purpose of screening or limiting the view of certain property uses from surrounding uses and the general
public.
GROUP HOME. A state licensed group home or foster home serving 6 or fewer mentally or
physically challenged persons.
HARDSHIP. Circumstances claimed to be unique and/or hard to bear to the individual property
under consideration for application of a variance request. Applicants shall demonstrate an inability to put
the land to any beneficial use unless a variance is granted.
Zoning Code
83
HEDGE. A series of plants, shrubs or other landscape material, so placed as to form a physical
barrier or enclosure.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING/STRUCTURE. The vertical distance between the highest adjoining
ground level at the building and the highest point of a flat roof or average height of the highest gable of a
pitched or hipped roof.
HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation which is customarily and traditionally conducted within
a dwelling by its occupants and is clearly incidental and secondary to the principal use of the dwelling;
and does not change the character thereof or exhibit any exterior evidence of such secondary use.
HOTEL. A building in which lodging or boarding and lodging are provided and offered to the
public for compensation and which is open to transient guests. Customary hotel services such as maid
service, furnishing and laundering of linen, telephone and desk service, and the use and upkeep of
furniture shall be provided.
INCOMPATIBLE USE. A use or service which is unsuitable for direct association with other
uses because it is contradictory, incongruous or discordant with respect to sight, sound, odor, vibration
or any other injurious or offensive variable.
INDUSTRIAL USE. The use of land or buildings for the production, manufacturing,
warehousing, storage, or transfer of goods, products, commodities, or other wholesale items.
INSTITUTION. A building or premises occupied by a non-profit corporation or establishment
for public use.
JUNKYARD. Any open area of any lot or parcel where waste, discarded or scrap materials are
bought, sold, exchanged, baled or packed, disassembled, kept, stored or handled, including scrap metals
or scrap materials, or the abandonment or dismantling of machinery, motor vehicles or other vehicles, or
parts thereof. A JUNKYARD does not include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings.
KENNEL. Any lot or parcel of land where 3 or more small animals over 4 months of age are
boarded for compensation or where dogs are bred or raised on a commercial scale.
LAND USE. A description of how land is occupied or utilized.
LANDSCAPING. Plantings such as trees, grass, and shrubs.
LINEAR BLOCK. That property abutting 1 side of a street between the 2 nearest intersecting
or intercepting streets, natural barrier, or between such cross-street and the end of a dead end or
cul-de-sac. Where a street curves so that any adjacent 100-foot chords thereof form an angle of 120
degrees or less, measured on the lot side, such curve shall be construed as an intersecting street.
Zoning Code
84
LIVESTOCK. Cattle, horses, sheep, goats, poultry, swine and large wild and/or exotic
animals.
LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET. Space logically and conveniently located for bulk pick-ups
and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used and accessible to such vehicles when
off-street parking spaces are filled.
LOT. A parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use,
coverage, and area, and to provide such yard and other open spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall
have frontage on an improved public street, or on an approved private street. In no case of division or
combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created which does not meet the requirements of this
chapter.
LOT AREA. The area of horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and rear lot lines, but not
including any area occupied by the waters of a recorded lake or river.
LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the intersection of 2 streets with 2 adjacent sides abutting a
street for their full length.
LOT, COVERAGE. The part of percentage of the lot occupied by buildings or structures,
including accessory buildings or structures.
LOT DEPTH. The distance between the midpoints of straight lines connecting the foremost
points of the side lot lines in front and the rear most points of the side lot lines in the rear. LOT DEPTH
is also measured as the horizontal distance between the front line and rear lot line.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot having 2 opposite lot lines along 2 more or less parallel
public streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT both lot lines abutting
the street shall be deemed front lot lines. Also, known as a through lot.
LOT, INTERIOR. Any lot which is not a corner lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT. Any lot line which is along an existing or dedicated public street.
LOT LINE, REAR. A lot line which is most distant from, and is, or is most nearly, parallel to
the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, the REAR LOT LINE shall be that assumed line
parallel to the front lot line, not less than 10 feet long, lying most distantly from the front lot line and
wholly within the lot. With the exception of a double frontage lot, every lot shall have a REAR LOT
LINE.
LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line not a front or rear lot line.
Zoning Code
85
LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded
in the office of the County Recorder or a lot described by metes and bounds, the deed to which has been
recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
LOT SIZE. The total area within the lot lines of a lot, excluding any street right-of-way.
LOT, THROUGH. A lot that has a pair of opposite lot lines along 2 substantially parallel
streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a THROUGH LOT, both street lot lines shall be deemed front
lot lines.
LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot measured at right angles
to its depth along a straight line parallel to the front lot line at the minimum required building setback
line. (Note: See yard definitions also.)
MANUFACTURING - HEAVY. All manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging,
treatment or assembly of products and materials that may emit objectionable and offensive influences
beyond the lot on which the use is located.
MANUFACTURING - LIGHT. All uses which include the compounding, processing,
packaging, treatment or assembly of products and materials provided such use will not generate
objectionable influences that extend beyond the lot on which the use is located.
MAUSOLEUM. A building with places for entombment of the dead above ground.
MAY. For purposes of this chapter, means permissive.
MINI-WAREHOUSE. A structure containing separate storage spaces of varying sizes leased or
rented on an individual basis.
MOBILE HOME/MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in 1 or more
sections, which in the traveling mode is 8 body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length,
or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein;
except that the term includes any structure which meets all the requirements and with respect to which
the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the state of Minnesota and complies with the
standards established under M.S. Ch.327, as it may be amended from time to time.
MOBILE HOME PARK. A lot, parcel or tract of land upon which 2 or more occupied mobile
homes are sited either free of charge or for revenue purposes, including any building, structure, or
enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the equipment of such mobile home park.
MOTEL. Any building or group of buildings containing guest rooms primarily for the
Zoning Code
86
temporary occupancy for use by transient guests. Such building or group of buildings may include
quarters for the use of the operating personnel.
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL. A building or area in which freight brought by motor truck
is transferred and/or stored for movement.
MOTOR FUEL STATION. See service station.
MOTOR FUEL STATION CONVENIENCE STORE. A store operated in conjunction with a
motor fuel station for the purpose of offering for sale goods not essential to the motoring public.
MOTOR VEHICLE. Any passenger vehicle, truck, truck-trailer, trailer or semi-trailer
propelled or drawn by mechanical power.
NON-CONFORMING BUILDING OR USE. Any building or use or building and use which
does not comply with all of the regulations of this chapter or of any amendment hereto for the zoning
district in which it is located.
NON-CONFORMING LOT OF RECORD. Means any legal lot of record that at the time it was
recorded fully complied with all applicable laws and ordinances but which does not fully comply with the
lot requirements of this chapter concerning minimum area or minimum lot width.
NOXIOUS MATTER OR MATERIALS. Material capable of causing injury to living organisms
by chemical reaction, or capable of causing detrimental effects on the physical or economic well-being of
individuals.
NURSING HOME. A building or structure having accommodations and where care is provided
for invalid, infirmed, aged, convalescent or physically disabled or injured persons, in which 3 or more
persons not of the immediate family are received, kept and provided with food and shelter for
compensation.
OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE. A space accessible from a street, alley or driveway for the
use of trucks while loading or unloading merchandise or materials. Such space shall be of such size as to
accommodate 1 truck of the type typically used in the particular business.
OPEN SALES LOT. Any land used or occupied for the purpose of buying and selling new or
secondhand passenger cars and/or trucks, motor cycles, motor scooters, farm and lawn equipment, boats,
trailers, ATV's, golf carts, aircraft construction equipment and monuments and for the storage of same
prior to sale. OPEN SALES LOTS shall have a principal building.
OPEN SPACE. Land used for recreation, resource protection, amenity and/or buffers. In no
event shall any area of a lot constituting the minimum lot area nor any part of an existing or future road
or right-of-way be counted as constituting open space. An area undeveloped and left in a natural state.
Zoning Code
87
OPEN STORAGE. Storage of materials and products outside of a building.
OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT. An overlay district is a special zone that is drawn on a map
outlining a significant resource, such as an airport, shoreline or historic district. These districts are used
as tools for dealing with special situations or accomplishing special goals. OVERLAY ZONING
DISTRICTS can be placed over the base zoning for an area to alter some of the regulations.
OWNER OR PROPERTY OWNER. The fee owner of land or the beneficial owner of land,
whose interest is primarily one of ownership or possession and enjoyment in contemplation of ultimate
ownership. The terms includes, but not limited to, mortgages and vendees under contract for deed.
PARCEL. A continuous quantity of land in the possession of or owned by or recorded as the
property of the same person or persons.
PARKING LOT. A parcel of land devoted to unenclosed parking spaces.
PARKING SPACE. A graded and surfaced are of not less than 200 square feet plus necessary
maneuvering space for the parking or storage of a motor vehicle, which affords satisfactory ingress and
egress to a street or alley.
PARTY WALL. A common shared wall between 2 separate structures, buildings, or dwelling
units.
PERMITTED USE. A use which may be lawfully established in a particular zoning district
provided it conforms with all applicable requirements and regulations of such district and this chapter.
PERSON. Any individual, corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization or other
group acting as a unit. It also includes any executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or other
representative appointed by law.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). A development of land that is under unified
control and is planned and developed as a whole in a single development operation or programmed series
of development stages. The development may include streets, circulation ways, utilities, buildings, open
spaces, and other site features and improvements.
PLANNING COMMISSION. A 6-member commission appointed by the City Council which
reviews and initiates applications for amendments and changes to the Zoning Ordinance. They also,
review applications i.e. appeals, conditional uses, and variances, and make recommendations to either
the City Council or Board of Appeals and. All their actions and recommendations shall require a simple
majority of its members attending official Commission meetings.
PREMISES. A tract of land together with all structures thereon.
Zoning Code
88
PRINCIPAL USE. The main use of land or structures as distinguished from an accessory use.
PORCH, UNENCLOSED. An entrance to a building which may include steps, a landing,
railings and a roof but not enclosed either partially or completely above the landing by windows, screens
or siding.
PUBLIC USES. Municipal, county, school district, state, federal and other public uses.
PUBLIC UTILITY. Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department or board duly
authorized to furnish and furnishing to the public under governmental regulation electricity, gas, steam,
water, sewage disposal, communication or transportation facilities.
RECREATIONAL CAMPING VEHICLE. The words RECREATIONAL CAMPING
VEHICLE shall mean any of the following:
(a) Travel trailer means a vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis designed to be
used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational or vacation use.
(b) Pick-up coach means a structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis for use as a
temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation.
(c) Motor home means a portable temporary dwelling to be used for travel, recreation and
vacation and constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle.
(d) Camping trailer means a folding structure mounted on wheels and designed for travel,
recreation and vacation use.
RETAIL SALES. Stores and shops selling personal services or goods.
RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk,
railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade
trees, or other special use.
ROAD. A public right-of-way affording primary access by pedestrians and vehicles to abutting
properties, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue,
boulevard, land, place, or however otherwise designated.
ROADSIDE STAND. A temporary and unenclosed structure for the display and sale of
agricultural products, produced or grown on the premises.
SCREENING. The use of plant material, fences, or earthen berms to partially conceal and
separate a land use from the surrounding land uses.
Zoning Code
89
SERVICE STATION. Any premises where gasoline and other petroleum products are sold
and/or light maintenance activities such as engine tune-ups, lubrication, and minor repairs are conducted.
SERVICE STATIONS shall not include premises where heavy automobile maintenance activities such as
engine overhauls, automobile painting, and body work are conducted.
SETBACK, BUILDING. The minimum horizontal distance between the line of a building or
structure and the nearest specified property line.
SEWER SYSTEM. The city pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, and force main, and all
other construction, devices, appliances, or appurtenances used for conducting sewage or industrial
sewage or industrial waste or other wastes to a point of ultimate disposal.
SHALL. For purposes of this chapter, means mandatory.
SIGN. See definitions of signs under '' 152.150 et seq.
SITE PLAN. A plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensioning,
the boundaries of a site and the location of all buildings, structures, uses, and principal site development
features proposed for a specific parcel of land.
SPECIAL USE PERMIT. A permit issued by the City Council in accordance with procedures
in this chapter which would enable the City Council to attach appropriate restrictions to a proposed use
or conditions surrounding it.
STORM SHELTER. A structure or portion of a structure intended to provide protection to
human life during periods of danger from storms or other emergencies.
STORY. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of
the floor next above it, or the space between such a floor and the ceiling next above it. A basement shall
be considered a STORY if its ceiling is over 5 feet above the average established grade.
STREET. A public way which affords the principal access to abutting property excepting a
public alley. The term STREET shall include road, avenue, highway, boulevard, drive, lane, circle,
place, court, parkway or other similar designation.
STREET, DEAD-END or CUL-DE-SAC. A street or roadway with only 1 vehicular traffic
control.
STREET, PRIVATE. A street or roadway which is not dedicated to the community for public
use.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any replacement or changes in the type of construction or in
Zoning Code
90
the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or
any substantial change in the roof or exterior walls, beyond ordinary repairs and maintenance.
STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground or attached
to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things STRUCTURES include
buildings, walks, fences, billboards and poster panels.
SUBDIVISION. Means land that is divided for the purpose of sale, rent, or lease.
SWIMMING POOL. A water-filled enclosure, permanently constructed or portable, having a
depth of more than 18 inches below the level of the surrounding land, or an above-surface pool, having a
depth of more than 24 inches, designed, used and maintained for swimming and bathing.
TOWER. Any structure designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting 1 or
more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term
includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular
telephone towers, and similar structures.
TOWNHOUSE/ROWHOUSE. A building comprised of single-family dwelling units erected in
a row as a single building on adjoining lots, each unit having its own front and rear access to the outside,
separated from the adjoining unit or units by 1 or more common fire walls extending from the basement
floor to the roof along the dividing lot line and having a yard space on the front, rear and both sides.
TRUCK STOP. A motor fuel station devoted principally to the needs of trucks and which shall
include eating and/or sleeping facilities.
USE. The purpose for which land or buildings thereon are designed, arranged or intended to be
occupied or used or for which they are occupied or maintained.
USE, PERMITTED. A use which may be lawfully established in a particular district or
districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations, and performance standards of such
district.
USE, PRINCIPAL. The primary use of the land or structures as distinguished from an
accessory use.
USE, SPECIAL OR CONDITIONAL. See conditional use.
VARIANCE. A modification or variation of the strict provisions of this chapter, as applied to a
specific piece of property in order to provide relief for a property owner because of undue hardship or
particular difficulty imposed upon him by this chapter. Economic considerations alone shall not
constitute a hardship. A VARIANCE shall normally be limited to height, bulk, density and yard
requirements. A modification in the allowable uses within a district must be done as a zoning ordinance
Zoning Code
91
amendment and not through a VARIANCE. Use VARIANCES are prohibited.
VETERINARY. Those uses concerned with the diagnosis, treatment, and medical care of
animals, including animal or pet hospitals.
WAREHOUSE. A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials. See
mini-warehouse.
WAREHOUSING. Terminal facilities for handling freight with or without maintenance
facilities.
WHOLESALING. The selling of goods, equipment and materials by bulk to another business
that in turn sells to the final customer.
YARD. A required open space not occupied by a building or buildings, open to the sky and on
the same lot as the principal building. A YARD extends along a lot line, and to a depth or width specified
in the yard requirements for the applicable zoning district.
YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the front
lot line and a line at a distance therefrom as specified by the regulations.
YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the rear lot
line and a line at a distance therefrom as specified by these regulations.
YARD, SIDE. A yard between the side lot line and a line at a distance therefrom as specified
by the district regulations. Interior SIDE YARD is a SIDE YARD which is located adjacent to another
lot. Street SIDE YARD is a SIDE YARD which adjoins a public street. (Note: See lot definitions also.)
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The individual appointed by the City Council to administer and
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
ZONING DISTRICT. An area or areas within the limits of the city for which the regulations
and requirements governing land use are uniform.
ZONING MAP. The areas comprising these zoning districts and boundaries of said districts as
shown upon the map, which is incorporated by reference as if appearing in total and made a part of this
chapter being designated as the Official Zoning map for the city with all proper notations, references and
other information shown thereon.
ZONING ORDINANCE. Part of an adopted local government code which establishes the type
and amount of development that is permissible within defined zoning districts.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
Zoning Code
92
NON-CONFORMITIES
' 152.025 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter by
reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards or other characteristics of the structure or its
location on the lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful subject to the
following provisions:
(A) No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity, but
any structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity.
(B) Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50% of its current
appraised value, exclusive of the foundation, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter. If less than 50% is damaged, exclusive of the foundation, it may be restored,
reconstructed or used as before, provided that it is done within 12 months of such happening and that it
be built of like or similar materials, or the architectural design and building materials are approved by
the City Building Official after recommendations from the Planning Commission and appropriate
officials.
(C) If the nonconforming structure is moved to another lot, it shall thereafter conform to the
regulations for the district to which it is moved.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.026 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.
Any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use may be
maintained and improved by ordinary repairs or by repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures,
wiring or plumbing if the cubic area was existing when it became nonconforming is not increased. This
chapter does not prevent the strengthening or restoring of any structure or part declared to be unsafe by
order of an official charged with protecting the public safety.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.027 NONCONFORMING USE, LAND.
A nonconforming lawful use existing at the time this chapter becomes effective, may be continued
provided:
(A) The nonconforming use shall not be expanded or extended either on the same or adjoining
property.
Zoning Code
93
(B) If the nonconforming use of land, existing at the time this chapter became effective, is thereafter
discontinued or changed, the future use of such land shall be in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.028 NONCONFORMING USE, CHANGE.
A nonconforming use can not be changed to a comparable nonconforming use. Once a use has been
brought into conformity with regulations of the district, it must remain in conformity.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.029 NONCONFORMING USE, DISCONTINUANCE.
In the event that a nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of 6 months, any future use shall
conform to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.030 NONCONFORMING USE, ZONE CHANGE.
The above provisions shall apply to buildings, land and uses which may become nonconforming due
to classification or reclassification of districts under this chapter.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
GENERAL REGULATIONS AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
' 152.045 GENERAL REGULATIONS AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
(A) The following general regulations and performance standards of this subchapter shall apply
equally to all districts within this chapter except where special provisions provide otherwise. It is not
intended by this chapter to repeal, annul, impair or interfere with any existing easements, covenants,
deed restrictions, agreements, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law.
However, wherever this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall govern.
(B) The general regulations and performance standards established in this subchapter are designed to
encourage high quality residential and business development by providing assurance that neighboring
land uses will be compatible. The general regulations and performance standards are also designed to
prevent and eliminate those conditions that cause blight.
Zoning Code
94
(C) All future development in the city shall be required to meet these standards. The standards shall
also apply to existing development where so stated. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for
enforcing these standards and may require the submission of information showing compliance or
noncompliance with the standards.
(D) Before any building or land use permit is approved, the Zoning Administrator shall determine
whether the proposed use will conform to the general regulations and performance standards. The
developer shall supply additional data about the proposed use (such as equipment to be used, hours of
operation, method of refuse disposal, type and location of exterior storage, etc.), where required to do so
by the Zoning Administrator. It may occasionally be necessary for a developer or business to employ
specialized consultants to demonstrate that a given use will conform with any general regulation and/or
performance standard.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.046 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES.
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to that of the main building may be erected or
established upon a lot or tract of land, provided they comply with the following regulations.
(A) All accessory buildings.
(1) Accessory buildings shall not be constructed prior to the time of construction of the
principal building to which it is accessory.
(2) All accessory buildings and uses shall be located a minimum of 10 feet to the rear of the
principal use, 10 feet from a side property line and 10 feet from a rear property line or alley
right-of-way.
(3) On a through lot, no accessory building shall be located closer to the rear property line than
the distance required for front yard setbacks.
(B) Attached or detached accessory buildings: Residential Districts.
(1) No accessory building shall be used for dwelling purposes.
(2) All accessory buildings and uses shall be sited on the same lot.
(3) Accessory buildings are permitted only for the purpose of personal use and the storage of
personal belongings.
(4) No accessory building shall contain more than 30 feet of vehicle door openings as measured
horizontally.
Zoning Code
95
(5) Accessory building and uses shall not exceed 950 square feet of floor area except by
conditional use permit. In no case shall the accessory building be larger than the principal building.
(6) Accessory buildings and uses in Residential Districts shall not exceed 1 story or 15 feet in
height, and in no case will the accessory building exceed the height of the principal building.
(C) Detached accessory buildings and uses: Residential Districts.
(1) No detached accessory buildings or uses are permitted to be located within the limits of a
front yard.
(2) No detached accessory building or uses on a corner lot shall project beyond the front yard
setback requirement of the principal building.
(D) Accessory buildings and uses: Business and Manufacturing Districts.
(1) In Business and Manufacturing Districts, accessory buildings and uses may be placed in
rear and side yards, but must not project beyond the principal building in the front yard. Exceptions to
this requirement are shown below in division (D)(2). Accessory buildings are subject to the building
code, and the fire zone regulations.
(2) Accessory buildings such as buildings for parking attendants, guard shelters, gate houses
and transformer buildings may be located in front in Manufacturing Districts.
(3) Accessory buildings that exceed the height of the principal building are allowed only
through a conditional use permit. Except for structures not included in height of building, all accessory
buildings must meet the height requirements of the district in which they are located.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.047 ADJACENT LOTS AND LOTS OF CONTINUOUS FRONTAGE IN SINGLE
OWNERSHIP.
(A) If 2 or more lots or combination of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage or common
property line are in single ownership, the following provisions shall apply. No building, structure or use
shall be constructed, altered, expanded or developed except in conformity with these provisions and such
other applicable provisions of this chapter.
(B) Each individual lot of record shall be dealt with as an individual lot in all cases, even though in
common ownership with adjacent lots of record. Nothing shall prohibit the legal joining together of
separately described lots or parcels.
Zoning Code
96
(C) No new or existing structure or use on a lot of record shall be constructed, altered or expanded
in any manner which would be at variance with the provisions of this chapter. Common ownership with
adjacent parcels shall not be considered grounds for a variance.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.048 LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS.
No lot area shall be so reduced or diminished that the yards or other open spaces shall be smaller
than prescribed herein, nor shall the number of dwelling units be increased in any manner except in
conformity with the area regulations herein prescribed, nor shall the area of any lot be reduced below the
minimum requirements herein established.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.049 USE REGULATIONS.
Only the following uses and their essential services shall be allowed in any district:
(A) Principal uses - specified for a district.
(B) Accessory uses - and structures are permitted in any district but not until their principal
structure is present or under construction. Uses accessory to Residential District developments shall not
involve the conduct of any business trade, or industry except for home and professional occupations as
defined herein. An accessory structure cannot be occupied as a separate dwelling unit.
(C) Conditional uses - and their accessory uses shall be permitted in specified districts after review,
public hearing, recommendation by the Planning Commission, and approval by the City Council in
accordance with procedures and standards established in this chapter.
(D) Uses not specified - in this chapter may be permitted by the City Council after the Planning
Commission has made a review and written recommendation and provided that such uses are similar in
character to the permitted uses in the district.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.050 BUILDING ACCESS.
Every building erected, moved or structurally altered, shall be on a lot or parcel having a frontage
on a public street or road. All structures shall be located on lots so as to provide required off-street
parking and the safe and convenient access for fire protection.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
Zoning Code
97
§ 152.0501 ACCESS DRIVEWAYS.
(A) The distance from a driveway to the intersection of two streets shall not be less than 20 feet
measured along the street curb line from the point of intersection of the property line extended and the
curb line to the point of tangency of the curb return of the driveway with the street curb line, provided,
however, that if, in the opinion of the City Engineer, present or future traffic conditions warrant greater
distances, such greater distances shall be required, subject to approval by the City Council. The distance
from a driveway to the intersection of 2 thoroughfares shall be no less than 100 feet as measured in the
same manner.
(B) The minimum distance between driveways shall be 25 feet measured from the point of tangency
of the street curb line with the curb return of the driveway; provided however, that if, in the opinion of
the City Engineer, present or future traffic conditions warrant greater distances, such greater distances
shall be required, subject to approval by the City Council.
(C) The driveway angle to the street shall be 90 degrees unless otherwise recommended by the City
Engineer and approved by the City Council.
(D) The distance from a driveway to the property line of an adjacent property shall not be less than 5
feet measured along the street curb line between the point of intersection of the street curb line with the
property line extended and the point of tangency of the street curb line with the curb return of the
driveway unless otherwise recommended by the City Engineer and approved by the City Council.
(E) Access driveways for other than single family dwellings, shall be 30 feet wide measured along
the property line between the curb faces of the driveway unless otherwise recommended by the City
Engineer and approved by the City Council.
(F) Access driveways for single family dwellings shall be not less than 12 feet, nor more than 24
feet wide measured along the property line between curb fences of the driveway unless otherwise
recommended by the City Engineer and approved by the City Council.
Zoning Code
98
' 152.051 BUILDING AREA.
(A) Outside stairways, fire escapes, fire towers, porches, platforms, balconies, boiler flues and
other similar projections shall be considered as part of the building and not allowed as part of the
required space for yards, courts or unoccupied space.
(B) This provision shall allow 1 fireplace or 1 chimney projecting not more than 30 inches into the
allowable side yard space. This provision shall allow roof overhangs not exceeding 24 inches in width.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.052 BUILDINGS UNDER CONSTRUCTION.
(Repealed and replaced with §150.09)
' 152.053 DRAINAGE.
No land shall be developed and no use shall be permitted that results in water run-off, flooding, or
erosion on adjacent properties. Such run-off shall be properly channeled into a storm drain, water
course, ponding area or other public facility.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.054 DWELLING UNIT RESTRICTION.
Excluding the city's camping facility that has its own rules and regulations for short term camping,
the following dwelling unit restrictions shall apply:
(A) No model home, garage, tent, accessory building, or recreational camping vehicle shall at any
time be used as living quarters, temporarily or permanently, except as may be approved in emergency
cases by the Zoning Administrator.
(B) Tents, play houses or similar structures may be used for play or recreational purposes. When
adult supervision is present on the property, children are allowed to camp over night.
Zoning Code
99
(C) Basements may be used as living quarters or rooms as a portion of the principal residential
dwelling. Living quarters and bedrooms in basements must follow the regulations of the Minnesota State
Building Code for adequate sized windows for emergency egress.
(D) Energy conservation designs in housing, including earth sheltered residential dwellings, are not
prohibited by this provision of the chapter, provided that a conditional use permit is approved by the City
Council and the structure complies with standards imposed by the State and the Minnesota State Building
Code.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.055 FRONT YARD EXCEPTIONS.
(A) When the majority of residential or commercial buildings have been built in a block at the time
of adoption of the ordinance creating this chapter, no building or structure hereafter erected or altered,
shall project beyond the average setback line established by existing structures, provided no building will
be required to set back more than 25 feet from the property line.
(B) In the following circumstances, a new residential structure may not be required to conform to
the minimum setback requirements of the zoning district:
(1) Where adjacent structures within same block have front yard setbacks different from those
required, the front yard minimum setback shall be the average of the adjacent structures. If there is only
1 adjacent structure, the front yard minimum setback shall be the average of the required setback and the
setback of the adjacent structure. In no case shall the minimum front yard setback exceed the minimum
requirement.
(2) Where the lot on which the new residential structure is proposed is between 2 adjacent
existing developed residential lots with less than the required setback front yard setback, the average
setback of both adjacent residential lots shall be observed as the minimum front yard setback.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.056 GREENBELTS.
(A) In all Commercial and Industrial Districts adjacent to Residential Districts and not divided by
streets there shall be provided along the property line an 8-foot wide planting strip composed of grass,
trees and shrubs. Trees at least 12 inches in diameter, shall be planted not more than 30 feet apart.
Shrubs shall be planted not more than 5 feet apart and be at least 5 feet in height after 5 full growing
seasons, and attain a height of 8 feet at maturity.
(B) A decorative masonry wall not less than 5 feet in height and not less than 8 inches in thickness
may be substituted for the above greenbelt upon approval of the Planning Commission.
Zoning Code
100
(C) The greenbelt or wall area shall be maintained in an attractive condition at all times.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.057 STRUCTURES, NOT INCLUDED IN HEIGHT OF BUILDING.
Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulk head, fire towers, drive-in movie theater screens, grain
elevators, silos, stacks, tanks, water towers, water slides, pumping towers, radio or television towers,
monuments, cupolas, and mechanical accessories pertaining to and necessary to the permitted use of the
district in which they are located, shall not be included in calculating the height of principal structure.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.058 LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE.
Double frontage lots shall maintain a yard on both streets conforming to the requirements for front
yards on those streets.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.059 LOT, CORNER.
Corner lots shall maintain a yard on both streets conforming to the requirements for front yards on
those streets.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.060 LOT OF RECORD.
A parcel legally created and existing at the time of passage of the ordinance creating this chapter
need not conform to the lot width or lot area of the district in which it is located. If 2 or more lots or
combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at
the time of passage or amendment of this chapter, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the
requirements established for lot width and area, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided
parcel for the purposes of this chapter. No portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which
diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this chapter, nor shall any
division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area below the requirements stated in
this chapter.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
Zoning Code
101
' 152.061 MAINTENANCE.
In all districts, all structures, signs, required landscaping and fences shall be maintained so as not to
be unsightly to the adjoining areas or created hazards to public health or safety.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.062 SETBACK MEASUREMENTS.
All setbacks shall be measured from property lines.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
§152.0621 PROPERTY LINE LOCATION.
Prior to issuance of any building permit, the applicant or property owner shall locate and make
visible for the Building Official, the property corner survey pins and identify the property lines around
the proposed improvement area. If the Building Official has any reasonable doubt as to the location of
the property survey pins or the property lines, then the City may require the owner to cause the property
to be surveyed before a permit is issued.
' 152.063 FENCES, HEDGES, SHRUBBERY, WALLS, AND OBSTRUCTIONS IN ALL
DISTRICTS.
This section is intended to provide for the regulation of the height and location of fences, walls,
hedges, shrubbery and similar obstructions, for the purpose of providing for light, air, and privacy and
safeguarding the public welfare by preventing visual obstructions at street and highway intersections.
(A) Permits required. All fence and wall construction shall require a permit from the Zoning
Administrator.
(B) Height. For the purpose of this section, HEIGHT shall mean the vertical distance from existing
grade to the top of the fence, hedge, shrubbery, or wall, except in the front and side yard setback where
the finished grade is lower than the existing grade, height shall be measured from the finished grade.
(1) All Residential Districts; front and corner yard setbacks. No fence, hedge, shrubbery, or
wall over 42 inches in height shall be permitted within any required front and corner setback.
(2) Rear and side setbacks. No fence, hedge, shrubbery, or wall greater than 6 feet in height
shall be permitted within any required rear setback or side setback. Should the rear lot line be common
with the side lot line of an abutting lot, that portion of the rear lot line equal to the required front yard of
the abutting lot shall not be fenced to a height of more than 42 inches.
Zoning Code
102
(3) Corner lots in all districts. No fence, hedge, shrubbery, wall, or other obstruction to vision
over 42 inches in height shall be permitted within the clear view triangle of an intersection as is
described below in this section in division (C).
(4) Business and Industrial Districts. Fences and walls located in Business and Industrial
Districts that exceed the height of 8 feet, measured from its top edge to the ground at any point, shall
require a conditional use permit.
(5) Tennis court fences. Fences up to 10 feet in height may be permitted to enclosed tennis
courts provided all other requirements of this chapter are met, and shall not require a conditional use
permit where a tennis court is permitted as an accessory use or when the court is given a conditional use
permit.
(6) Swimming pool fences. See division (G) below for height requirements.
(C) Clear view triangle. On a property located at a street intersection, it shall be unlawful for the
owner or occupant to install, set out, maintain or to permit the installation or maintenance of any sign,
fence, hedge, tree, shrubbery, natural growth, construction, or other obstructions between a height of 3
feet and 10 feet above the existing ground elevation; and within the triangle formed by measuring 30 feet
of any street corner measured from the point of the nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. (If there are
no curbs, the edge of the traveled portion of the street or road shall be used instead of the curb line.) On
any property which is located at an intersection of an alley with a street, the triangular area is formed by
connecting points 20 feet from such point of intersection. It is hereby declared that any such installation
or obstruction within the clear view triangle as herein defined is a public nuisance, encumbrance, and/or
obstruction to the public streets.
(D) Fences and walls placed on property lines.
(1) Fences and walls may be placed along property lines provided no damage of any kind
results to abutting property.
(2) Prior to issuance of a building permit for any fence, abutting property owners shall be
notified.
(3) That side of the fence considered to be the face (facing as applied to fence posts) shall face
abutting property.
(E) Fences within 3 feet of property lines.
(1) Any fence/wall may be placed 3 feet from the property line without notifying adjoining
property owners.
Zoning Code
103
(2) Fences, hedges or walls can be placed no closer than 3 feet to any public right-of-way.
(F) Construction. All fences hereafter erected shall have the structural components thereof facing
the side of the property for and on which the same are erected.
(G) Swimming pools and hot tubs. All swimming pools and hot tubs shall be provided with
safeguards to prevent children from gaining uncontrolled access. Every owner of an outdoor swimming
pool or hut tub located in the city shall erect and maintain a fence or barrier of not less than 4 feet in
height nor more than 8 feet in height around such swimming pool of such construction as to safeguard
the area. The structural sides of an above-ground swimming pool may be used to satisfy a portion of the
fence height requirement. The fence should have a maximum clearance from the ground of 3 inches; and
shall be equipped with self-closing door and latches not less than 4 feet above the ground. Fences shall be
of a non-corrosive material and shall be constructed as to be not easily climbable. All fencing shall be in
place and approved by the City's Building Inspector before water is run into the pool. Spas and hot tubs
with a locking safety cover which complies with ASTMF 1346-91 shall be exempt from these barrier
requirements.
(H) Easements. No fence shall be erected upon or within any platted or otherwise designated
easement without the prior written approval of the Zoning Administrator.
(I) Snow fences. Utility snow fences may be used only during the winter months and shall be
removed at the end of each winter season.
(J) Maintenance. Every fence shall be maintained in a good and safe condition at all times. Every
damaged or missing element of any fence shall be repaired or replaced immediately. Fences must be
maintained so as not to endanger life or property.
(K) Approved material. A fence shall be constructed of stone, brick, finished wood, durable vinyl
or other durable plastic materials, ornamental non-corrosive aluminum or iron, or chain link.
(L) Prohibited fences. The following fences are prohibited:
(1) No fence constructed wholly or in part of barbed wire shall be located in the city, except in
any industrial, utility areas and AG Districts. Within these industrial and utility areas, the barbed wire
fence may be placed above the top of other fencing not less than 6 feet, 6 inches high and none of which
may be within 5 feet of any public street, alley or sidewalk. Within AG Districts, barbed wire fences
may be used to fence in livestock. Barbed wire fences shall require a conditional use permit.
(2) Chicken wire, welded mesh wire and electrically charged wire fences.
(3) Fences made of solid plywood, scrap lumber, temporary fencing and similar non-customary
materials.
Zoning Code
104
(4) Fences made of common concrete or cinder block.
(5) Fences on any portion of any public right-of-way, except fences erected by a governmental
entity.
(6) Fences so constructed as to prevent natural water drainage and/or water runoff.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.064 RETAINING WALLS.
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect public and private property from the effects
of poorly designed and constructed retaining walls.
(B) Permit required. A permit shall be required for all retaining walls constructed that exceed 42
inches in height, including terraced retaining wall projects where the total height of all walls exceeds 42
inches and are closer than 15 feet to a property line. The height requirements shall meet the requirements
of ' 152.063(C), clear view triangle.
(C) Application. Application shall be made to the Zoning Administrator on forms provided and
shall include a site plan and a set of construction plans. Plans signed by a professional engineer
registered in the state and/or other information necessary to adequately review the proposed retaining
wall may also be required by the Zoning Administrator.
(D) Setbacks. Setbacks for retaining walls shall be the same as for fences.
(E) Maintenance. Every wall shall be maintained in a good and safe condition at all times. Every
damaged or missing element of any wall shall be repaired or replaced immediately. Walls must be
maintained so as not to endanger life or property and any wall which through lack of repair, type of
construction or otherwise that imperils health, life or property, or the well-being of a neighborhood shall
be deemed a nuisance.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.065 SEWER AND WATER PROVISIONS.
(A) All sewage facilities shall be directly connected to community sewer facilities when available
and separately metered. Where sewers are not constructed or in operation, all sewage facilities shall be
connected to individual sewage disposal systems approved by the City Engineer and in accordance with
any applicable regulations of state agencies. This provision shall not apply to temporary construction
sites, or portable units used in farming operations.
(B) All water shall be procured from the public water system when available. Where it is not
Zoning Code
105
feasible to connect to a public water supply or if on-site water supplementation is required, a well may be
drilled in accordance with the specifications and provisions of the Minnesota Department of Health,
Water Well Construction Code.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.066 STORAGE STANDARDS.
Besides the storage regulations found within the city's nuisance ordinance, the following storage
standards shall apply:
(A) Exterior storage in Residential Districts. All materials and equipment shall be stored within a
building or fully screened (so as not to be visible) from adjoining properties, except for the following:
laundry drying and recreational equipment, construction and landscaping materials and equipment
currently being used for construction on the premises, agricultural equipment and materials if these are
used or intended for use on the premises, off-street parking except as otherwise regulated herein. Boats,
recreational vehicles and recreational camping vehicles, less than 35 feet in length, are permissible if
stored in the rear or side yard not less than 10 feet distant from any property line.
(B) Exterior storage in Business and Manufacturing Districts. Exterior storage in Business and
Manufacturing Districts shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Governed by respective zoning district. Exterior storage and display shall be governed by
the respective zoning district in which the use is located.
(2) Setback requirements. All exterior storage shall conform with all building setback
requirements.
(3) Location, screening. All exterior storage shall be located in the rear or side yard and shall
be screened so as not to be visible from adjoining properties and public streets except for the following
permitted activities:
(a) Materials and equipment currently being used for construction on the premises.
(b) Merchandise being displayed for sale in accordance with zoning district requirements.
The merchandise being displayed may not use space required as a parking lot, except which is allowed
below in this section under seasonal unenclosed areas and temporary, outdoor promotional events.
(c) The following merchandise shall not be given an exception under this section, and thus
must meet the exterior storage requirements described above:
1. Automobiles, trucks, tractors and other motorized vehicles which are incapable of
movement under their own power due to mechanical deficiency.
Zoning Code
106
2. Parts for vehicles and machinery.
(4) Located on durable and dustless surface and to include storm drainage management
facilities. All exterior storage areas must be on a durable and dustless surface and include storm
drainage management facilities as required by the city. The 1 exception to this section is that for storage
areas in Manufacturing Districts may have a gravel surface, provided the storage area is used only to
store heavy machinery and the access to the storage area is not less than 100 feet from a public
right-of-way.
(5) Seasonal open displays. The unenclosed sale and display of cut Christmas trees, wreathes,
tree branches, pine cones, holly and related plant items during the months of November and December,
and the unenclosed sale and display of plants and garden supplies during the months of April through
August, shall be permitted as an accessory use, provided that the sale and display is conducted in
connection with the operation of an existing retail use in a Business District, and that the area used for
the unenclosed sale and display does not exceed 20% of the area of the parcel containing buildings or use
more than 20% of the required parking lot.
(6) Temporary, outdoor promotional events. Temporary, outdoor promotional events which
include activities such as grand openings, craft shows, flea markets, sidewalk sales shall be allowed up to
4 days in length and not more than 2 times a year per property.
(C) Bulk storage (liquid). All uses associated with the bulk storage of oil, gasoline, liquid fertilizer,
chemicals and similar liquids shall comply with the requirements of the Minnesota State Fire Marshall,
the Minnesota State Pollution Control Agency (PCA), the United States Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) and have documents from those offices stating that the use is in compliance. Buried gas
and/or diesel bulk storage for vehicles are not permitted in Residential Districts.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.067 TRAFFIC CONTROL.
(A) The traffic generated by any use shall be channelized and controlled in a manner that will avoid
(1) Congestion on the public streets,
(2) Traffic hazards, and
(3) Excessive traffic through residential areas, particularly truck traffic.
(B) Internal traffic shall be so regulated as to insure its safe and orderly flow. Traffic into and out of
business and industrial areas shall in all cases be forward moving with no backing onto streets.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
Zoning Code
107
' 152.068 BUILDING RELOCATION.
(A) Review process. The relocation of any building or structure on a lot or onto another lot within
the city shall be subject to approval of a conditional use permit. Accessory buildings less than 120 square
feet in floor area shall be allowed without issuance of a conditional use permit, but shall comply with all
other provisions of this chapter.
(B) Performance standards.
(1) Upon relocation, the building shall comply with the applicable requirements of the
Minnesota State Building Code.
(2) The proposed relocated building shall comply with the character of the neighborhood in
which it is being relocated as determined by the City Council or Building Official.
(3) The relocated use will not result in a depreciation of neighborhood or adjacent property
values.
(4) Except as otherwise allowed by the City Council or Building Official, the relocated
structure shall be ready for occupancy within 6 months from the date of location on the site.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.069 INTERFERENCE WITH TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
No sign, structure, tree, planting, or vegetation or any portion thereof shall protrude over or into
any street so as to create confusion around, or otherwise interfere with, traffic signals of any kind.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.070 DUMPING AND DISPOSAL OF EXCAVATED MATERIALS.
The dumping of dirt, rock or other earthen material is permitted in any district not part of a drainage
channel provided the surface of such material is graded within a reasonable period of time in a manner
preventing the collection of stagnant water and that the ground surface is left in a condition suitable for
growing of turf or for other land uses permitted in the district. This shall not prevent the development of
the property for its best use when adequate facilities are provided to maintain the primary purpose of the
drainage way or flood plain, i.e. the uninterrupted flow of surface water.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
Zoning Code
108
' 152.071 ESSENTIAL SERVICES.
Essential services shall be allowed in all zoning districts. Essential services is defined under the
definition section of this chapter.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.072 TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNAE PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS.
(A) Purpose. To meet the communication needs of residents and businesses while protecting the
public health, safety, and general welfare of the community, the city finds that this section is necessary in
order to:
(1) Facilitate the provisions of the wireless telecommunications services to the residents and
businesses of the community;
(2) Through setback requirements and structural standards, avoid potential damage to adjacent
properties from tower failure;
(3) Minimize adverse visual effects of towers through careful design and siting standards;
(4) Reduce the number of towers necessary to serve the area by maximizing the use of existing
and approved towers and buildings that can accommodate new wireless telecommunication antennas;
(B) Consistency with federal law. In addition to other findings required by this section, the city
shall find that its decision regarding an application is intended to be consistent with federal law,
particularly the Telecommunications Act of 1996. This section does not:
(1) Prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services;
(2) Unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent wireless services; or
(3) Regulate personal wireless services on the basis of the environmental effects of radio
frequency emissions to the extent that the regulated services and facilities comply with the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) regulations concerning such emissions.
(C) Definitions.
ANTENNA. Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting or transmitting
electromagnetic waves, including but not limited to directional antennas, such as panels, microwave
dishes, and omni-directional antennas, such as whip antennas.
Zoning Code
109
COMMERCIAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES. Licensed commercial
wireless communication services including cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized
mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging, and similar services that
are marketed to the general public.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES. Overhead or underground electrical, gas, steam, or water
transmission or distribution systems and structures or collection, communication, supply, or disposal
systems and structures used by public utilities or governmental departments or commissions or as are
required for the protection of the public health, safety, or general welfare, including towers, poles,
wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes and accessories
in connection therewith but not including buildings. For the purpose of this chapter, commercial
telecommunication service facilities shall not be considered public utility uses, and are defined
separately.
RFI. Radio frequency interference.
RFR. Radio frequency radiation.
TOWER. Any ground or mounted pole, spire, steeple, structure, or combination thereof taller
than 15 feet, including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, and masts, intended primarily for the
purpose of mounting an antenna, meteorological device, or similar apparatus above grade.
TOWER, MULTI-USER. A tower to which is attached the antennas of more than 1 commercial
wireless telecommunication service provider or governmental entity.
TOWER, SINGLE-USER. A tower to which is attached only the antennas of a single user,
although the tower may be designed to accommodate the antennas of multiple users as required in this
chapter.
(D) Required permits.
(1) Prior to any construction activities, the following permits must be secured from the city:
(a) A city building permit; and
(b) A conditional use permit, with attachments, as required by this chapter.
(2) An applicant for a telecommunications tower or facility permit must be a
telecommunications provider or must provide a copy of its executed contract to provide land or facilities
to an existing telecommunications provider to the city at the time that an application is submitted. A
permit shall not be granted for a tower or facility to be built on speculation.
Zoning Code
110
(3) No construction, alteration, modification (including the installation of antennas for new
uses) or installation of any telecommunications tower or facility shall commence without a conditional
use permit first being obtained from the city.
(E) Zoning district use. Telecommunication towers and antennae shall only be allowed in the
Highway Business and Industrial Zoning Districts in the city upon the approval of the 2 permits required
above. A building permit and a conditional use permit are both required in said Highway Business and
Industrial Districts.
(F) Conditional use permit. The city may, by conditional use permit, authorize the use of city
property for towers in accordance with the procedures of this code. The city has no obligation to allow
the use of city property for this purpose.
(G) Water tower or reservoir sites. The city's water towers and reservoirs represent a large public
investment in water pressure stabilization and peak capacity reserves. Protection of the quality of the
city's water supply is of prime importance to the city. As access to the city's water storage systems
increases, so too increases the potential for contamination of the public water supply. For these reasons,
the placement of antennas or towers on water tower or reservoir sites will be allowed only when the city
is fully satisfied that the following requirements are met.
(1) The applicant's access to the facility will not increase the risks of contamination to the city's
water supply;
(2) There is sufficient room on the structure and/or on the grounds to accommodate the
applicant's facility;
(3) The presence of the facility will not increase the water tower or reservoir maintenance costs
to the city; and,
(4) The presence of the facility will not be harmful to the health or workers maintaining the
water tower or reservoir.
(H) Application process. All applicants who wish to locate an antenna or tower on city owned
property must submit to the Zoning Administrator a completed application and detailed plan that
complies with the submittal requirements of the Zoning Ordinance along with other pertinent information
requested by the city.
(I) Termination.
(1) The City Council may terminate any lease if it determines that any 1 of the following
conditions exist:
(a) A potential user with a higher priority cannot find another adequate location and the
Zoning Code
111
potential use would be incompatible with the existing use;
(b) A user's frequency broadcast unreasonably interferes with other users of a higher
priority, regardless of whether or not this interference was adequately predicted in the technical analysis;
or
(c) A user violates any of the standards in this policy or the conditions attached to the
city's permission.
(2) Before taking action, the city will provide notice to the user of the intended termination and
the reasons for it, and provide an opportunity, for the user to address the City Council regarding the
proposed action. This procedure need not be followed in emergency situations.
(J) Reservation of right. Notwithstanding the above, the City Council reserves the right to deny,
for any reason, the use of any or all city owned property by any 1 or all applicants.
(K) Use of revenue. All revenue generated through the lease of city owned property for towers and
antennas shall be made payable to the city and transmitted to the city's Department of Finance.
(L) Area, setback and height restrictions.
(1) Lot area. The minimum lot area requirements are determined by the zoning district in
which the tower development site is located and as determined by any additional area needed to meet all
setback requirements of this chapter.
(2) Tower setbacks. The minimum setback from all property lines and public rights of way for
telecommunications towers, exclusive of attached antennae, shall be equal to its height.
(3) Height restrictions.
(a) A maximum height for telecommunications towers is 150 feet, excluding attached
antennae. Measurement of tower height must include the tower structure itself, the base pad, and any
other telecommunications facilities attached thereto. Tower height is measured from grade.
(b) Notwithstanding the above, additional height may be approved upon a finding by the
city that additional height is necessary in order to provide coverage in the city or to accomplish
collocation of facilities and that the additional height will not cause an undue visual impact on the scenic
character or appearance of the area.
(c) When the property is within the vicinity of the city's airport, the airport's zoning height
requirements within various control zones shall take precedent over the limits shown above. Please refer
to the city=s airport zoning map and document for further information.
Zoning Code
112
(M) Collocation requirements.
An application for a new telecommunications tower shall not be approved unless the city finds
that the telecommunications facilities planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an
existing or approved tower or structure due to 1 of the following reasons:
(1) The proposed antennas and equipment would exceed the structural or spatial capacity of the
existing or approved tower or facility, as documented by a qualified engineer licensed to practice in the
State of Minnesota. Additionally, the existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced, modified or
replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent equipment, at a reasonable cost, to provide coverage and
capacity comparable to that of the proposed facility.
(2) The proposed antennas and equipment would cause interference, materially impacting the
usefulness of other existing or permitted equipment at the existing or approved tower or facility as
documented by a qualified engineer licensed to practice in the State of Minnesota and such interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
(3) The proposed antennas and equipment, either alone or together with existing facilities,
equipment or antennas, would create RFI in violation of federal standards or requirements.
(4) The proposed antennas and equipment, either alone or together with existing facilities,
equipment or antennas, would create RFR in violation of federal standards or requirements.
(5) Existing or approved towers and structures cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a
height necessary to function reasonably or are too far from the area of needed coverage to function
reasonably as documented by a qualified engineer licensed to practice in the State of Minnesota.
(6) Aesthetic reasons make it unreasonable to locate the planned telecommunications equipment
upon an existing or approved tower or building.
(7) There is no existing or approved tower in the area in which coverage is sought.
(8) Other unforeseen specific reasons make it unreasonable to locate the planned
telecommunications equipment upon an existing or approved tower or building.
(N) Tower design requirements. Proposed or modified towers and antennae shall meet the following
design requirements:
(1) Towers and antennae shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment through
the use of color and camouflaging architectural treatment, except in instances where the color is dictated
by federal or state authorities.
Zoning Code
113
(2) Commercial wireless telecommunication service towers shall be of a monopole design
unless the City Council determines that an alternative design would better blend in to the surrounding
environment. Towers must be self-supporting without the use of wires, cables, beams, or other means.
(3) Towers must be designed to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and
to accept antennas mounted at varying heights when overall permitted height allows. Towers shall be
designed structurally, electrically and in all respects to accommodate both the applicant's antennas and
additional antennas when overall permitted height allows.
(O) Construction requirements.
(1) All antennae, towers, and accessory structures shall comply with all applicable provisions
of this chapter.
(2) Towers shall be certified by a qualified and licensed professional engineer to conform to the
latest structural standards and wind loading requirements of the Uniform Building Code and Electronics
Industry Association.
(3) No part of any antenna or tower nor any lines, cable, equipment, wires, or braces in
connection with either shall at any time extend across or over any part of the right-of-way, public street,
highway, sidewalk, or property line.
(4) Towers and associated antennae shall be designed to conform with accepted electrical
engineering methods and practices and to comply with the provisions of the National Electrical Code.
(5) All signal and remote control conductors of low energy extending substantially horizontally
above the ground between a tower or antenna and a structure, or between towers, shall be at least 8 feet
above the ground at all points, unless buried underground.
(6) Every tower affixed to the ground shall be protected by a security fence to discourage
climbing of the tower by unauthorized persons.
(7) Tower locations should provide the maximum amount of screening possible for off-site
views of the facility. Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable.
The area around the base of the tower and any accessory structures shall be landscaped and/or screened.
(P) Site plan requirements. In addition to site plan requirements found elsewhere in this zoning
ordinance or within Olivia's subdivision ordinance and building permit requirements, site plans for
telecommunications facilities shall include the following supplemental information:
(1) Location map. A copy of a portion of the most recent USGS Quadrangle map showing the
area within at least a 2-mile radius of the proposed tower site.
Zoning Code
114
(2) Vicinity map. Vicinity map showing the entire vicinity within a 2,500-foot radius of the
tower site, including the telecommunications facility or tower, topography, public and private roads and
driveways, buildings and structures, water bodies, wetlands, landscape features, historic sites and
habitats for endangered species. It shall indicate the property lines of the proposed tower site parcel and
all easements or rights of way needed for access from a public way to the tower.
(3) Proposed site plans. Proposed site plans of the entire development indicating all
improvements including landscaping, utility lines, guy wires, screening and roads.
(4) Elevations. Elevations showing all facades and indicating all exterior materials and color of
towers, buildings and associated facilities.
(5) Construction sequences and time schedules. Construction sequences and time schedule for
completion of each phase of the entire project.
(6) Scale. Plans shall be drawn at a minimum at the scale of 1 inch equals 50 feet.
(Q) Lights and other attachments.
(1) No antenna or tower shall have affixed or attached to it in any way, except during time of
repair or installation, any lights, reflectors, flashers, or other illuminating device, except as required by
the Federal Aviation Agency (FAA) or the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), nor shall any
tower have constructed on, or attached to, in any way, any platform, catwalk, crow's nest, or like
structure, except during periods of construction or repair.
(2) The use of any portion of a tower for signs other than warning or equipment information
signs is prohibited.
(R) Accessory utility buildings. All utility buildings and structures accessory to a tower shall be
architecturally designed to blend in with the surrounding environment and shall meet the minimum
setback requirements of the zoning district in which the tower site is located. Ground mounted equipment
shall be screened from view by suitable vegetation, except where a design of non-vegetative screening
better reflects and complements the architectural character of the surrounding neighborhood.
(S) Screening standards.
(1) When used, walls or fences must provide for full visual screening of accessory buildings or
storage areas, as viewed from residential areas and state and county roads;
(2) The materials used for constructing the wall or fence shall be specified in the site plan and
shall be subject to recommendation by the Planning Commission and approval by the City Council;
(3) Berms, if used, shall be constructed with a slope not to exceed 3:1 and shall be covered
Zoning Code
115
with sod or other landscape material sufficient to prevent erosion of the berm.
(4) Trees, hedges or other vegetative materials, when used, must provide at least 75%
screening capacity throughout the year. Such screening must also conform to all vegetative setback
requirements of this Code.
(T) Security. Towers must be reasonably secured to protect against trespass. Appropriate signage
shall be posted indicating that trespassing and/or vandalism to the property may be punishable under
local, state, or federal laws.
(U) Access. Parcels upon which towers are located must provide access during normal business
hours to at least 1 paved vehicular parking space on site.
(V) Maintenance requirements.
(1) The yard area in front of fences and walls shall be trimmed and maintained in a neat and
attractive manner.
(2) Repairs to damaged areas of walls or fences shall be made within 30 days of sustaining said
damage.
(3) Areas left in a natural state and vegetative screening areas shall be properly maintained in a
sightly and well kept condition.
(4) Diseased, dying, or dead vegetative screening elements shall be removed and then replaced,
at a minimum, with healthy plants of the same size required when first planted.
(5) The telecommunications facility owner shall maintain adequate insurance on all
telecommunications facilities.
(W) Abandoned or unused towers or portions of towers.
(1) All abandoned or unused towers and associated facilities shall be removed within 6 months
of the cessation of operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the City Council. A copy
of the relevant portions of a signed lease which requires the applicant to remove the tower and any
associated facilities upon the cessation of their operations shall be submitted at the time of application. In
the event that a tower is not removed within 6 months of cessation of operations at a site, the tower and
associated facilities may be removed by the city and the cost of removal assessed against the property.
(2) Unused portions of towers above manufactured connection shall be removed within 6
months of the time of antenna relocations. The replacement of portions of a tower previously removed
requires the issuance of a new building/conditional use permit.
Zoning Code
116
(X) Antennae mounted on roofs, walls, and existing towers. The placement of wireless
telecommunication antennae on roofs, walls and existing towers may be approved by the City Council,
provided the antennae meet the requirements of this ordinance, after submittal of:
(1) A site and building plan.
(2) A report prepared by a qualified and licensed professional engineer indicting the existing
structure or tower's suitability to accept the antenna, and the proposed method of affixing the antenna to
the structure. A complete detailing of all fixtures and couplings needed and the precise point of
attachment shall be indicated.
(Y) Additional submittal requirements. In addition to the information required elsewhere in this
chapter, applications for towers shall include the following supplemental information:
(1) Documentation of the area to be served by the tower including a narrative describing why
the site chosen is the most appropriate site for the tower location, the results of any environmental review
conducted on the chosen site, and a discussion of why existing structures within the search area would
not be suitable as locations or co-locations for the purpose of antennae.
(2) A copy of an agreement between the applicant and property owner that the site and tower
will be designed for not less than 3 users. The agreement shall also include a statement that any unused
or obsolete tower shall be removed by the property owner or applicant. This agreement shall be signed
by the applicant and property owner and shall be attached to and become part of the permit .
(3) A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer which:
(a) Describes the tower height and design including a cross section and elevation;
(b) Documents the height above grade for all potential mounting positions for co-locating
antennae and the minimum separation distances between antennae;
(c) Provides written evidence from the engineer that at the proposed site the applicant will
be in compliance with all FCC regulations, standards and requirements, and includes a statement that the
applicant commits to continue to maintain compliance with all FCC regulations, standards and
requirements regarding both radio frequency interference (RFI) and radio frequency radiation (RFR).
The city may hire independent engineers to perform evaluations of compliance with the FCC regulations,
standards and requirements on an annual basis at unannounced times.
(d) Includes an engineer's stamp and registration number; and
(e) Includes other information necessary to evaluate the request.
Zoning Code
117
(4) Before the issuance of a building permit, the following supplemental information shall be
submitted:
(a) Proof that the proposed tower complies with regulations administered by the FAA; and
(b) A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer which demonstrates the
tower's compliance with the aforementioned structural and electrical standards.
(5) Additional liability insurance equivalent to the minimum city requirements and proof of
insurance be provided with all other information contained with the submittal materials.
(Z) Existing antennas and towers. Antennas and towers in existence before the adoption of the
ordinance creating this chapter that do not conform to or comply with this chapter are subject to the
following provisions:
(1) Towers and antennas may continue in use for the purpose now used and as now existing but
may not be replaced or materially altered without complying in all respects with this chapter.
(2) If such towers or antennas are hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason or cause
whatsoever, the tower or antenna may be repaired and restored to its former use, location, and physical
dimensions upon obtaining a building permit therefore, but without otherwise complying with this
chapter, provided, however, that if the cost of repairing the tower to the former use, physical
dimensions, and location would exceed the cost of a new tower of like kind and quality, then the tower
may not be repaired or restored except in full compliance with this chapter.
(AA) Temporary wireless communications. Any telecommunications facility designed for temporary
use is subject to the following:
(1) Use of a temporary facility is permitted only if the owner has received a temporary use
permit from the city.
(2) Temporary telecommunications facilities are permitted for no longer than 5-days' use
during a special event.
(3) The maximum height of a temporary facility is 50 feet from grade.
(4) Temporary facilities must comply with all applicable portions of these regulations.
(BB) Evaluation and monitoring. As a condition of approval for telecommunication facilities the
applicant shall reimburse the city for its costs to retain outside expert technical assistance to evaluate any
aspect of the proposed siting of telecommunications facilities. The owner of a telecommunications facility
shall provide the city with current, technical evidence of compliance with FCC radiation emission
Zoning Code
118
requirements, annually or more frequently at the city's reasonable request. If the owner does not
promptly provide the city with satisfactory technical evidence of FCC radiation compliance, the city may
carry out tests to ensure FCC radiation compliance using a qualified expert. The owner shall reimburse
the city for its reasonable costs in carrying out such compliance testing.
(CC) Interference with public safety telecommunications. No new telecommunications facility shall be
placed or constructed in such a way as to interfere with public safety telecommunications. All
applications for new telecommunications facilities shall be accompanied by an intermodulation study that
predicts no likely interference problems and certification that the study has been provided to the
appropriate public safety agencies. Before testing or operating new service or changes in existing service,
telecommunications providers shall notify the City at least 10 calendar days in advance of such changes
and allow the city to monitor interference levels during the testing process.
(DD) Variances. The City Council may grant a variance to the setback, separation or buffer
requirements, and maximum height provision of this section by the criteria set forth under this chapter,
including the following additional variance criteria for telecommunication towers and antennae:
(1) The location, shape, appearance or nature of use of the proposed tower will not
substantially detract from the aesthetics of the area, not change the character of the neighborhood in
which the tower is proposed to be located;
(2) The variance will not create a threat to the public health, safety or welfare;
(3) In the case of a requested modification to the setback requirement, that the size of the plat
upon which the tower is proposed to be located makes compliance impossible, the only alternative for the
applicant is to locate the tower at another site but poses a greater threat to the public health, safety or
welfare or is closer in proximity to a residentially zoned land;
(4) In the case of a request for modification of separation requirements, if the person provides
written technical evidence from an engineer that the proposed tower and telecommunications facilities
must be located at the proposed site in order to meet the coverage needs of the applicant's wireless
communications system and if the person agrees to create approved landscaping and other buffers to
screen the tower from being visible to the residential area;
(5) In the case of a request for modification of the maximum height limit, that the modification
is necessary to (1) facilities co-location of telecommunications facilities in order to avoid construction of
a new tower; or (2) to meet the coverage requirements of the applicant's wireless communications
system, which requirements must be documented with written, technical evidence from an engineer.
(EE) Penalties. Any person, corporation, or other entity that constructs, erects, places, reconstructs,
enlarges, expands or repairs a tower or antenna in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be subject to any additional legal or equitable remedies available to the city.
Zoning Code
119
(FF) Fees. The fees for filing an application to build or alter a telecommunications facility shall be
set by the city. Fees may include the reasonable costs of an independent technical assessment of the
application.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.073 ADULT USE BUSINESSES.
The following provisions are applicable for purposes of this Chapter and supplemental to Chapter
112 of this Code to the extent that they are consistent with that Chapter.
(A) Accessory use. No adult use shall be permitted as an accessory use.
(B) Adult use - incidental. An adult use - incidental may locate as a permitted use in the B-3 Central
Business Zone subject to the provisions of this chapter and other ordinances, including the standards of
said zone.
(C) Adult use - nonprotected. An adult use - nonprotected may not locate as a permitted or
conditional use in any zone of the city.
(D) Adult use - primary. An adult use - primary may locate as permitted uses in a B-1 Highway
Business, I-1 Light Industry, and I-2 Heavy Industry Zones, subject to the provisions of this chapter and
other ordinances, including the standards of said zones.
(E) Adult use - primary distance provisions. No adult use-primary shall be permitted within: 300
feet of R-1 Single-Family Residential Districts and R-2 Mixed Residential Districts; 600 feet of a public
library, park, church, or school; 200 feet of a cemetery; and 300 feet of an establishment licensed to sell
on-sale intoxicating or non-intoxicating alcoholic beverages. The distance is to be measured in a direct
line from the property line to property line without regard for intervening properties or structures.
(F) Simple subdivision of a large parcel allowed. When a property owner petitions for a simple
subdivision of a large parcel in order to accommodate the distance requirements of division (E) and both
resulting parcels would be buildable lots as far as setbacks, lot width and depth, lot area, building
coverage, parking, access, and utilities are concerned, the Council shall allow the simple subdivision to
accommodate the above-described distance requirements for an adult use-primary.
(G) Off street parking requirements. An adult use involving new construction shall have off-street
parking to accommodate normal traffic generated by the business.
(1) When the determination of the required number of parking spaces results in a fraction, the
fraction of 1/2 or less may be disregarded and the fraction in excess of 1/2 shall be counted as 1 space.
Zoning Code
120
(2) An adult cabaret, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult
motion picture theater, or other adult use - primary providing on-premises entertainment shall have a
minimum of 1 space for each 3 seats based upon the designed maximum occupancy.
(3) An adult use - incidental, adult bookstore, adult novelty business, or other adult use
providing retail sales or rental shall have a minimum of 1 space for each 200 square feet of floor area.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
HOME OCCUPATIONS
' 152.085 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
(A) It is the intent of this section on home occupations to provide peace, quiet and domestic
tranquility within all residential neighborhoods in the city, and in order to guarantee to all residents
freedom from excessive noise, excessive traffic, nuisance, fire hazard and other possible effects of
commercial uses being conducted in residential areas; to ensure the compatibility of home occupations
with other uses permitted in the Residential Districts; and maintain and preserve the character of
residential neighborhoods. It is also the intent of this section to promote the efficient use of public
services and facilities by assuring these services are provided to the residential population for which they
were planned and constructed, rather than commercial uses.
(B) The city recognizes the need for some citizens to use their place of residence for limited
nonresidential activities. However, the city believes that the need to protect the integrity of its residential
areas is of paramount concern.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.086 STANDARDS.
In all residential zones, home occupations in compliance with the following regulations are permitted
as accessory uses, and no special use permit shall be required in order to establish and maintain such
uses.
(A) The primary use of the unit is a dwelling. The area set aside for home occupations shall not
exceed 20% of the total floor area of such residence.
(B) The use shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on by the inhabitants thereof
and no others.
(C) There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the dwelling or premises or any visible
Zoning Code
121
evidence of the conduct of a home occupation.
(D) No interior or exterior business sign shall be permitted.
(E) There shall be no storage of equipment, vehicles or supplies associated with the home
occupation outside the dwelling.
(F) There shall not be conducted on the premises the business of selling stocks of merchandise,
supplies or products, provided that orders previously made by telephone, Internet, or at a sales party may
be filled on the premises. That is, direct sales of products off display shelves or racks is not allowed, but
a person may pick up an order placed earlier as described above.
(G) Parties for the purpose of selling merchandise or taking orders shall not be held more than 4
times each month.
(H) A home occupation shall not create greater vehicle or pedestrian traffic than normal for the
district in which it is located. In no case shall a home occupation be open to the public at times earlier
than 7:00 a.m. nor later than 10:00 p.m.
(I) No highly explosive or combustible material should be used or stored on the premises. No
activity shall be allowed that would interfere with radio or television transmission in the area, nor shall
there be any offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare noticeable at or beyond the
property line.
(J) A home occupation shall not generate the need for parking spaces to cause such parking to be
located on the street in front of a neighbor's property.
(K) Deliveries from commercial suppliers may not be made more than once each week, and the
deliveries shall not restrict traffic circulation.
(L) No vehicle which requires a commercial driver's license for its driver, nor
commercially-licensed vehicles, may be utilized in the home occupation business except as otherwise
permitted by applicable Minnesota law or Olivia ordinance.
(M) The use of mechanical equipment other than is usual for purely domestic or hobby purposes is
allowed only when it meets the requirements under division (I).
(N) Garage sales are permitted without special permit provided they meet the following standards:
(1) Sales last no longer than 3 days.
(2) Sales are held no more than twice yearly.
Zoning Code
122
(3) Sales are conducted on the owner's property. Multiple family sales are permitted if they are held on
the property of 1 of the participants.
(4) No goods purchased for resale may be offered for sale.
(5) No consignment goods may be offered for sale.
(6) All directional and advertising signs shall be free-standing and removed after completion of
the sale.
(7) All directional and advertising signs placed on private property shall have the owner's
permission.
(8) No directional or advertising signs may be larger than 2 feet by 3 feet.
(O) The operation of day care homes in Residential Districts has its own standards and regulations
and are found elsewhere in this chapter.
(P) The following uses shall be allowed home occupations (unless listed as prohibited in this
section.)
(1) Architectural studio.
(2) Art studio.
(3) Baby sitting.
(4) Consulting service.
(5) Contracting (except as specifically prohibited.)
(6) Data processing.
(7) Direct sale product distribution (Am way, Avon, Shaklee, Tupperware, Herbalife and
similar products.)
(8) Drafting and graphic service.
(9) Dressmaking, sewing, tailoring, contract sewing.
(10) Engineering service.
(11) Financial planning, investment service.
Zoning Code
123
(12) Flower arranging.
(13) Gardening, landscape maintenance.
(14) Home crafts.
(15) House cleaning service.
(16) Insurance sales or broker.
(17) Interior design.
(18) Jewelry making, jeweler.
(19) Laundry, ironing service.
(20) Locksmith.
(21) Mail order (not including retail sales from site.)
(22) Real estate sales or broker.
(23) Sales representative (office only.)
(24) Telephone answering, switchboard, call forwarding.
(25) Tutoring.
(26) Typing, word processing service.
(27) Wallpapering.
(28) Watch repair.
(29) Writing, computer programming.
(Q) The following uses shall be prohibited as home occupations, unless authorized by a conditional
use permit. In the rare case where the city grants a conditional use permit, the home occupation still must
meet the standards shown above for home occupations, and meet any other stipulation placed on the
business by the city.
(1) Ambulance service.
Zoning Code
124
(2) Appliance repair.
(3) Automobile repair, part sales, upholstery or detailing, washing service (including
businesses working at customer's homes.)
(4) Beauty salons and barber shops (owner operated only.)
(5) Boarding house, time share condominium.
(6) Carpentry, cabinet making.
(7) Dog kenneling.
(8) Contracting, masonry, plumbing or painting.
(9) Health salons, gyms, dance studios, aerobic exercise studios, massage.
(10) Limousine or pedicabs service.
(11) Medical or dental office.
(12) Mortician, hearse service.
(13) Palm reading, fortune telling.
(14) Private clubs.
(15) Restaurants, taverns, food preparation.
(16) Retail sales from site (except direct distribution and sales parties.)
(17) Tow truck service.
(18) Upholstery.
(19) Veterinary uses (including care, grooming, or boarding.)
(R) All uses not listed in divisions (P) or (Q) shall require a conditional use permit from the city,
subject to the interpretation of the Zoning Administrator, unless the City Council, through a
recommendation of the City Planning Commission, determines that the home occupation is similar to
uses listed under division (P).
(S) The home occupation shall not be considered a nonconforming use in the event of revisions to
the applicable provisions of this chapter.
Zoning Code
125
(T) Persons with demonstrated physical handicaps may be permitted special consideration by the
Planning Commission and the City Council. The applicant may request waiver of a portion or all of 1 or
more of the foregoing requirements. This special request shall be considered by the Planning
Commission at a public hearing after notice to property owners within 350 feet of the subject property.
The Planning Commission will make recommendations to the City Council, which may only grant
waivers on the basis of applicant's physical inability to function within said requirements.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.087 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES.
(A) Any aggrieved person believing that a violation or violations of this subchapter are occurring
and who desires that action be taken by the city shall notify the Zoning Administrator of such written
allegation(s). Within 30 calendar days after receipt by the Zoning Administrator of such written
allegation(s), the Zoning Administrator shall complete an investigation of the allegation(s) to determine
the merits thereof.
(B) Within 10 calendar days after the Zoning Administrator has completed the investigation(s), he or
she shall notify in writing the following persons.
(1) If the Zoning Administrator determines that no violation as alleged or otherwise is
occurring, notification of that decision shall be given to the complaining person or a spokesperson for the
complaining person by certified mail, return requested.
(2) If the Zoning Administrator determines that a violation is occurring or has occurred as
alleged, notification of that decision and a time for compliance shall be sent by certified mail, return
requested, to both the violator and the complaining person or a spokesperson for the complaining person.
The notification shall also state what action, if any, will be taken if compliance is not timely affected.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.088 PENALTY.
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with,
or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this subchapter shall, upon conviction, be
fined not more than $100 for each offense. Each day a violation shall exist shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.089 BED AND BREAKFAST INNS.
Zoning Code
126
(A) Special use permit. Bed and breakfast inns shall only be allowed through the granting of a
special use permit for those meeting at least the minimum criteria outlined herein, and only after it is
determined that the single-family character of the property and the quality of the neighborhood will be
preserved. A bed and breakfast inn must be an existing residential building and have no greater impact
than, or be perceived to be other than, a private home with house guests. The intent is not to permit or
allow yards to be destroyed, landscaping to be removed or the integrity of the neighborhood to be altered
in order to convert the property to a bed and breakfast inn.
(B) Obligation to comply. The bed and breakfast owner shall at all times be subject to all lawful
exercise of the police power of the city and to such reasonable regulations as the city hereafter by
ordinance provides.
(C) Application. An application for this special use permit shall include the following:
(1) A site plan.
(2) A landscape plan.
(3) A set of floor plans indicating the traditional uses of all rooms and the intended uses in the
bed and breakfast operation.
(4) Sign drawings showing location, dimensions and detail.
(D) Standards and conditions. Bed and breakfast inns may be granted permits in zones subject to
the following standards and conditions.
(1) The main residential building must contain a minimum of 1,500 square feet of area.
(2) The proprietor shall be the owner or manager of the property and no dwelling unit other
than that of the proprietor, no home occupation, roomers or boarders shall be permitted.
(3) Two off street parking spaces for the home occupants plus 1 for each guest room shall be
provided.
(4) Parking layouts and construction shall be considered on a case-by-case basis prior to
approval.
(5) Only breakfast or light refreshments shall be provided to guests. Dining and other facilities
shall not be open to the public, but shall be used exclusively by the registered guests and residents,
unless allowed by a separate permit.
(6) There shall be a limitation of no more than 6 on the number of guest rooms permitted based
on the character and size of the building, and guest rooms shall have traditionally been bedrooms.
Zoning Code
127
(7) One sign may be erected on the property, not to exceed 2 square feet in size. Such signage
shall not be illuminated and shall complement the architecture of the structure.
(8) Guests stays shall be limited to 10 consecutive days.
(9) The bed and breakfast shall be a subordinate use to the primary single-family use of the
structure.
(10) The bed and breakfast shall employ not more than the equivalent of 2 full-time persons who
are not domicile in the principal structure.
(11) The inn shall comply with all applicable laws, rules and regulations governing its existence
and operation, including, but not limited to, the State Building Code, the State Fire Code, and the State
Health Code.
(12) The bed and breakfast shall have a valid, current State license (hotel and/or food.)
(13) Such other conditions deemed necessary by the planning commission and/or city council to
ensure the use complies with the purpose of this division.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
CHILD DAY CARE FACILITIES
' 152.105 INTENT.
To allow the establishment of child care facilities in safe and convenient locations throughout the
community to accommodate the growing demand for child care in the community caused by
demographic, economic and social forces. The city believes that the need to protect the integrity of its
residential areas is of paramount concern.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.106 FAMILY DAY CARE HOME AND GROUP FAMILY DAY CARE HOME.
A family day care home and a group family day care home shall be permitted by right in all zoning
districts permitting residents, provided that:
(A) State of Minnesota licensing requirements are met, including those pertaining to building, fire
safety and health code.
Zoning Code
128
(B) Lot size, building size, setbacks and lot coverage conform to those applicable to the zoning
district.
(C) One off-street parking space is provided for each nonresident or nonfamily member employee,
in addition to the off-street parking spaces required within this chapter. The residential driveway is
acceptable for this purpose.
(D) If located on a major arterial street, an off-street drop-off/pick-up area must be provided.
(E) All necessary forms filed with the city.
(F) Signage shall conform to the requirements for the zoning district in which the home is located.
(G) No structural or decorative alteration that will alter the single-family character of an existing
residential structure or be incompatible with surrounding residences is permitted.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.107 CHILD DAY CARE CENTERS.
A child day care center may be allowed in the designated zoning districts as follows:
(A) Limitation in use of family residence. No child day care center shall be located in a private
family residence.
(B) Conditional use AG permits. A child day care center may be allowed in all zoning districts
permitting residents only upon issuance of a conditional use permit by the city.
(C) All other zoning districts. A child day care center is permitted by right in all other zoning
districts subject to the following conditions:
(1) State licensing standards and requirements are met.
(2) Setbacks, screening, and landscaping shall conform to the pertinent portions of the zoning
code.
(3) Structure shall meet building, sanitation, health, traffic safety and fire safety code
requirements.
(4) A minimum of 1 off-street parking space shall be provided for each employee, plus an
off-street drop-off/pick-up area. Parking areas shall be screened from view if they abut residential uses.
Zoning Code
129
(5) All necessary forms filed with the city.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.108 DECLARATION OF CONDITIONS.
The Planning Commission and City Council may impose such conditions on the granting of a day
care facility conditional use permit as may be necessary to carry out the purpose and provisions of this
section.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.109 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
Day care facilities shall be allowed as a principal use or as an accessory use, provided that the day
care facilities meet all the applicable provisions of this section.
(A) Lot requirements and setbacks. The proposed site for a day care facility as a principal use shall
have a minimum lot area as set forth in the respective zoning district. The City Council may increase the
required lot area in those cases where such an increase is considered necessary to ensure compatibility of
activities and maintain the public health, safety and general welfare. The day care facility shall meet the
setback requirements of the respective zoning district.
(B) Sewer and water. All day care facilities shall have access to municipal sewer and water or have
adequate private sewer and water to protect the health and safety of all persons who occupy the facility.
(C) Buffering. Unless exempted by the Zoning Administrator, where an outdoor play area of a day
care facility abuts any commercial or industrial use or zone, or public right-of-way, the day care facility
shall provide screening along the shared boundary of such uses, zones, or public rights-of-way. All of
the required fencing and screening shall comply with the fencing and screening requirements of this
chapter.
(D) Off-street loading. The facility shall have an off-street loading space.
(E) Signage. All signing and informational and visual communication devices shall be in compliance
with the provisions of '' 152.150 et seq.
(F) Compliance with state requirements. The structure and operation shall be in compliance with
State of Minnesota Department of Human Services regulations and shall be licensed accordingly.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
Zoning Code
130
' 152.110 INSPECTION.
At any and all reasonable hours, with or without notice, the city hereby reserves the right upon
issuing any day care facility conditional use permit to inspect the premises in which the occupation is
being conducted to insure compliance with the provisions of this section or any conditions additionally
imposed.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
' 152.120 OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES.
In all districts where off-street parking lots are permitted or required, such off-street parking lots
shall be constructed and maintained subject to the following regulations.
(A) Adequate ingress and egress shall be provided.
(B) Off street parking areas shall be improved with a durable and dustless surface. Such areas shall
be so graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulation within the area. These
requirements shall also apply to open sales for cars, trucks and other equipment.
(C) Necessary curbs or other protections against damage to adjoining properties, streets and
sidewalks shall be provided and maintained.
(D) Plans for the construction of any parking lots must be approved by the Planning Commission
before construction is started. No such land shall be used for parking until approved by first the Building
Official and than by the Planning Commission.
(E) Parking and driveway areas adjacent to the streets must have barriers. The barriers may be
vegetative (i.e. shrubs) or physical (i.e. curbs).
(F) Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area shall be arranged to reflect the light
away from adjoining premises in any AR@ District.
(G) All off-street parking spaces shall have access off driveways and not directly off the public
street. Such driveway access shall not exceed 30 feet in width.
(H) Property that constitutes required off-street parking area may not be separated, through sale or
other means, from the property containing the principal use for which the parking area is required.
Zoning Code
131
(I) Signs located in any parking area necessary for orderly operation of traffic movement, shall be
in addition to accessory signs.
(J) Existing off-street parking spaces upon the effective date of this chapter shall not be reduced in
number unless said remaining number exceeds the requirements set forth herein for a similar new use.
(K) Under no circumstances shall required parking facilities accessory to residential structures be
used for the storage of commercial vehicles or for the parking of automobiles belonging to the
employees, owners, tenants or customers of nearby business or manufacturing establishments.
(L) All utilities shall be protected against damage as specified by Olivia Public Facilities Department
Heads.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.121 OFF-STREET PARKING LOCATION.
All required off-street parking facilities shall be located as follows:
(A) One- and 2Bfamily dwellings: on the same lot as principal use served.
(B) Multiple-family dwellings: on the same lot as the principal use served or within 100 feet of the
main entrance to the principal building served.
(C) Business and industrial off-street parking spaces shall not be less than 20 feet from an adjacent
lot zoned or used for residential purposes. In all other cases, no off-street parking area containing more
than 4 parking spaces shall be located closer than 15 feet from an adjacent lot zoned or used for
residential purposes.
(D) Within 300 feet of a main entrance to the principal building served in a Business or Industrial
District.
(E) There shall be no off-street parking space within 3 feet of any street right-of-way.
(F) Nothing in this section shall prevent the extension of, or addition to a building or structure into
an existing parking area which is required for the original building or structure when the same amount of
space taken by the extension or addition is provided by an enlargement of the existing parking area or an
additional area within the required distance of such building.
(G) Off-street parking space may be located within the required front yard of any AB@ or AM@
District, but no off-street parking shall be permitted in the required front yard of any AR@ District except
upon a driveway providing access to a garage, carport or parking area for a dwelling.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
Zoning Code
132
' 152.122 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
(A) In all zoning districts, except (B-2) Central Business District and in connection with all uses,
there shall be provided at the time any use or building is erected, enlarged, expanded or increased,
off-street parking spaces for vehicles of employees, residents and/or patrons in accordance with the
following requirements.
(B) For the purpose of this chapter, an off-street parking space shall be a minimum of 82 feet wide
for angle parking and 9 feet wide for 90-degree stall parking. It shall also provide proper access to a
public street or alley, in which maneuvering room may be estimated at 300 square feet, but off-street
parking requirements will be considered to be met only when the requirements below are provided and
maintained, improved in a manner appropriate to the circumstances of the case and in accordance with all
applicable ordinances and regulations.
(C) (1) Required off-street parking areas for 3 or more automobiles shall have individual spaces
marked and shall be so designed, maintained and regulated that no parking or maneuvering incidental to
parking shall be on any public street, walk or alley, and so that any automobile may be parked and
unparked without moving another.
(2) Loading space shall not be construed as supplying off-street parking space.
(3) When units or measurements used in determining the number of required parking spaces
result in requirement of a fractional space and fraction up to and including 1/2 shall be disregarded and
fractions over 1/2 shall require 1 parking space.
(4) Whenever a use requiring off-street parking is increased in floor area, and such use is
located in a building existing on or before the effective date of the ordinance creating this chapter,
additional parking space for the additional floor area shall be provided and maintained in amounts
hereafter specified for that use.
(5) Floor area in the case of offices, merchandising or service types of uses, shall mean the
gross floor area used or intended to be used for services to the public as customers, patrons, clients,
patients as tenants, including areas occupied by fixtures and equipment used for display or sale of
merchandise.
(6) Off-street parking facilities for dwellings shall be provided and located on the same lot or
parcel of land as the building they are intended to serve.
(7) Where a use is not specifically mentioned, off-street parking requirements shall be the same
as for a similar use.
Zoning Code
133
(8) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent collective provisions of off-street
parking facilities for 2 or more buildings or uses provided, collectively, such facilities shall not be less
than the sum of the requirements for the various individual uses computed separately in accordance with
the following table.
(9) The amount of required off-street parking space for new uses or buildings, additions thereto
and additions to existing buildings as specified above, shall be determined in accordance with the
following table, and the space so required and shall be irrevocably reserved for such use.
Use
Required Parking Space
All retail stores, except as
otherwise specified
One for each 100 square feet of gross floor area
Apartments above commercial
uses in Central Business District
One per dwelling unit
Automobile, truck, boat or similar
vehicle sales or rental
establishment
One for each 2 employees during time of maximum
employment plus 1 space for each 2,000 square feet of
lot and building area used to display or storage of
vehicles
Beauty parlors and barber shops
Two for each barber and/or beauty shop chair
Bowling alley
Five for each alley, plus additional space as may be
required herein for related uses such as a restaurant
Business or professional office,
and bank
One for each 200 square feet of gross floor space
Churches, theaters, auditoriums,
mortuaries and other places of
assembly
One for each 3 seats based on maximum design
capacity
Dance hall, pool and billiard
rooms, assembly halls and
exhibition halls, community
centers, civic clubs, fraternal
orders, union halls, adult use
businesses and similar uses
One for each 4 people allowed within the maximum
occupancy load as established by the State Fire
Marshal
Drive-in food establishment (No
seating for customers)
One for each 10 square feet of gross floor area
Establishments for sale and
consumption on the premises of
One for each 75 square feet of floor area
Zoning Code
134
Use
Required Parking Space
alcoholic beverages, food or
refreshments
Furniture and appliance stores,
personal service shops (not
including beauty or barber shops),
household equipment or furniture
repair shops, clothing, shoe repair
or service shops, wholesale stores
and machinery sales
One for each 500 square feet of floor area
Gasoline service station
One for each employee, plus 1 for the owner and/or
management plus 2 for each grease, service or wash
stall
Hospital
One and one-half for each bed
Industrial establishments including
manufacturing, research and
testing laboratories, creameries,
bottling works, printing and
engraving shops, warehousing and
storage buildings
One for each 2 employees on maximum shift or 1 for
each 500 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is
the larger
Medical and dental clinic
Three for each doctor or dentist
Residential
Two for each dwelling unit; the area of which may
include driveways for 1- and 2-family dwellings
Sanitarium, convalescent home,
rest home, nursing home, assisted
living or institution
One for each 2 beds plus 1 for each 3 employees, plus
1 for each resident and staff doctor
Schools, elementary and junior
high
Two for each classroom plus 1 additional for each
200-student capacity
Schools, high school, colleges and
other institutions of higher
learning
One fo reach 7 students based on design capacity, plus
2 additional for each classroom
Senior residential complexes
Assisted living units
One per dwelling unit
Assisted living units: .50 spaces for each residential
unit based on maximum occupancy
Service garage, automobile
Four plus 2 for each service stall and wash stall
Zoning Code
135
Use
Required Parking Space
salesroom, automobile repair,
body shop
Tourist homes, bed & breakfast
inns, motels, hotels, boarding &
rooming houses
One for each guest or sleeping room or suite, 1 per
employee, plus 2 if there is a dwelling unit
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.123 LOADING SPACE.
On the premises with every building, structure, or part thereof, erected and occupied for
manufacturing, or commercial use storage, receipt or distribution of vehicles, materials or merchandise,
there shall be provided and maintained on the lot adequate space for standing, loading and unloading
services in order to avoid undue interferences with public use of the streets or alleys. Such loading berths
shall be constructed and maintained subject to the following regulations:
(A) Size. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, the minimum dimensions allowable for a
loading space or truck berth shall be 15 feet in width and 50 feet in depth. Such space shall be sufficient
for the proposed use as determined by the Planning Commission and approved by the Planning
Commission and the City Council.
(B) Location. All required loading berths shall be off street and shall be located on the building or
use to be served. A loading berth shall not be located less than 100 feet from the intersection of 2 street
right of ways, nor less than 50 feet from a Residential District unless within a building. Loading berths
shall not occupy the required front yard setback space.
(C) Access. Each required loading berth shall be located with appropriate means of vehicular access
to a street or public alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic.
(D) Surfacing. All loading berths and accessways shall be improved with a durable material to
control dust and drainage.
(E) Accessory use. Any space allocated as a loading berth or access drive so as to comply with the
terms of this chapter shall not be used for the storage of goods, inoperable vehicles or be included as part
of the space requirements necessary to meet the off-street parking area.
Zoning Code
136
(F) Required loading berths.
(1) Institutional uses having over 20 units shall have 1 loading space 25 feet in length minimum
for the first 20,000 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 for each 40,000 square feet thereafter.
(2) Retail sales, office, shall have 1 loading space 25 feet in length minimum for the first 6,000
square feet of gross floor area plus 1 for each 10,000 square feet thereafter. This is not required within
the B-3 Central Business District.
(3) Manufacturing, fabrication, warehousing, storing and servicing in a facility over 3,000
square feet shall have at least 1 loading space, with additional berths as needed to adequately serve the
establishment without interfering with off street parking or flow of traffic in public streets or alleys.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
MANUFACTURED HOMES/MOBILE HOME PARKS
' 152.135 PARK PERMIT REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain or operate a manufactured home/mobile
home park or the facilities therein unless such person shall first procure a permit from the city.
Compliance with the provisions of this chapter is necessary to obtain said special use permit.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.136 PROCEDURE.
The following procedure shall be followed for a park permit application.
(A) Application.
(1) An application for a special use permit shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator and
shall contain the following information: Name and address of developer and landowner; Location and
legal description of the proposed park property; Survey and engineering information including distances
with angles, bearings, lengths; and legal descriptions of property involved. This shall be shown on
drawings not to exceed 1 inch equals 50 feet and including the following information:
(a) Location and size of the park.
(b) Location and size of each lot with dimensions and boundary lines.
Zoning Code
137
(c) Limits and location of proposed or existing streets, cartways, curbs, driveways,
sidewalks, easements and rights-of-way.
(d) Location of off-street parking facilities.
(e) Plans for sanitary sewer collection, water systems and storm water drainage system.
(f) Plans for electrical services, telephone services, fuel systems and garbage collection.
(g) Detailed landscaping plans and specifications.
(h) Location and construction plans for park structures such as auxiliary sanitary facilities,
laundries and utility buildings.
(i) Location of required park and/or recreation site including type of equipment.
(j) Such other information as may be requested by the Zoning Administrator to enable him
to determine if the proposed park will comply with all legal requirements including this chapter.
(2) The following general design requirements shall be incorporated into the park site plan.
(a) General location and size.
1. Each park shall comply with applicable ordinances and codes of the city and the
laws of the State of Minnesota. The developer shall provide evidence that the plans have been approved
by the Minnesota Department of Health before the special use permit will be issued.
2. The park shall be located on a well-drained site suitable for the purpose, and so the
drainage of the park area will not endanger any water supply. All plans for the disposal of surface storm
water must be approved by the city.
3. The park shall be located on a minimum lot size of 3 acres, shall contain not less
than 15 home spaces and shall not exceed a gross density of 8 units per acre.
4. Each park shall have frontage to and access to a public street which is deemed
adequate to serve the anticipated traffic needs of the park. Access to parks shall be as approved by the
city.
Zoning Code
138
(b) Roads and parking.
1. Each park shall contain all-weather hard surfaced interior roadways free from dust
and mud and includes adequate provisions for surface drainage. This requirement shall be applicable no
later than 1 year following the initial construction of said interior private roadways. Such streets shall be
private streets.
2. An adequate entrance road of 44-foot pavement width shall be constructed to the
municipality's street or road specifications capable of handling heavy service vehicles such as fire and
garbage trucks without injury to surface or base.
3. Interior roads shall be not less than 44 feet in width for 2-lane roads.
4. Off-street (or road) parking for the park shall be provided in the ratio of 2 spaces
per unit with an all-weather, permanent, hard surfaced area for each home site.
5. Provisions shall be made for each home site to have access on an approved
roadway.
6. Streets approved for dedication to the city shall be constructed in accordance with
applicable city standards.
(c) Bulk and space requirements.
1. Each home space shall have a minimum area of 5,000 square feet exclusive of
roadways and common space.
2. Each home space shall have a minimum width of not less than 50 feet, and a
minimum depth of not less than 100 feet.
3. No home shall be placed closer than 30 feet to any adjacent mobile home, except
that when awnings, porches or cabanas are attached, the minimum distance between each mobile home
shall be 20 feet.
4. No home shall be located closer than 20 feet to the traveled portion of an interior
street.
5. No home shall be placed closer than 15 feet from the side lot line, closer than 15
feet from the rear lot line.
6. No building or structure hereafter erected or altered in a park shall exceed 25 feet
or 12 stories in height.
Zoning Code
139
7. No home shall be located nearer than 20 feet to any property line of the park and
adjacent properties.
8. The occupied area of a home site shall not exceed 75% of the total area of the site
the individual home sites.
(d) Utilities and essential services.
1. Each park shall be served by a sanitary sewer system as provided by this chapter.
2. Each park shall be served by a central water supply system as provided by this
chapter and shall include fire hydrants located in accordance with generally accepted practices.
3. Each park shall be served by a central fuel source metered to the individual home
sites. The source of fuel cooking, heating, or other purposes at each home site shall be as approved by
the city.
4. All electrical and telephone or any other cable service shall be underground
facilities from the existing city's distribution system.
5. All utility connections shall be approved by the city.
6. No obstruction shall be permitted that impedes the inspection of plumbing,
electrical facilities, and related mobile home equipment.
7. The proposed method of garbage, waste, and trash disposal must be as approved by
the city.
(e) Landscaping and parks.
1. A boundary of 15 feet around the entire park site shall be provided. This boundary
area shall be landscaped and screened as may be required by the Planning Commission.
2. The front yard of each site shall be landscaped except for driveways and parking
needs.
3. Landscaping shall provide for at least 1 tree on each site.
4. At least 10% with a minimum of 10,000 square feet of the land area within each
park shall be designed for development into a recreational space. Such space shall be of appropriate
design and provided with appropriate equipment and maintained by the owner of the park.
5. The corners of each home site shall be clearly marked and each site shall be
Zoning Code
140
numbered.
6. A compact hedge, wood fence, or landscaped area shall be installed around each
park and be maintained in first class condition at all times as approved.
7. Additional requirements as to screening, landscaping and space reserved for
recreation and playground may be required by the Planning Commission for proper development and
protection of the park's occupants and that of the surrounding area.
(B) Processing
(1) At least 5 copies of the application and park site plan shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator.
(2) The Zoning Administrator shall forward the application and park site plan to the Planning
Commission and to other agencies as deemed necessary.
(3) After Planning Commission review, the City Council shall consider the application in
accordance with its procedures for acting on special exception use permits as provided in this chapter.
(C) Permit issuance. Subsequent to City Council approval, the Zoning Administrator shall be
instructed to issue a special use permit, providing all other provisions of this chapter have been met.
(D) Compliance required.
(1) It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to ensure that the approved special use
permit is followed by the owner and/or developer.
(2) No departure from the approved special use permit shall be made without the express
written permission of the city. The procedure for review and approval or disapproval of changes shall be
the same as for the initial application.
(3) No building or site shall be used or occupied until all requirements and provisions of this
chapter and any special conditions as provided by this article have been complied with.
(4) The city may require performance bonds or other forms of security for reasons and in
amounts as specified in the city's special assessment policies.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
Zoning Code
141
' 152.137 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
The following additional regulations shall apply to manufactured homes/mobile homes and
manufactured homes/mobile home parks.
(A) Other than what is allowed under the '' 152.085 et seq., no commercial operation shall be
conducted within the park other than those necessary to the operation thereof. Commercial sales lots for
homes are prohibited within the home park.
(B) Any enlargement or extension to any existing park shall require application for a special use
permit as if it were a new establishment.
(C) A request for transfer of the permit shall be treated in the same manner as an original
application for a permit.
(D) No additions, building or other structure shall be attached to a home without a city permit and
approval of the park operator. Such additions shall not encroach upon the setbacks herein provided.
(E) All manufactured homes as defined by M.S. '' 327.31 through 327.35, as they may be
amended from time to time, shall be anchored in accordance with the Minnesota Code of Agency Rules,
Building Code Division, Section 2 MCAR 1.904.50 Stabilizing System for Mobile Homes.
(F) Skirting for homes is required with a fireproof material harmonious with the appearance of the
home and in good repair. There must be an enclosure for access for inspection purposes. Plywood,
hardwood, and cardboard, or baled hay or straw shall be prohibited.
(G) One accessory building not to exceed 100 square feet in floor area shall be allowed for each
home space. Accessory buildings shall be located within the rear yard 5 feet from lot lines.
(H) In addition to the foregoing, the Planning Commission may impose such other conditions,
requirements or limitations concerning the design, development and operation of each park as it may
deem necessary for the protection of adjacent properties and the public interest.
(I) The park grounds shall be lighted as approved by the city from sunset to sunrise. Artificial light
shall be maintained during all hours of darkness in all buildings containing public toilets, laundry
equipment, and the like.
(J) Advertising the home park shall be limited to 1 sign not to exceed 6 square feet, with lighting,
height and location as approved by the city.
(K) There shall be no outdoor camping anywhere in the park.
(L) No public address or loud speaker shall be permitted.
Zoning Code
142
(M) The operator of every park shall maintain a registry of the park showing both the name and
address of the residents and the make, type, and license number of each home. The park shall be
available for inspection at all times by authorized city, state, and county officials, public health officials
and other public officials whose duty necessitates acquisition of the information contained in the register.
The register record for each occupant and/or mobile home register shall not be destroyed until after a
period of 3 years following the date of departure of the registrant from the park.
(N) All dwellings within the park shall contain a minimum gross area of 800 square feet.
(O) The park must meet all licensing, rules, and regulations from the Minnesota Department of
Health. See M.S. Ch. 327, (Hotels, Motels, Resorts, and Manufactured Homes), as it may be amended
from time to time, for details.
(P) Mobile homes shall not be used for residential purposes in the city if they:
(1) Are in an unsanitary condition or have an exterior in bad repair.
(2) Are structurally unsound and do not protect the inhabitants against all elements.
(Q) All land areas shall be clean and free from refuse, garbage, rubbish or debris.
(R) No tents shall be used for other than recreational purposes in a mobile home park.
(S) All structures, i.e. fences, storage, etc., shall require a building permit.
(T) A mobile home park shall have an adequate storm shelter maintained in a safe, clean and
sanitary condition, for its tenants, per Minnesota state regulations. A severe weather evacuation plan
shall be developed by each mobile home park owner. This plan shall be reviewed by the Civil Defense
Director of the municipality in which the park is located. The plan shall include the name, location and
safest route to the nearest severe weather shelter servicing the park. A map of the route shall be included
with the evacuation plan. The severe evacuation plan shall include emergency telephone numbers and the
mobile home contact person(s). The plan and all subsequent amendments shall be distributed to each park
resident and the Civil Defense Director immediately.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
Zoning Code
143
SIGNS
' 152.150 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect, insure, maintain and regain the natural and scenic beauty
and attractiveness throughout the city. By the construction of public roads, the public has created views
to which the public retains a right of view and it is the intent of these standards to prevent the taking of
that right. Signs are recognized as accessory uses and may be permitted in all districts subject to the
regulations of this chapter. The purpose of this subchapter is to coordinate and regulate the type,
placement and physical dimensions of signs within the city's various zoning districts. The City Council
considers the standards and regulations in this chapter to be reasonable and necessary.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.151 DEFINITIONS OF SPECIFIC TERMS AND PHRASES.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
AWNING. A shelter, of canvas or other material, projecting from and supported by the exterior
wall of a building, constructed on a supporting framework.
AWNING, or CANOPY SIGN. A sign painted, stamped, perforated, or stitched, or otherwise
applied on the valance of an awning.
BANNER. Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is permanently mounted to a pole
or a building by a permanent frame at 1 or more edges. National flags, state or municipal flags, or the
official flag of any institution or business shall not be considered a banner.
BEACON. Any light with 1 or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at 1 or more
points not on the same zone lot as the light source; also, any light with 1 or more beams that rotates or
moves.
BILLBOARD. A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment or
attraction sold, offered or existing elsewhere than upon the same zone lot where the sign is displayed.
This definition does not include noncommercial.
BUILDING MARKER. Any sign indicating the name of a building and date and incidental
information about its construction, which sign is cut into the masonry surface or made of bronze or other
permanent material.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN. A sign that indicates the required or preferred direction of movement for
Zoning Code
144
vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
FESTOON. A string or garland of leaves, flowers, ribbons, tinsel, small flags, pinwheels,
ornamental windsocks, or other like ornaments.
FLASHING SIGN. Any directly or indirectly illuminated sign which the artificial light is not kept
constant in terms of intensity or color at all times when the sign is illuminated.
FREE STANDING SIGN. A sign supported by 1 or more upright poles, columns, posts, pylons or
braces placed in or on the ground and not attached to any building or structure.
ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign illuminated in any manner by an artificial light source.
INCIDENTAL SIGN. A small sign, emblem, or decal informing the public of goods, facilities, or
services available on the premises, such as a credit card sign or a sign indicating hours of business. A
sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the zone lot on which it is
located, such as no parking, entrance, loading zone, telephone, and other similar directives. No sign with
a commercial message legible from a position off the zone lot on which the sign is located shall be
considered incidental.
MARQUEE. A permanent, roof-like structure of rigid materials supported by and extending from
the facade of the building and projecting over its entrance.
MARQUEE SIGN. A projecting sign attached to, in any manner, or made a part of a marquee.
NAMEPLATE. A non-electric on-premise identification sign limited to the name, address and
occupation of an occupancy or a group of occupancies.
OFF-PREMISE SIGN. A sign advertising or announcing any place, product, goods, or services
whose subject is not available or located at or on the lot where the sign is erected or placed. A billboard
is considered an OFF-PREMISES SIGN. This definition does not include noncommercial.
PARAPET. The extension of a false front or wall above the roof line.
PORTABLE SIGN. A sign that is not permanently affixed to a building, other unmovable structure,
or the ground.
PROJECTING SIGN. Any sign other than a wall sign that is attached to and projects from the wall
or face of a building or structure, including an arcade/marquee sign.
ROOF SIGN. Any sign erected upon, against, or directly, above a roof or roof eave, or on top or
above the parapet, or on a functional appendage above the roof or roof eave.
Zoning Code
145
SIGN. A name, identification, description, display, illustration or device which is affixed to or
represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or land in view of the general public and
which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution, or business. The term SIGN shall
also mean and include any display of 1 or more of the following:
(1) Any letter, numeral, figures, emblem, picture, outline, character, spectacle delineation,
announcement, trademark, and logo;
(2) Multiple colored bands, a stripe or stripes, patterns, outlines or delineations displayed for
the purpose of commercial identification; or
(3) Anything specified above in divisions (1) or (2) in part or in combination by any means
whereby the same are made visible from beyond the boundaries of the lot on which the same are
displayed for the purpose of attracting attention outdoors to make anything known.
SIGN AREA. Sign area shall be measured as follows:
(1) When such sign is on a plate or framed or outlined, all of the area of such plate or the area
enclosed by such frame or outline shall be included.
(2) When such sign consists only of letters, designs or figures engraved, painted, projected or
in any manner affixed on a wall, or a fascia panel integrated into the building, canopy, marquee or other
covered structure, the total area of such sign shall be deemed the area of the smallest triangle, rectangle,
or circle within which all of the matter such sign consists may be inscribed.
TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, plywood
or other temporary light material and designed or intended to be displayed for a period of 7 days or less.
WALL SIGN. A wall sign shall consist of any sign which is attached flat against or represented on
the surface of a building wall. A wall sign may have a depth of up to 15 inches.
WINDOW SIGN. A sign painted, stenciled, or affixed on a window, which is visible from a
right-of-way.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.152 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
(A) Signs exempt from regulation under this chapter. The following signs shall be exempt from
regulation under this chapter:
(1) Any public notice or warning required by a valid and applicable federal, state or local law,
regulation or ordinance.
Zoning Code
146
(2) Any sign inside a building, not attached to a window or door, that is not legible from a
distance of more than 3 feet beyond the lot line of the zone lot or parcel or which such sign is located.
(3) Works of art that do not include a commercial message.
(4) Holiday lights and decorations with no commercial message.
(5) Traffic control signs on private property, such as Stop, Yield and similar signs, the faces of
which meet Department of Transportation standards and which contain no commercial message of any
sort.
(B) Signs not requiring permits. No permit shall be required for the following types of signs,
provided that such signs shall be subject to all other applicable provisions of this chapter:
(1) Signs advertising garage, rummage, or household auction sales and placed on the premises
where the sale is held.
(2) Temporary signs not in place for more than 30 days.
(3) Real estate signs.
(4) Construction signs of 32 square feet or less.
(5) On premise-directional signs of 4 square feet or less.
(6) Nameplates of 2 square feet or less.
(7) Political signs.
(8) Public signs or notices placed by any agency of government.
(9) Emergency signs, or signs warning of hazards, whether placed by public or private persons
or agencies.
(10) Window signs, provided that not more than 50% of the window is covered.
(11) Incidental signs.
(12) Banners, festoons, and pennants in place for 30 days or less, unless specified by special
permit.
Zoning Code
147
(C) Prohibited signs. All signs not expressly permitted under this chapter or exempt from
regulation hereunder in accordance with the previous section are prohibited in the city. Such signs
include, but are not limited to:
(1) Abandoned signs.
(2) Flashing signs.
(3) Unsafe or dangerous signs. Any sign which becomes structurally unsafe or endangers the
safety of a building or premises or endangers the public safety shall be taken down and removed by the
owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building, structure or land upon which the sign is
located within 10 days after written notification from the Zoning Administrator.
(4) Signs imitating or resembling traffic signs or signals or governmental signs.
(5) Signs attached to trees, telephone or utility poles, public benches, streetlights or placed on
any public property or street or highway right-of-way by any person other than the 1 having a permit
from the government to place such a sign.
(6) Signs which obstruct access to fire escapes, exits, doors, standpipes, or ventilating systems,
or which interfere with the view of traffic signals or signs by those to whom such signs or signals are
directed.
(7) Strings of lights not permanently mounted to a rigid background, except those exempt from
regulation under this chapter.
(8) Signs for which a permit is required under this chapter, which were constructed before the
ordinance creating this chapter was adopted, and as to which no procedures provided by this chapter have
been initiated to bring such signs into compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(9) Signs with rotating beams or flashing illumination.
(D) Signs permitted only through the issuance of a special sign permit.
(1) Off-premise directional sign that are no larger than 4 square feet in size.
(2) Temporary sign in place for more than 30 days.
(3) Portable sign.
(4) Banners, festoons and pennants in place for more than 30 days.
(5) Searchlight.
Zoning Code
148
(6) Animated signs.
(7) Signs placed on vehicles or trailers which are parked or located for the primary purpose of
displaying said sign.
(8) Inflatable signs and tethered balloons.
(9) Any other signs not specifically prohibited or allowed in other sections.
(10) Signs covered by grandfather clause.
(E) Signs in the public right-of-way. No sign shall be allowed in the public right-of-way, except for
the following:
(1) Permanent signs, including:
(a) Public signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body to post legal notices,
identify public property, convey public information, and direct or regulate pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
(b) Bus stop signs by a public transit company.
(c) Informational signs of a public utility regarding its poles, lines, pipes or facilities.
(d) Awning, projecting and suspended signs projecting over a public right-of-way in
conformity with this chapter.
(2) Temporary signs. Temporary signs for specific or special events shall be issued only for
signs meeting the following requirements. Signs are limited to a 30-day period, unless permission from
the city grants a longer specific period of time.
(a) Such signs shall contain no commercial message.
(b) Such signs shall be no more than 4 square feet in area each.
(3) Emergency signs. Emergency warning signs erected by a governing agency, a public utility
company, or a contractor doing authorized or permitted work within the public right-of-way.
(4) Other signs forfeited. Any sign installed or placed on public property, except in conformity
with the requirements of this section, shall be forfeited to the public hereunder, the city shall have the
right to recover from the owner or person placing such a sign the costs of removal and disposal of such
sign.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
Zoning Code
149
' 152.153 ZONING CLASSIFICATIONS.
(A) Residential Districts. In all classes of residence districts, no sign, business sign, nameplate sign
or advertising sign shall be erected except for the following:
(1) A nameplate sign identifying the owner or occupant of a building or dwelling unit;
provided, that the surface area does not exceed 2 square feet. This sign may be placed in any front yard,
but in no case may it be placed in any side yard. The sign may not be for the purpose of identifying a
home occupation business.
(2) A sign pertaining to the lease or sale of a building or property; provided, that such sign
shall not exceed 12 square feet in surface area and shall not be illuminated.
(3) Temporary signs advertising a new subdivision development; each subdivision or
development shall be allowed the following signs:
(a) One sign not to exceed 96 square feet in surface area, no more than 15 feet in height.
(b) One sign not to exceed 12 square feet in surface area, no more than 15 feet in height.
(c) Directional signs not to exceed 2 square feet in surface area; provided, that each
subdivision shall be limited to 1 such sign per major thoroughfare approach to the subdivision or
development. No such sign shall be allowed on minor residential streets.
(d) Temporary non-illuminated signs identifying an engineer, architect, contractor or
product engaged in or used in the construction of a building; provided, that such signs shall not exceed
32 square feet each in surface area and are no more than 15 feet in height; and provided, that such signs
are removed prior to occupancy of the building.
(4) One identification sign, not to exceed 30 square feet in area, for the following uses: church,
school, college, club, library, or similar uses. Such signs shall be solely for the purpose of displaying the
name of the institution and its activities or services. It may be illuminated, but not flashing. Unless
otherwise noted, the maximum height of all free standing identification signs shall be 6 feet and all signs
shall have a minimum setback of 8 feet from the property line.
(5) Directional signs not to exceed 4 square feet in surface area for the following uses: church,
school, college, hospital, club, library or similar use; provided, that each shall be limited to 1 such sign
per major thoroughfare approach. No such sign shall be allowed on minor residential streets.
(6) One nameplate sign for a dwelling group of 4 or more units not exceeding 24 square feet in
surface area. Such sign may indicate the names and addresses of the buildings or it may be a directory
for occupants.
Zoning Code
150
(7) Directional signs in any area necessary for the orderly movement of traffic; provided, that
such signs shall not be used as advertising space and shall not be illuminated.
(8) Signs not specifically addressed under this ordinance require interpretation by the Zoning
Administrator.
(B) Business and Industrial Districts. Business and industry signs and nameplate signs are permitted
subject to the following regulations:
(1) There shall be permitted 1 freestanding sign on each premise, provided that, lots adjacent to
more than 1 street may have 1 sign per street frontage. Within the Central Business District freestanding
signs shall be no larger than 35 square feet in area per sign with a maximum height of 15 feet. Within
other Business and Industrial Districts, freestanding signs shall be no larger than 50 square feet in area
per sign with a maximum height of 15 feet. All freestanding signs shall be set back at least 5 feet from
the property line in the Central Business District and at least 8 feet from the property line in all other
Business and Industrial Districts. In all cases the freestanding sign shall not overhang the property line.
(2) A minimum 20 square feet, may be devoted to wall signs, provided that the maximum wall
area devoted to signs on any side of a building will be no larger than 120 square feet. For the purposes
of these measurements, wall, canopy and/or marquee signs shall go into the total sign area figures.
(3) Allocation of sign area for wall signs on multiple occupancy buildings shall be controlled by
the building owner, who shall be directly responsible for obtaining the necessary permits for all signs, or
for seeing that they are obtained and for compliance with this chapter.
(4) Each premise shall be permitted, in lieu of a wall sign, to have 1 projecting sign, provided
that such sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in sign area, shall not project more than 4 feet from the
building to which it is attached when located in a Business District.
(5) Wall signs shall not extend or project more than 18 inches from the wall to which they are
affixed, the lower edge of said signs shall not be less than 72 feet over any pedestrian use area.
(6) Each occupancy having an awning/canopy shall be permitted to maintain, in addition to the
under the canopy sign herein permitted, 1 canopy sign for each of the front, back and sides of the
canopy.
(7) Marquee signs shall not be permitted on any marquee, other than signs built into and
forming a part of the marquee itself. Marquee signs shall not extend beyond the edge of the marquee.
Such signs shall not exceed a height of 3 feet or a total area of 24 square feet on any 1 side of the
marquee.
(8) Each occupancy shall be permitted to maintain a maximum of 2 incidental signs, not to
exceed 2 square feet in aggregate sign area.
Zoning Code
151
(9) All freestanding, projecting, awning, canopy and marquee signs shall have a minimum
setback of 2 feet from any vehicle use area, and a minimum clearance of 72 feet over any pedestrian use
area.
(10) All shopping center or mall signs not provided for under this section require a variance.
(11) Time and temperature informational signs shall be permitted.
(12) One menu board per restaurant use is permitted with a permitted drive-through facility.
Such signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in surface area or 8 feet in height. Such signs are permitted in
addition to other permitted signage.
(13) Business special event signs. One temporary sign for commercial announcements such as
grand openings and special events, may be mounted on a portable stand, with a maximum surface area
not exceeding 32 square feet, or may be a wall sign subject to the same size standards as the permanent
wall signage allowed for the enterprise. Such signs must be located on the subject property and may be
used not more than 4 times per calendar year, and for a period of not more than 14 days per time.
(14) Transient merchant signs. One temporary sign for transient merchants and transient produce
merchants is allowed. The sign shall not exceed 16 square feet in surface area, and shall not exceed 6
feet in height. The sign shall be set back at least 10 feet from lot lines and shall be erected only during
the period of transient sales.
(15) Off-premises advertising signs (billboards) may be permitted along state trunk highways in
the B-1 or Industrial Districts as a conditional use. Billboards erected along state trunk highways shall be
spaced a minimum of 2,500 feet apart. These signs shall not exceed 200 square feet in area. Off-premises
advertising signs shall meet all setback requirements and shall not be located within 100 feet of any
residential zone, church, school or designated recreational area.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.154 CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.
(A) Maintenance.
(1) All signs shall be maintained so that exposed surfaces are clean and painted if painting is
required, defective parts are replaced, and broken or nonfunctioning parts are repaired or removed.
(2) The owner, or lessee, of any sign or the owner of the land on which the sign is located shall
keep the grass, weeds or other growth cut and the area free from refuse between the sign and the street
and also the distance of 6 feet behind at the ends of said signs.
Zoning Code
152
(B) Lighting. Unless otherwise provided by this chapter, all signs may be illuminated, provided that
no sign may utilize:
(1) The light from any illuminated sign or from any light source, including interior of a
building, shall be so shaded, shielded, or directed that the light intensity of brightness shall not adversely
affect surrounding or facing Residential Districts, or adversely affect safe vision of operators of vehicles
moving on public or private roads, highways or parking areas. Light shall not shine or reflect on or into
residential structures.
(2) Any lamp throwing light on the sign, in which the direct light from the lamp is visible from
any public street or public sidewalk.
(3) Any revolving beacon light.
(C) Changeable copy. Unless otherwise provided by this chapter, any sign permitted by this chapter
may use changeable copy, changed either manually or electronically.
(D) Compliance with codes. All signs shall comply with provisions of all applicable codes.
(1) All signs, excluding temporary signs, shall be designed and constructed of materials that are
similar to those used on the principal building. Such signage shall be dominated with materials of
permanency and strength and shall be compatible with other structures and signs in the development. A
sign must not obscure architectural features of a building.
(2) No sign face shall extend horizontally beyond the supporting structure a distance greater
than 13 inches.
(3) All electric signs shall be manufactured to meet UL specifications and other standards as
outlined by the state electrical code.
(E) Electrical signs watertight. Electrical signs shall be watertight, with service holes to provide
access to each compartment with fitted waterproof covers.
(F) No electrical interference requirements. Any electrical equipment or apparatus of a sign, which
causes interference with radio or television reception, shall not be permitted.
(G) Wind pressure and dead load requirements. All signs and sign structures shall be designed and
constructed to withstand a wind pressure as regulated by the Building Code of the city, and shall be
constructed to receive dead loads as required in the Building Code and/or other ordinances of the city.
Temporary signs shall be excluded from dead load requirements as required above.
(H) Clearance from electrical lines. A clearance of not less than 8 feet horizontally and 12 feet
vertically shall be maintained between any sign and any overhead electrical transmission line.
Zoning Code
153
(I) Number of faces. No sign shall have more than 2 faces. Sign faces shall be parallel, unless
otherwise permitted.
(J) Emissions prohibited. No sign shall emit audible sound, noticeable odor, or smoke or other
visible matter.
(K) Obstruction of fire exits, light or ventilation. No sign shall be permitted to obstruct or interfere
in any way with free use of any door, window, fire escape, nor to obstruct or impair operation of any
opening required for light or ventilation.
(L) Traffic hazard. It shall be illegal for any sign to interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be of
such design which may be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal, or device; nor shall any sign
imitate an official traffic sign or include the words STOP, LOOK, CAUTION, or any other work,
phrase, symbol, or character in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse motorists.
(M) Obscene matter. No obscene, indecent, or immoral matter prohibited by City Code shall be
displayed on any sign.
(N) Building address. A building address is not a sign.
(O) Anchoring.
(1) No sign shall be suspended by non-rigid attachments that will allow the sign to swing in a
wind.
(2) All freestanding signs shall have self-supporting structures erected on or permanently
attached to concrete foundations.
(3) All portable signs on display shall be braced or secured to prevent motion.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.155 ILLEGAL SIGNS.
The following signs are illegal signs:
(A) Any sign placed or maintained in the city from and after the effective date of the ordinance
creating this chapter without a permit as required by this chapter.
(B) Any sign maintained in the city as to which the nonconforming use period has expired or has
terminated as provided in this chapter.
(C) Any sign as to which limitations on the period of maintaining said sign has expired.
Zoning Code
154
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.156 SIGN ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
(A) Generally. The sign regulations set forth in this section shall be administered and enforced by
the Zoning Administrator with the possible assistance of other appointed city staff. The procedures,
standards and requirements for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this section shall
be in accordance with this section, the City Code, and other applicable laws and regulations.
(B) Permits required. Every person shall obtain from the city a permit before erecting, placing,
rebuilding, reconstructing, structurally altering, enlarging or relocating any sign which is not specifically
exempted by regulations from this permit requirement. A nonrefundable sign permit fee is due and
payable with the filing of the sign permit application. More than 1 sign on 1 building or group of
buildings located on the same parcel of land may be included on 1 application provided that all such signs
be applied for at the same time. It is up to the City Council to set the cost of the permit fee.
(C) Sign application. The following information for a sign permit must be supplied by the applicant
which shall be requested on a form provided by the city.
(1) Name, address and telephone number of the person making application.
(2) Name, address and telephone number of the person owning sign.
(3) Necessary sketches and supporting information indicating location of sign, size, sign type
and method of construction, building materials used and attachment to the building or placement method
in the ground
(4) Information on current signage as to type, size and location. The city may require drawings
to scale showing this information as well as showing existing buildings and location of lot lines.
(5) Copy of stress sheets and calculations showing that the structure is designed for dead load
and wind pressure in any direction in the amount required by this and all other laws and ordinances of
the city. This provision may be waived for individual applications at the discretion of the Zoning
Administrator.
(6) Written consent of the owner or lessee of any site on which the sign is to be erected.
(7) Any electrical permit required and issued for said sign.
(8) Such other information as the Zoning Administrator shall require to show full compliance
with this and all other laws and ordinances of the city.
Zoning Code
155
(D) Duty of Zoning Administrator. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator upon the filing
of an application for a permit to examine such plans, specifications and other data and the premises upon
which it is proposed to erect the sign. If it shall appear that the proposed structure is in compliance with
all the requirements of this chapter and all other laws and ordinances of the city, the permit shall then be
issued. If the work authorized under the permit has not been completed within 90 days after the date of
issuance, the permit shall be null and void.
(E) Inspection. After the issuance of an approved sign permit, the applicant may install and display
any such sign or signs approved. Once installed, city staff may inspect the sign(s) for conformance with
the approved sign permit and this chapter.
(F) Sign permits, subsequent.
(1) Except for existing billboard signs, the city shall not require any subsequent sign permits
for unchanged existing signs. Billboard sign permits shall be issued for a 5-year period. Except as
provided herein, billboard sign permits shall be renewable every 5 years upon submission of a renewal
application form and the applicable fees.
(2) Renewal applications for billboard signs shall contain a representation by the applicant that
no change in signage under the permit has been made or shall contain dimensions, drawings and photos
of any changes.
(G) Assignment of sign permits. A current and valid sign permit shall be freely assignable to a
successor as owner of the property or holder of a business license for the same premises, subject only to
filing such application as the zoning administrator may require and paying any applicable fee. The
assignment shall be accomplished by filing and shall not require approval.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.157 SIGN VARIANCES.
(A) In order to provide additional flexibility in the enforcement of this subchapter and alleviate
hardship and injustice, the City's Board of Appeals, may, upon application, grant a variation from the
terms of this subchapter. Upon application therefore from the person seeking a permit for the erection or
installation of a sign, the request for variance shall be processed in accordance with applicable provisions
of this chapter, as may be amended.
(B) Additionally, the Board of Appeals shall make findings of fact that undue hardship or injustice
exists if a variance were not granted and therefore, may grant such variations based upon consideration
the following:
(1) The particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific
parcel of land involved.
Zoning Code
156
(2) The condition involved is unique to the parcel of land involved.
(3) The purpose of the variance is not based exclusively upon a desire to increase the value or
income potential of the business involved.
(4) The alleged difficulty or hardship is caused by this chapter and has not been created by any
person presently having an interest in the parcel.
(5) The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to
other land or improvements in the neighborhood.
(6) The proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent
property, or substantially increase the congestion of the public streets or interfere with the function of the
police and fire departments of the city.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.158 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
(A) Signs existing on the effective date of the ordinance creating this chapter which do not conform
to the regulations set forth in this chapter shall become a nonconforming use.
(B) Nonconforming signs existing for at least 6 months prior to the effective date of the ordinance
creating this chapter which do not conform to their respective zoning classifications standards will
automatically qualify for a special exception permit under the grandfather clause of this chapter. This
special exception permit will be issued upon application following adoption of the ordinance creating this
chapter and be good for a term of 5 years.
(C) All hanging grandfathered nonconforming signs shall be required to meet the minimum height
requirements of 72 feet for pedestrian areas and 15 feet for vehicular areas with a minimum setback of 2
feet from all vehicular traffic areas. Alteration of these nonconforming signs to meet these requirements
will not jeopardize their grandfather status in this chapter.
(D) A non-conforming sign may not be:
(1) Changed to another non-conforming sign
(2) Structurally altered except to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(3) Expanded.
(4) Re-established after its discontinuance for 14 days.
Zoning Code
157
(5) Repaired or otherwise rehabilitated, except to bring it into compliance after damage more
than 50% of the sign market value.
(E) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as relieving the owner or user of a legal
non-conforming sign or owner of the property on which the legal non-conforming sign is located from
the provisions of this chapter regarding the construction and maintenance standards found in this section.
Provided, however, that any repainting, cleaning, and other normal maintenance or repair of the sign or
sign structure shall not modify the sign structure or copy in any way which makes it more
non-conforming or the sign shall lose its legal non-conforming status.
(F) Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this chapter are not intended to alter,
diminish, increase or otherwise modify any rights or liabilities imposed upon nonconforming or
prohibited signs existing prior to the adoption of the ordinance creating this chapter. Any act done,
offense committed, or signs existing prior to the date of the adoption of the ordinance creating this
chapter is not affected by its enactment.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
' 152.175 PURPOSE.
(A) The purpose of the Planned Unit Residential Development regulations is to encourage flexibility
in the design and development of land in order to promote the most efficient use of land and preserve
natural features and open space.
(B) PUDs are intended to provide an alternative to the conventional approach to zoning by
permitting flexibility and innovation in design, placement of buildings, use of open spaces, circulation
facilities, and off-street parking areas to encourage a more creative approach in the utilization of land. A
PUD District permits a more efficient, aesthetic, and desirable development characterized by special
features of the geography, topography, size or shape of a particular piece of property while
simultaneously providing a compatible and stable environment in harmony with the surrounding area.
(C) Under the provisions of a PUD District, the City Council has the right to allow deviations from
any standards set forth in this chapter. However, rezonings to a Planned Development District shall not
be allowed merely as a convenience or benefit to the applicant or as a means of circumventing the
requirements of this chapter. Rather, the PUD District shall be used to create a development having
greater public benefit than would otherwise have been possible.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
Zoning Code
158
' 152.176 USE REGULATIONS.
The PUD District permits any use or combination of uses allowed in the zoning districts established
by this chapter in accordance with the procedures, requirements, and standards set forth herein.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.177 PROCEDURES, REQUIREMENTS, AND STANDARDS.
An application for a Planned Unit Development District shall meet and follow the same procedures,
requirements, and standards as that of a rezoning request. In addition, the application shall include a
development plan that meets the following requirements and standards set forth herein.
(A) Ownership. The tract shall be under unified ownership or control at the time of application and
shall be planned as a whole. If the tract is not to be developed as a whole, a phasing schedule shall be
provided showing the chronological order in which portions of the tract are to be developed.
(B) Conformance with the city's long range plans. The proposed PUD shall be consistent with the
long range goals, Comprehensive Plan, etc., that the city has developed in terms of land use, density,
streets, and traffic.
(C) Lot area regulations. A proposed residential planned unit development or a residential planned
unit development mixed with commercial and/or industrial uses shall consist of an area that is not less
than 3 acres in size. A proposed commercial and/or industrial planned unit development shall consist of
an area that is not less than 2 acres in size.
(D) Density. In a residential planned unit development, where a variety of housing types may be
provided, the total number of dwelling units allowed shall be determined by the density standard of the
original zoning district classification of the area that is now proposed for the PUD District. The planned
unit development may exceed these maximum density standards by 50% if it can be demonstrated by the
applicant that such an excess will not adversely affect public facilities nor the enjoyment of adjacent
property.
(E) Setback regulations. Building setbacks from all property lines which form the perimeter of the
total area devoted to the planned unit development shall blend well adjacent developments by matching
the setback requirements of the original zoning district classification of the area that is proposed for the
PUD District or the setback requirements applicable to the adjacent zoning districts.
(F) Height regulations. Heights of buildings and structures shall result in a development that will
blend well with adjacent developments by matching the height requirements of the original zoning district
classification of the area that is now proposed for the PUD District or the height requirements applicable
to the adjacent zoning districts.
Zoning Code
159
(G) Open space.
(1) Common open space, varying in amount and location, shall be provided to off-set any
substantial increase in dwelling unit density or building height or any substantial decrease in interior
building setback distance.
(2) A minimum of 20% of the land of a planned residential development shall be devoted to
private outdoor passive or active recreation. Such space shall be effectively separated from automobile
traffic and parking and be readily accessible. Provisions shall be made for the permanent private
maintenance of such land. The term OPEN SPACE shall not include space devoted to streets and
parking. Such private outdoor recreation space shall not be a substitute for the dedication of land and/or
cash for public parks as may be required by another city ordinance.
(H) Streets, utilities, services, and public facilities. Because of the uniqueness of each planned unit
development proposal, the specifications and standards for streets, utilities, services, and public facilities
may be different from those normally required in this chapter and other ordinances if it can be
demonstrated by the applicant that such modification of specifications and standards will not adversely
affect the interests of the general public or the entire city. In addition, the planned unit development
proposal shall illustrate how the streets, utilities, services, and public facilities, and traffic circulation
will function and serve the entire development.
(I) Off-street parking. The proposed planned unit development and the land use therein shall
provide the necessary amount of off-street parking areas and shall illustrate how such areas will
adequately serve the entire development.
(J) Architecture. Architectural style of buildings shall not solely be a basis for the denial or
approval of a PUD Development Plan. However, the overall appearance and compatibility of the
individual buildings to other site elements or to the surrounding development will be primary
considerations in the review of such application.
(K) Other information. Any other information which the City Planning Commission and/or the City
Council deems necessary to properly assess the request for the Planned Unit Development District.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.178 APPROVAL AND REQUIREMENTS PRIOR TO CONSTRUCTION.
(A) Approval. The planned unit development request may be approved after a public hearing has
been held. Additional conditions may be imposed to insure the public interest.
(B) Building permit. A building permit shall be issued only if the building or structure, for which
the permit is to be issued, is in conformance with the approved development plan and only if all site and
facility improvements are in place adjacent to and in front of the location of the building or structure.
Zoning Code
160
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
SITE PLAN
' 152.190 SITE PLAN REQUIRED.
All planned buildings and/or structures or uses of land unless exempted, whether they be new,
substantially changed, converted or reconstructed, must secure approval of a site plan from the Planning
Commission. No permit shall be issued prior to approval of the site plan. The site plan need not be
drawn by an architect or engineer.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.191 PROCEDURE.
The following procedure shall be followed in the preparation of site plans.
(A) Preparation of site plans.
(1) The person, developer, contractor or builder shall be responsible for preparation of the site
plan.
(2) The site plan shall contain the following information as is pertinent to the proposed use of
the land.
(a) Name and address of the developer and property owner.
(b) Small key (location) map.
(c) Zoning classification of the land and names of adjoining land owners and zoning
classification of adjacent lands.
(d) Proposed buildings and/or land use.
(e) Area of land in square feet.
(f) Survey and engineering information including distances with angles, bearings, lengths
and legal description of property involved shall be shown on drawings at a scale not to exceed 1 inch
equaling 50 feet and including the following information:
1. Proposed buildings with location dimensions, building area and height.
Zoning Code
161
2. Distances on all sides from buildings to property lines and between buildings.
3. Location, dimensions and area of existing buildings not to be razed.
4. Location and use of all buildings and adjacent lands that are within 50 feet of the
property line in question.
5. Existing and proposed contours or spot grades at no more than 2-foot intervals.
6. Drainage design for roof areas, parking lots and driveways showing area for or
method of disposal of surface run-off waters.
7. Existing and proposed street curb cut radii and curb cut width.
8. Limits and location of proposed or existing streets, cartways, curbs, sidewalks,
easements and rights-of-way.
9. Location, size and elevation of proposed or existing sanitary sewerage facilities,
storm sewers, catch basins and drywalls.
10. Location and approximate diameter of proposed or existing trees and other woody
stemmed plantings together with the common names of the plantings.
11. Limits and location of plantings or physical structures designed for screening.
12. Limits, location and size of retaining walls and the type of material to be used in
construction.
13. Limits and location of parking lots, driveways, parking bays, outside storage,
garbage areas, loading and unloading areas and surfacing and screening thereof.
14. Directions of vehicular traffic flow to, from and within the area, together with
traffic control signs and markings.
15. Locations, height, candle power and type of all outside lighting including street
lighting and sign lighting.
16. Locations, size, height and overall dimensions of outside signs.
17. Location of underground utilities, e.g. wells and fuel tanks.
18. Such other or different information as may be required by the design standards set
forth hereinafter or as required elsewhere in this chapter.
Zoning Code
162
(3) The following general principles of design shall be incorporated into the site plan.
(a) Landscaping.
1. All front yards shall be landscaped to soften the effect the building creates at
ground level.
2. Existing trees shall be preserved where possible.
3. Surface denuded of vegetation shall be seeded or sodded to prevent soil erosion.
(b) Light glare from vehicles.
1. When a building, parking lot or driveway adjoins or is within 200 feet of a
residential area, provision shall be made to screen all vehicle lights so as to curtail direct illumination of
the residential area. Screening provided on the land may be provided by the use of closely spaced
evergreen trees, shrubs or physical structures which will harmonize with the developed use of the land
and with the residential area.
2. Vehicle lights need not be screened on that portion of a site bounded by and
parallel to a street.
(c) Surface water, sewage disposal and erosion control.
1. Storm water and sanitary sewage systems shall be laid out by a professional
engineer.
2. Run-off water from parking lots, roofs and driveways shall not be allowed to cross
sidewalks or to run onto private property that is not a part of the site unless easements have been
obtained.
3. Surface run-off waters shall be directed into municipal facilities where such
facilities are available. Where municipal facilities are not available, a drywell or drainage area owned or
controlled by the owner or developer shall be provided.
4. Sanitary sewage shall be directed into municipal facilities where such facilities are
available. Where municipal facilities are not available, other disposal methods approved by the Planning
Commission may be used.
5. Retaining walls shall be constructed where necessary for land stabilization.
Zoning Code
163
(d) Parking lots.
1. Parking lots shall be designed to avoid creating large open expanses.
2. Parking lots shall be designed to avoid the problem of vehicles backing onto
streets, alleys and sidewalks.
3. Vehicular traffic flow to, from and within land containing a parking lot shall be
controlled by appropriate traffic control signs and surface markings.
4. Adequate provision shall be made for vehicular ingress and egress.
5. Provisions shall be made for a safe and convenient circulation pattern within any
parking lot.
6. Proposed curb cut widths shall be kept to a minimum consistent with vehicular and
pedestrian safety. Curb cut radii shall allow safe ingress and egress of vehicles from and to the proper
lane of traffic on the street which they adjoin. Existing curb cuts and curb radii shall be used only if they
comply with appropriate standards for proposed curb cuts and curb cut radii.
(e) Parking lot lighting. A parking lot shall be lighted for vehicular and pedestrian safety.
(B) Processing.
(1) Adequate copies of the complete site plan shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator.
(2) The Zoning Administrator shall forward the site plan to the Planning Commission and to
applicable reviewing agencies as instructed by the Planning Commission.
(3) The Planning Commission or a delegation thereof shall view the area being considered
within the site plan.
(C) Decision.
(1) The Planning Commission shall review the site plan and any written comments from
reviewing agencies and recommend notification as necessary within 45 days from the time it is filed.
(2) Decisions and recommendations of the Planning Commission shall be filed and recorded
with the Zoning Administrator. Copies shall be sent to the applicant and/or his or her representative.
Zoning Code
164
(D) Compliance required.
(1) It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator or other appointed city staff to ensure that
the approved site plan is followed by the owner and/or developer.
(2) The land area of a site developed pursuant to an approved site plan shall not thereafter be
reduced in size, and no departure from the approved site plan shall be made without the express written
permission of the Planning Commission. The procedure for review and approval or disapproval of
changes shall be the same as for the initial application.
(3) No building or site shall be used or occupied until all requirements and provisions of this
chapter and any special conditions have been complied with.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.192 PERFORMANCE.
To ensure performance that development proposed in the plan submitted abides by all conditions of
the city and that all tasks planned and all development proposed are completed within the established time
frame, the city may require a warranty, and be given security, through performance bond or other
security means.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
ADMINISTRATION, PERMITS AND FEES
' 152.205 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR DUTIES.
The City Council shall appoint a Zoning Administrator. It shall be the duty of the Zoning
Administrator to do the following:
(A) Administer the requirements of this chapter for permits and issue or deny each application in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(B) Review the use of land to determine compliance with the terms of this chapter.
(C) Publish and attend to the service of all notices required under the provisions of this chapter.
(D) Receive, file and forward applications for appeals, variances, conditional use permits,
amendments or other action to the appropriate official bodies.
Zoning Code
165
(E) Maintain permanent and current records pertaining to this chapter including, but not limited to,
maps, amendments, conditional uses, variances, appeals and applications thereof.
(F) Keep up to date records of the appointments of the Planning Commission members, their terms,
addresses, and telephone contacts.
(G) Provide technical assistance to the Planning Commission, City Council and the Board of
Appeals.
(H) Make recommendations to the Planning Commission, City Council, and Board of Appeals as
necessitated by this chapter.
(I) Serve as an Ex-Officio member of the Planning Commission.
(J) Refer to the City Attorney all violations of this chapter which can not be handled
administratively.
(K) Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter, including maps, amendments,
conditional uses, and variances.
(L) Keep current records of all non-conforming uses.
(M) Provide the County Recorder with a copy of all variances and Conditional Use permits granted
so they can be attached to the deed for permanent record.
(N) Review and forward to the Building Official building permit applications that require
verification of property lines, setbacks, and State Building Code inspections and work closely with the
Building Official on building permit applications.
(O) Answer questions, review and interpret the Zoning Ordinance with applicants. Refer to the
Zoning Ordinance on such issues as, but not limited to: zoning district map, City plat map, whether a
particular use is permitted or accessory, or conditional use in a designated district, lot size requirements
of each district, moving in a structure, off street parking requirements, zoning definitions, fencing
requirements, outside storage requirements, nuisance standards, traffic standards, access driveway
requirements, sign provisions, motor fuel stations, Planned Unit Developments, etc.
(P) Perform duties in accordance with the Land Subdivision Ordinance including preliminary and
final platting procedures and lot splits (minor subdivisions).
(Q) Perform duties in accordance with the Airport Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
Zoning Code
166
' 152.206 APPEALS.
It is the intent of this chapter that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall first be
presented to the Zoning Administrator, and that such questions shall be presented to the Board of
Appeals only in accordance with '' 152.230 et seq. or '' 152.260 et seq.
' 152.207 FEES.
The City Council shall establish a schedule of fees for appeals, amendments and charges, conditional
uses, variances and other matters pertaining to this chapter. The schedule may be altered or amended
only by the City Council. Until all applicable fees have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any
application or appeal.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
CONDITIONAL USES
' 152.220 CONDITIONAL USES.
(A) A conditional use is a use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction
throughout the zoning district but which, if controlled as to number, area, location, or relation to the
neighborhood, would not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or general welfare. If granted, a
permit would be issued specially and individually for conditional use(s) permitted in any district. Any of
the uses or purposes for which such permits are required or permitted by the provisions of this chapter
shall be submitted to the Planning Commission and City Council for review and determination of its
applicability to the district in which it is proposed. After due consideration in each case, the City
Council, upon receiving a report and recommendation of the Planning Commission relative to the
requirements of this chapter, may or may not grant/approve the conditional use.
(B) The following procedure shall be followed for conditional use permit application:
(1) Application.
(a) The applicant requests proper form for a conditional use permit from the Zoning
Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may assist the applicant with filing the application.
(b) The application shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator accompanied by the fee as
set by the City Council. The application shall contain the following information:
1. The legal description and local address of the property.
Zoning Code
167
2. A map showing the locations, dimensions and use of all property within 350 feet of
the applicant's property including streets, alleys, railroads and other physical and cultural features.
3. The names and addresses of the owners of all property within 350 feet of the
property for which the conditional use permit is being applied.
4. A detailed description of the proposed conditional use.
5. Detailed plans of all buildings, roadways and any other structural or cultural
improvements.
6. A statement describing the reasons for the request of the conditional use permit.
7. Other information or exhibits as required by the Planning Commission and City
Council in making recommendations, determinations and dispositions on the application.
(2) Application processing. Upon receipt of the application by the Zoning Administrator, a
copy of the completed application and attachments shall be forwarded immediately to the Planning
Commission and City Council.
(3) Planning Commission.
(a) The Zoning Administrator shall present the complete application with the Applicant at
the next regular meeting of the Planning Commission, or, in the Zoning Administrator's discretion, at a
special meeting in order to process the application in a timely manner.
(b) The Planning Commission or delegation thereof shall view the area being considered
for a conditional use permit.
(c) The Planning Commission shall consider all possible effects of the proposed conditional
use permit and what, if any, additional requirements may be deemed necessary to prevent adverse
effects.
(d) The Planning Commission, in considering an application for a conditional use permit,
shall make findings on the following criteria and report these findings and a recommendation, with
reasons, within 30 days to the City Council:
1. Whether the establishment, maintenance or operation will not be detrimental to or
endanger the public health, safety or general welfare and is not contrary to established standards,
regulations or ordinances of other governmental agencies.
2. Whether each structure or improvement is so designed and constructed that it is not
unsightly, undesirable or obnoxious in appearance to the extent that it will hinder the orderly and
Zoning Code
168
harmonious development of the city and of the district wherein proposed.
3. Whether the use will not be substantially injurious to the permitted uses nor unduly
restrict the enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity nor substantially diminish and impair
property values within the area.
4. Whether the establishment of the use will not impede the orderly and normal
development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses permitted in the zoning district.
5. That adequate water supply and sewage disposal facilities are provided and in
accordance with applicable standards.
6. Whether adequate access roads, on-site parking, on-site loading and unloading
berths and drainage have been or will be provided.
7. Whether adequate measures have been taken to provide ingress and egress so as to
minimize traffic congestion on public roads.
8. Whether the use will not be in major conflict with the Comprehensive Plan.
9. Whether the use will conform to all other applicable regulations as required in this
chapter.
(4) Public hearing.
(a) The City Council shall conduct a public hearing within 30 days of receiving fact
findings and recommendation from the Planning Commission.
(b) The Zoning Administrator shall set the date for a hearing and give notice of the time,
place, and purpose of the hearing in the following manner:
1. Notify by mail all property owners within 350 feet of the property at least 10 days
prior to the date of the hearing.
2. Give public notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 10 days
prior to the hearing.
3. Notify individuals and other agencies as instructed or deemed necessary.
(c) The Zoning Administrator, along with the applicant and/or his or her representative,
shall appear before the City Council to present the application and answer questions relative to the
application.
Zoning Code
169
(d) Any person with a legitimate interest in the application may present his or her views to
the City Council either verbally or in writing.
(e) An accurate record of all testimony shall be kept by the Zoning Administrator. This
record shall include the names of all persons who participated in the meeting.
(5) Decision.
(a) The City Council shall make a decision on the application for a conditional use permit
following the public hearing.
(b) The concurring vote of a majority of the full Council membership shall be necessary
for the approval or denial of an application for a conditional use permit within 60 days of submission of
the application (unless an extension is granted.) The Council may act without a recommendation from the
Planning Commission after 60 days.
(c) Decisions of the City Council shall immediately be filed with fact findings and properly
recorded with the Zoning Administrator.
(6) Approval.
(a) Issuance of permit.
1. The Council shall detail its reasons for approval by adopting a resolution and may
impose any additional special conditions considered necessary to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare.
2. The Zoning Administrator shall record the Resolution with the County Recorder.
3. The Zoning Administrator shall issue a conditional use permit to the applicant for a
specific use on a particular tract of land.
4. Copies shall be sent to the applicant and/or his or her representative.
(b) A conditional use permit shall become void 1 year from the date of issuance if
significant construction has not been undertaken.
(7) Denial.
(a) The City Council shall detail its reasons for denial and the Zoning Administrator shall
inform the applicant of the reasons it is denied and document its official findings on file.
(b) Failure to approve the requested conditional use permit shall not be deemed cause to
Zoning Code
170
refund the fee to the applicant.
(8) Violations. Violations of such conditions shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and
punishable hereunder.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
VARIANCES
' 152.230 PURPOSE.
(A) Pursuant to M.S. §§ 462.357, Subd. 6, as it may be amended from time to time, the Board of
Appeals and Adjustments, may issue variances from the provisions of this zoning code. A variance is a
modification or variation of the provisions of this zoning code as applied to a specific piece of property.
A variance from the literal provisions of this zoning code may be granted by the Board of Appeals and
Adjustments only when the variance is in harmony with the general purposes and intent of the zoning
code and the variance is consistent with the comprehensive plan, if the city has adopted one. A variance
may be granted when the applicant for the variance establishes that there are PRACTICAL
DIFFICULTIES in complying with the zoning ordinance. PRACTICAL DIFFICULTIES as used in
connection with granting a variance, means the property owner proposes to use the property in a
reasonable manner not permitted by the zoning code; the plight of the landowner is due to circumstances
unique to the property not created by the landowner; and the variance, if granted, will not alter the
essential character of the locality. Economic considerations alone do not constitute practical difficulties.
Practical difficulties include, but are not limited to, inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy
systems.
(B) Variances shall be granted for earth sheltered construction as defined in M.S. § 216C.06, Subd.
14, as it may be amended from time to time, when in harmony with this zoning code. The Board of
Appeals and Adjustments may not permit as a variance any use that is not allowed under this zoning code
for property in the zone where the affected person's land is located. The Board of Appeals and
Adjustments may permit as a variance the temporary use of a one-family dwelling as a two-family
dwelling. The Board of Appeals and Adjustments may impose conditions in the granting of variances to
ensure compliance and to protect adjacent properties. A condition must be directly related to and must
bear rough proportionality to the impact created by the variance. The variance shall not become effective
until a certified copy is filed by the applicant with the County Recorder, which shall include the legal
description of the property included.
(C) Establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance.
(D) Decisions of the Board of Appeals within the city are final, subject to judicial review (M.S.
' 462.357, subd. 6 and ' 462.358, subd. 4, as they may be amended from time to time.)
Zoning Code
171
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.231 PROCEDURE.
(A) Approved. Pursuant to M.S. ' 15.99, as it may be amended from time to time, an application
for a variance shall be approved or denied within 60 days from the date it is officially completed and
submitted, unless extended pursuant to statute or a time waiver is granted by the applicant. If applicable,
processing of the application through required state or federal agencies shall extend the review and
decision-making period an additional 60 days unless this limitation is waived by the applicant.
(B) Application.
(1) The applicant requests the proper form for a variance from the Zoning Administrator. The
Administrator may assist the applicant with filing the application.
(2) The application shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator accompanied by the fee as set
by the City Council. The application shall contain the following information:
(a) The legal description and local address of the property.
(b) A map showing the locations, dimensions and use of all property within 350 feet of the
applicant's property including streets, alleys, railroads and other physical features.
(c) The names and addresses of the owners of all property within 350 feet of the property
for which the conditional use permit is being applied.
(d) A statement on what is intended to be done on, or with, the property which does not
conform with this chapter.
(e) Detailed plans of all buildings, roadways, and any other structural improvements.
(f) Other information or exhibits as required by the Planning Commission and City
Council in making recommendations, determinations, and dispositions of the application.
(3) The following requirements shall be addressed within the application:
(a) That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions which are
peculiar to the land, structure or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures
or buildings in the same district.
(b) That literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant
of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this chapter.
Zoning Code
172
(c) That the authorizing of such variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent
property and will not materially impair the intent and purpose of this chapter or the public interest.
(d) That the condition or situation of the specific piece of property, or the intended use of
said property for which the variance is sought, is not of so general or recurrent a nature as to make
reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation for such conditions or situations.
(e) That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the
applicant.
(C) Application processing.
(1) Upon receipt of the application by the Zoning Administrator, a copy of the completed
variance application shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation to
the Board of Appeals.
(2) A physical inspection of the property in question by all members or a delegation of
members of the Planning Commission shall be done.
(3) The Planning Commission shall review and make findings and a recommendation to the
Board of within 30 days for final action as to whether the requirements of ' 152.231(B)(3) have been met
by the applicant.
(4) After a recommendation has been made by the Planning Commission, the application
materials and the recommendation of action shall be sent to the Board of Appeals for action.
(5) The Zoning Administrator shall do the following:
(a) Set the public hearing date within 30 days from the submission date of the application.
(b) Provide notice of hearing to the applicant and all property owners, stating the: location,
purpose, date and time.
(c) Notify by mail all property owners within 350 feet of the property at least 10 days prior
to the date of the hearing.
(d) Give public notice in the local newspaper at least 10 days prior to the hearing.
(e) Notify the appropriate individuals and other agencies (township or county if applicable)
as instructed or deemed necessary.
(D) Public hearing.
Zoning Code
173
(1) The Board of Appeals shall conduct the hearing within 30 days of receiving fact findings
and recommendation from the Planning Commission.
(2) The applicant and/or his or her representative shall appear before the Board of Appeals and
answer questions relative to the application for variance.
(3) An accurate record of all testimony shall be kept by the Secretary of the Board of Appeals.
This record shall include the names of all persons who participated in the meeting.
(E) Decision.
(1) Approval.
(a) The Board of Appeals by concurring vote of the majority of the members may approve
the application within 60 days of the receipt of the application. The Board may act without a
recommendation from the Planning Commission after 60 days.
(b) If approved, the Board of Appeals shall adopt a resolution finding the reasons set forth
in the application justify the granting of the variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the
land, building or structure. The Board of Appeals may further attach any condition to the grant of the
variance as it shall determine is necessary and desirable to bring it within the purpose and intent of this
chapter, provided, however, that no variance shall be granted that establishes any setback requirement at
less than 3 feet.
(c) The Zoning Administrator shall document the fact findings and properly record the
resolution as required with the County Recorder.
(d) Copies shall be sent to the applicant and/or his or her representative by mail.
(e) The Zoning Administrator shall issue a variance as decided on by the Board of
Appeals.
(f) Unless otherwise stated in the decision, any order or decision of the Board of Appeals
shall become void if significant construction has not been undertaken within 12 months. It would be
necessary to apply to the Zoning Administrator for a specific time extension.
(2) Denial.
(a) The Board of Appeals by concurring vote of the majority of the members may deny the
application within 60 days of the receipt of the application. The Board may act without a
recommendation from the Planning Commission after 60 days. The decision shall describe the reasons
for the determination and the decision shall also state in detail what the denial was based upon.
Zoning Code
174
(b) A copy shall be sent to the applicant and/or his or her representative by mail.
(c) Failure to approve the requested variance shall not be deemed cause to refund the fee to
the applicant.
(F) Violations. Violations of any conditions or restrictions shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter and punishable hereunder.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
CHANGE AND AMENDMENTS (INCLUDING RE-ZONING REQUESTS)
' 152.245 ANNUAL REVIEWS.
The Planning Commission, in cooperation with the Zoning Administrator, shall annually prepare and
file with the City Council a report on the operations of the Zoning Ordinance. This may include
recommendations as to the enactment of amendments or supplements thereto. This report shall include,
but not be limited to, the study of the following:
(A) Development of property uses.
(B) Nature of population trends.
(C) Commercial and industrial growth, both actual and prospective.
(D) Effect upon the community as whole in view of the city's Comprehensive Plan and how the
ordinance has assisted in implementing the plan.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.246 AMENDMENT PROCEDURE.
A procedure whereby the regulations, restrictions and boundaries set forth in this chapter may from
time to time be amended, supplemented, changed or repealed. No such action may be taken unless it
shall have been proposed by, or shall have been first submitted to the Planning Commission for review
and recommendation in the following manner:
(A) Application.
(1) Applicant requests the proper form for zoning amendment from the Zoning Administrator.
Zoning Code
175
(2) Application shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator accompanied by the fee as set by
the City Council. The application shall contain the following information:
(a) The legal description and local address of the property.
(b) The present zoning classification and the zoning classification requested for the
property.
(c) The existing use and proposed use of the property.
(d) The names and addresses of the owners of all property within 350 feet of the property
for which the change is requested.
(e) A statement of the reasons why the applicant believes the present zoning classification
is no longer valid.
(f) A map showing the locations, dimensions and use of the applicant's property and all
property within 350 feet thereof, including streets, alleys, railroads and other physical features.
(3) Failure to approve the requested change shall not be deemed cause to refund the fee to the
applicant.
(B) Application processing.
(1) Upon receipt of the application by the Zoning Administrator, a copy of the completed
application shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission for study and recommendation at the next
regular meeting, or the Administrator may call for or arrange a special meeting in order to process the
application in a timely manner.
(2) The Planning Commission, or a delegation thereof, shall view the area being considered.
(3) The Planning Commission shall, prior to making a recommendation, consider the
following:
(a) Would the granting of the re-zoning request conform to the presently accepted future
land use plans for the city as well as present land uses.
(b) Is it in the community's best interest for additional land space to be zoned to the class
requested.
(c) If it is in the community's best interest for additional land to be zoned as requested,
should the re-zoning be done in areas requested or would the community's interest be better served if the
re-zoning were done in other areas of the city.
Zoning Code
176
(d) Would the granting of the re-zoning request adversely affect property values of adjacent
landowners to an unreasonable degree.
(e) If the request was granted, what additional public services would be required.
(f) Is the capacity of existing roads and sewer and water facilities sufficient to
accommodate this proposal.
(g) Was there an error or oversight in preparing the original zoning map which indicates
that this zoning should have been included at that time.
(h) Is this change beneficial to the community or is it merely a convenience to the
applicant.
(4) The Planning Commission shall send a written recommendation, with reasons, to the City
Council.
(C) Public hearing.
(1) The Zoning Administrator shall schedule a date for a hearing to be conducted by the City
Council within 30 days of receipt of the recommendation of the Planning Commission and give notice of
time, place, and purpose of the hearing in the following manner:
(a) Notify by mail all property owners within 350 feet of the property at least 10 days prior
to the date of the hearing.
(b) Notify the Township Clerk by certified mail not less than 20 days prior to hearing if the
zoning change or amendment affecting land is within 1 mile of the city boundary.
(c) Give public notice in the local newspaper of the city at least 10 days prior to the
hearing date.
(d) Notify individuals and other agencies as instructed and deemed necessary.
(2) The Zoning Administrator shall appear before the City Council to present the application
and answer questions relative to the application.
(3) Any person with legitimate interest in the application may present his or her views to the
City Council either verbally or in writing.
(4) An accurate record of all testimony shall be kept by the Zoning Administrator. This record
shall include the names and addresses of all persons who participated in the meeting.
Zoning Code
177
(D) Decision.
(1) Approval.
(a) The City Council may approve the application within 60 days by majority vote of the
entire City Council when concurring with the Planning Commission's fact findings and
recommendations, or the City Council may override the recommendation of the Planning Commission
and thereby approve or disapprove an application by a 4/5 vote of the entire City Council. The Council
may act without a recommendation from the Planning Commission after 60 days.
(b) The City Council shall officially act on a granted change, amendment or a re-zoning
request by adopting a new ordinance.
(c) The Zoning Administrator shall prepare a map and/or forward a certified copy of the
new ordinance to the County Recorder, as needed.
(d) Copies of the ordinance shall be sent to the applicant and/or his or her representative.
(2) Denial.
(a) The City Council may deny the application within 60 days by majority vote of the
entire City Council when concurring with the Planning Commission's recommendation. If the application
is denied by the City Council, a period of not less than 1 year is required between presentation of the
same petitions for a change or amendment or re-zoning request, applying to a specific piece of property
unless there has been a substantial change in facts.
(b) The City Council shall detail its reasons for denial and the Zoning Administrator shall
inform the Applicant of the reasons it is denied and documents its official findings on file.
(c) Failure to approve the requested change shall not be deemed cause to refund the fee to
the applicant.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
CITY COUNCIL
' 152.260 POWERS AND DUTIES.
It is the intent of this chapter that the duties of the City Council shall include the following:
Zoning Code
178
(A) Review formulation and adoption of the ordinance creating this chapter and applicable maps as
empowered by M.S. ' 462.357, subd. 2, as it may be amended from time to time.
(B) Appoint members to and delegate certain powers and duties to the City Planning Commission,
Board of Appeals and Zoning Administrator for the purpose of implementing and enforcing the
requirements of this chapter in a fair, conscientious and intelligent manner.
(C) Review all applications for conditional use permits, zoning changes and ordinance amendments,
i.e. proposed land use requests; conduct public hearings and make decisions on them as provided in this
chapter.
(D) Establish a schedule of fees and charges as relating to this chapter.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.261 DECISIONS.
All actions and recommendations of the city pertaining to this chapter shall require a 4/5 vote of the
entire City Council.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
BOARD OF APPEALS
' 152.275 ESTABLISHMENT.
The Board of Appeals shall consist of 5 members appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the
City Council. One of the members shall be a member of the Planning Commission and 1 of the members
shall be a member of the City Council. The initial terms of the members shall be 1, 2, or 3 years and
thereafter all terms shall be for 3 years, or until removed by the City Council, or until his or her
successor is duly appointed and qualified. Any vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor
with the approval of the City Council. Members may be re-appointed for additional terms. Members
may be removed by the City Council without cause, after a hearing.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.276 RECORDS.
Minutes shall be kept for all Board meetings. The minutes shall include all important facts pertaining
to each meeting which will include, but not be limited to, names and addresses of all persons appearing
Zoning Code
179
before the Board, a record of all hearings and testimony, all exhibits presented to the Board, a copy of
each resolution acted upon by the Board, the vote of each member upon each question, the reasons for
the Board's determination and the members absent or failing to vote. These records shall be immediately
filed in the office of the Zoning Administrator and shall be a public record.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.277 POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Board of Appeals shall decide on issuance of a variance in accordance to '' 152.230 et seq. and
have the following powers and duties with regard to this chapter:
(A) Appeals. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement and interpretation of this
chapter, as follows:
(1) Procedure and process to appeal. An appeal may be taken by an aggrieved person or by
any City Personnel, Board or Commission member. Such an appeal shall be filed within 30 calendar days
after the date of the decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator. An appeal shall be made in
the following manner:
(a) The Applicant's requests the proper form from the Zoning Administrator.
(b) The application shall be filled with the Zoning Administrator accompanied by the fee
set by the City Council. The application shall contain the following information:
1. Applicant's name, address and telephone number.
2. The section of the Zoning Ordinance in question.
3. The nature of the difficulty encountered with the Zoning Ordinance.
4. The nature of the action by the Zoning Administrator.
5. The manner in which it is believed that an error in action, determination, or
decision has occurred.
(2) Application processing.
(a) Upon receipt of the application by the Zoning Administrator, a copy of the completed
application for an appeal shall be forwarded to the Board of Appeals for review.
(b) The Board of Appeals shall schedule and conduct a hearing on the application, and the
Zoning Code
180
Zoning Administrator shall provide the applicant at least 10-days= advance notice thereof.
(c) The Board of Appeals shall conduct the Hearing within 30 days.
(d) The applicant and/or his or her representative shall appear before the Board of Appeals
and answer questions relative to the application.
(e) An accurate record of all testimony shall be kept by the Secretary of the Board of
Appeals, and shall include the names of all persons who participated in the meeting.
(B) Decision.
(1) Approval.
(a) The Board of Appeals (quorum of members) may approve the application within 60
days of the receipt of the application. The decision shall show the reasons for the determination and may
reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order or determination appealed. Such decision
shall also state in detail any exceptional difficulty or unusual hardships upon which the appeal was based
and which the Board found present. The decision shall also state in detail what, if any, conditions and
safeguards are required.
(b) The Board of Appeals shall adopt a resolution stating its interpretation and
determination of the provisions of this chapter being appealed through the application.
(c) The Zoning Administrator shall notify the order or determination as decided on by the
Board of Appeals.
(d) Copies shall be sent to the Applicant and/or his or her representative by mail.
(e) The decision will be kept on file.
(2) Denial.
(a) The Board of Appeals (quorum of members) may deny the application within 60 days
of the receipt of the application. The decision shall state the reasons for the determination.
(b) The decision will be kept on file.
(c) Copies shall be sent to the applicant and/or his or her representative by mail.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
Zoning Code
181
CITY PLANNING COMMISSION
' 152.290 ESTABLISHMENT.
(A) The Planning Commission shall consist of six (6) appointed members, plus one (1) member
from the City Council, which the Council shall select from its own members. The appointed members
shall serve a 3 year term, or until removed by the City Council, or until his or her successor is duly
appointed and qualified. Any vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the Mayor with the approval of
the City Council for the unexpired portion of the term. Members may be re-appointed for additional
terms. Members may be removed by the City Council without cause, after a hearing.
(B) The Commission shall elect a Chair, Vice Chair and Assistant Secretary for the term of 1 year
and may create and fill such other offices as they determine. The Planning and Zoning Administrator
shall act as the official Secretary of the Planning Commission, but shall not be a voting member.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.291 MEETINGS.
Regular meetings of the Planning Commission shall be held on the second Monday of each month at
7:00 p.m. The date, time and location will be established from time to time by the City Council and
Zoning Administrator. Special meetings of the Planning Commission may be called by the Zoning
Administrator. Decisions, resolutions, and recommendations of the Planning Commission shall be by
majority vote of members present.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.292 RECORDS.
Minutes shall be kept for all Commission meetings. The minutes shall include all important facts
pertaining to each meeting which will include, but not be limited to names and addresses of all persons
appearing before the Commission; a record of the application (and any attachments) and all exhibits
presented to the Commission; the vote of each member upon each recommendation; the reasons for the
Commission's determination; and the members absent or failing to vote. These records shall be
immediately filed in the office of the Planning and Zoning Administrator and shall be a public record.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
Zoning Code
182
' 152.293 POWERS AND DUTIES.
The duties of the City Planning Commission shall include the following:
(A) To prepare and recommend to the City Council a Comprehensive Plan for the physical
development of the city including: street arrangements and improvements, public utility services, parks
and playgrounds, use of property, and other matters relating to the physical development of the city.
Before recommending the plan or any substantial amendment thereto, the Commission shall hold at least
1 public hearing, notice of which shall be given by publication at least 10 days before the day of the
hearing. The Commission may from time to time amend or add to the plan whenever a change or further
studies indicate that such action is necessary. The recommendation of the plan or amendment shall be a
resolution of the Commission, approved of by not less than 2/3 of its total membership.
(B) Upon instruction of the City Council, the Planning Commission shall prepare a revised zoning
plan for the city. Before recommending such plan to the Council, the Planning Commission shall hold at
least 1 public hearing, notice of which shall be given by publication at least 10 days before the day of the
hearing. The same procedures shall apply for the following:
(1) Preparation of any plan of proposed rights-of-way for future streets or highways or the
future widening of existing streets or highways or the reservation of lands for other public purposes,
(2) Preparation of an official map of the platted and unplatted portions of the city and adjoining
areas, or portions thereof, indicating proposed future extension growth areas.
(C) Upon its own motion may, and upon instructions by the City Council shall, review and make
recommendations on the land subdivision ordinance, preliminary and final plats, and plans for future
streets. The City Council shall have final approval.
(D) Review all applications submitted in accordance with '' 152.220, 152.230 et seq. and 152.245
et seq. and report the findings and recommendations to the Board of Appeals or City Council as provided
in this chapter.
(E) Prepare, in cooperation with the Zoning Administrator, an annual review related to the
effectiveness of this chapter as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
Zoning Code
183
AG - AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
' 152.305 PURPOSE.
The AG Agricultural District is intended to preserve for a limited time those lands devoted to
agricultural enterprises located within the city where urban expansion is planned to take place. In this
manner, conflicts between agricultural and non-agricultural land uses shall be minimized. Its effect is to
control the infiltration of urban development into areas generally devoted to agriculture until the City
Council determines that it is financially and economically feasible to provide public services and
facilities, thereby promoting orderly urban development.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.306 PERMITTED USES.
The following uses shall be permitted in the AG Agricultural District:
(A) Agricultural crops.
(B) Publicly owned parks, playgrounds and community buildings.
(C) Single-family and 2-family dwellings for resident land owners.
(D) Home occupations.
(E) Accessory buildings or structures and uses customarily incidental to any of the above listed uses
when located on the same property.
(F) Churches, chapels and similar places of worship.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005, amended by Ord. 2018-07, passed 11-19-2018)
' 152.307 CONDITIONAL USES.
The following uses may be permitted in the AG Agricultural District upon recommendation of the
Planning Commission and approval of the City Council.
(A) Livestock.
(B) Game refuge and preserve areas.
Zoning Code
184
(C) Churches, chapels and similar places of worship.
(D) Public schools and similar private education institutions, and libraries.
(E) Public utility buildings such as substations, transformer stations and regulator stations without
storage yards, and public works garages and shops.
(F) Cemeteries.
(G) Temporary produce stands on premises used for agricultural purposes provided there is adequate
off-street parking.
(H) Commercial radio, television and telephone towers and transmitters.
(I) Stables.
(J) Veterinary and animal clinics, commercial kennels, and riding and boarding stables.
(K) Excavating of sand and gravel.
(L) Parks, campgrounds, golf courses, golf driving ranges, historical sites and museums.
(M) Carnivals, outdoor circuses and migratory amusement enterprises.
(N) Airports and landing fields.
(O) Hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, senior housing facilities, daycare and nursery schools.
(P) Mobile home parks.
(Q) Storage rental facilities.
(R) Accessory buildings and structures and uses customarily incidental to any of the above listed
uses when located on the same property.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
Zoning Code
185
' 152.308 BULK REGULATIONS.
The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
(A) Lot area, width and yard requirements.
Use
Lot Area
Sq. Ft.
Lot Width
Yards
Front
Side
Rear
Single-family
dwelling
217,800*
(5 Acres)
400 ft.
25 ft.
10 ft.
80 ft.
Other uses
217,800
400 ft
50 ft.
50 ft.
80 ft.
* For lots not served by city sewer and water the minimum lot size for a single-family
dwelling shall be determined by the topography of the property, the ability to locate the
principal dwelling, any accessory buildings, and 2 individual sewage treatment systems that
meet state guidelines, which all meet applicable setback requirements.
(B) Height restrictions. The following height restrictions shall be observed:
(1) No residential building hereafter erected or altered shall exceed 36 feet.
(2) Public or semipublic buildings, churches, schools, and similar uses may be erected to a
height of 60 feet.
(3) Agricultural uses and accessory buildings shall be exempted from height requirements.
(4) When the property is within the vicinity of the city's airport, the airport's zoning height
requirements within various control zones shall take precedent over the limits shown above. Please refer
to the city=s airport zoning map and document for further information.
(C) Building dimension requirements. The main exterior walls of each residential structure shall not
be less than 20 feet wide at the narrowest point of the structure.
(D) Permanent foundation. All principal dwellings and principal structures shall be placed on a
permanent continuous perimeter foundation.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
Zoning Code
186
R-1 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
' 152.320 PURPOSE.
The R-1 District is intended to provide for low density residential development with a limited
number of institutional and recreational uses permitted. The district is designed to protect residential
areas now developed and to regulate the efficient use and orderly development of vacant land designated
for residential uses. The regulations are designed to promote a suitable environment for family life.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.321 PERMITTED USES.
The following uses shall be permitted in the R-1 Residential Districts:
(A) Single-family dwellings.
(B) Two-family dwellings.
(C) Publicly owned parks and playgrounds.
(D) Home occupations as regulated by this chapter.
(E) Accessory buildings or structures and uses customarily incidental to any of the above listed uses
when located on the same property.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.322 CONDITIONAL USES.
The following uses may be permitted in the R-1 Residential District upon recommendation of the
Planning Commission and approval of the City Council.
(A) Churches, chapels and similar places of worship, parish homes, rectories and convents.
(B) Public schools and similar private education institutions.
(C) Hospitals, medical clinics, nursing, rest or convalescent homes, assisted living and similar
institutions.
(D) Public utility buildings such as substations, transformer stations and regulator stations without
storage yards.
Zoning Code
187
(E) Day care or nursery schools.
(F) Community buildings.
(G) Golf and country clubs.
(H) Bed and breakfast inns as regulated by this chapter.
(I) Other residential or government service uses determined by the city to be of the same general
character as the permitted and conditional uses above and found not to be detrimental to existing uses and
the general public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.323 BULK REGULATIONS.
The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
(A) Lot area, width and yard requirements.
Use
Lot Area
Sq. Ft.
Width
Front Yard
Rear Yard
Side Yard
(Width)
At
Street
At Bldg.
Setback
Line
Dwellings:
Single-family
12,000
45 ft.
85 ft.
25 ft.
30 ft.
10 ft.
Two-family
13,000
50 ft.
85 ft.
25 ft.
30 ft.
10 ft.
Other uses
20,000
100 ft.
100 ft.
25 ft.
30 ft.
10 ft.
(B) Building height.
(1) No residential building hereafter erected or altered shall exceed 36 feet in height. Provided,
however, public and semipublic buildings, churches, cathedrals, temples, hospitals or schools may be
erected to a height of 60 feet when set back from all lot lines not less than 1 foot, in addition to required
yard dimensions, for each foot such building exceeds 36 feet in height.
(2) When the property is within the vicinity of the city's airport, the airport's zoning height
requirements within various control zones shall take precedent over the limits shown above. Please refer
to the city=s airport zoning map and document for further information.
Zoning Code
188
(C) Corner lot, special requirements. On any corner lot or lot fronting on more than 1 street, no
building or structure shall be placed or erected closer than 25 feet to any property line abutting and
paralleling a street. All corner lots shall be at least 10% larger in lot frontage at the building line and lot
area than is required above for 1- and 2-family dwellings.
(D) Area covered by buildings or roofed areas. The area of the lot covered by buildings or roofed
areas, excluding permitted projecting eaves, shall not exceed 35%.
(E) Building dimension requirements. The main exterior walls of each residential structure shall not
be less than 20 feet wide at the narrowest point of the structure.
(F) All principal dwellings and principal structures shall be placed on a permanent continuous
perimeter foundation.
(G) All principal dwellings shall have an earth covered, composition, shingled, tiled or steel roof.
(H) All structures, either principal or accessory, shall be constructed in conformance with the
Minnesota State Building Code or the applicable manufactured housing code.
(I) Unattached garages and parking spaces accessory to single and 2-family residential structures,
may be located anywhere on the buildable area, except that garages may be located to within 10 feet of
an interior side lot line and to within 10 feet of a rear lot line. No unattached garage accessory to a
residential structure on a corner lot or other similar situation shall be located outside a required buildable
area abutting a street except by conditional use permit.
(J) Floor area per dwelling unit. Floor area per dwelling unit (square feet): 1000.
(K) Zero lot line requirements.
(1) When interior units of townhouses are placed on interior side property lines with 0
setbacks, the structure setback for end units shall be a minimum of 10 feet.
(2) All developments using the 0 lot line provision must submit a site plan according to the
provisions of this chapter. The site plan shall include a plat drawn to the specifications of the city's
subdivision ordinance.
(3) Each structure shall be located on its own individually platted lot. The plat shall indicate the
0 lot lines, easements and provisions for common areas and their maintenance.
(L) Distance from a residential building. The following structures shall be located not less than 300
feet from a structure on a zoning lot used for residential purposes.
(1) Mausoleums, crematories and columbariums.
Zoning Code
189
(2) Stadia, auditoriums and arenas.
(3) Radar installation and towers, telephone transmission equipment buildings and micro-wave
relay towers and radio and television towers.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
R-2 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
' 152.335 PURPOSE.
The R-2 High Density Residential District is intended to provide for high density residential
development. It is designed to accommodate single-family and multiple-family structures in an acceptable
relationship with one another and to regulate the efficient use and orderly development of vacant land
designated for such use. Mobile home parks and institutional uses which are compatible with residential
areas are also permitted on parcels of adequate size to allow required parking and building needs.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.336 PERMITTED USES.
The following uses shall be permitted in the R-2 Residential District:
(A) Single-family dwellings.
(B) Two-family dwellings.
(C) Publicly owned parks and playgrounds.
(D) Home occupations as regulated by this chapter.
(E) Dwellings in groups of not more than 4 housekeeping units in any 1 building.
(F) Accessory buildings or structures and uses customarily incidental to any of the above listed uses
when located on the same property
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
Zoning Code
190
' 152.337 CONDITIONAL USES.
The following uses may be permitted in the R-2 Residential District upon recommendation of the
Planning Commission and approval of the City Council.
(A) Churches, chapels and similar places of worship, parish homes, rectories and convents.
(B) Public schools and similar private education institutions.
(C) Hospitals, medical clinics, nursing, rest or convalescent homes, assisted living and similar
institutions.
(D) Public utility buildings such as substations, transformer stations and regulator stations without
storage yards.
(E) Day care or nursery schools.
(F) Community buildings.
(G) Golf and country clubs.
(H) Bed and breakfast inns as regulated by this chapter.
(I) Other residential or government service uses determined by the city to be of the same general
character as the permitted and conditional uses above and found not to be detrimental to existing uses and
the general public health, safety and welfare.
(J) Mobile home parks.
(K) Institutions of a philanthropic or charitable nature.
(L) Funeral homes and mortuaries with adequate parking.
(M) Boarding and rooming house for up to 5 persons.
(N) Dwellings in groups of 5 or more housekeeping units in any 1 building.
(O) Accessory buildings and structures and uses customarily incidental to any of the above listed
uses when located on the same property.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
Zoning Code
191
' 152.338 BULK REGULATIONS.
The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
(A) Lot area, width and yard requirements.
Use
Lot Area
Sq. Ft.
Width
Front
Yard
Rear
Yard
Side Yard
At Street
Width
Dwellings:
Single-family
8,000
45 ft.
25 ft.
30 ft.
10 ft.
Two-family
10,000
50 ft.
25 ft.
30 ft.
10 ft.
Three-family
15,000
55 ft.
25 ft.
30 ft.
10 ft.
Four-family
15,000
60 ft.
25 ft.
30 ft.
10 ft.
Apartments
over 4
15,000
70 ft.
40 ft.
10 ft.
Other uses
20,000
100 ft.
25 ft.
45 ft.
12 ft.
(B) Building height.
(1) No building, hereafter erected or altered, shall exceed 4 stories or 60 feet. When set back
from all lot lines not less than 1 foot, in addition to required yard dimensions, for each foot such building
exceeds 36 feet in height
(2) When the property is within the vicinity of the city's airport, the airport's zoning height
requirements within various control zones shall take precedent over the limits shown above. Please refer
to the city=s airport zoning map and document for further information.
(C) Corner lot. On any corner lot or lot fronting on more than 1 street, no building or structure
shall be placed or erected closer than 25 feet to any property line abutting or paralleling a street. All
corner lots shall be at least 10% larger in lot frontage at the building line and lot area than is required for
1- and 2-family dwellings.
(D) Area covered by buildings, roofed areas. The area of the lot and common area covered by
buildings or roofed areas, excluding permitted projecting eaves, shall not exceed 35%.
(1) Ground floor area per dwelling unit minimum: 1,000
Zoning Code
192
(2) Floor area per dwelling unit minimums:
Three or more family
(each unit)
Square feet
Efficiency
500
1-bedroom unit
600
2-bedroom unit
720
3-bedroom unit
800
(E) Permanent perimeter foundation. With the exception of manufactured/mobile homes located
within a mobile home park, all principal dwellings and principal structures shall be placed on a
permanent perimeter foundation.
(F) Composition of roof. With the exception of manufactured/mobile homes located within a mobile
home park, all principal dwellings shall have an earth covered, composition, shingled, tiled or steel roof.
(G) Conformance with codes. All structures, either principal or accessory, shall be constructed in
conformance with the Minnesota State Building Code or the applicable manufactured housing code.
(H) Zero lot line requirements.
(1) When interior units of townhouses are placed on interior side property lines with 0
setbacks, the structure setback for end units shall be a minimum of 10 feet.
(2) All developments using the 0 lot line provision must submit a site plan according to the
provisions of this chapter.
(3) Each structure shall be located on its own individually platted lot. The plat shall indicate the
0 lot lines, easements and provisions for common areas and their maintenance.
(I) Building dimension requirements. The main exterior walls of each residential structure shall not
be less than 20 feet wide at the narrowest point of the structure. These dimensions shall not apply to
dwellings located within mobile home parks.
(J) Distance from a residential building. The following structures shall be located not less than 300
feet from a structure on a zoning lot used for residential purposes.
(1) Mausoleums, crematories and columbariums.
(2) Radar installation and towers, telephone transmission equipment buildings and micro-wave
Zoning Code
193
relay towers and radio and television towers.
(3) Animal shelters and kennels.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
B-3 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
' 152.350 PURPOSE.
The B-3 Central Business District is intended to provide for a wide variety of retail activities and
could act as a banking and financial center, entertainment center, or as a center for business and
professional offices. The district comprises the downtown section of the city. The use of land is
intensive. It is the purpose of these regulations to encourage such intensity of use and to exclude
activities which have a negative effect upon the proper functioning of the Central Business District.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.351 USES PERMITTED.
(A) Business services including banks, offices and postal stations.
(B) Clothing services including dry cleaning and laundry establishments, laundromats, dressmaking,
tailor shops, shoe repair shops.
(C) Equipment services including radio and television shops, electrical appliances shops, show room
of a plumber, decorator or similar trade.
(D) Food services including grocery stores, fruit, vegetable and meat markets, supermarkets,
restaurants, cafes, taverns, delicatessens, candy shops and bakeries.
(E) Personal services including barber and beauty shops, reducing salons, and photographic shops.
(F) Retail services including drug stores, hardware stores, sporting good sales, stationery and book
stores, news shops, apparel shops, show room for articles to be sold at retail, and flower shops.
(G) Medical and dental clinics.
(H) Commercial recreation.
(I) Buildings used for storage.
Zoning Code
194
(J) Any similar commercial establishment or professional service or commercial service.
(K) Residence when included as an integral part of the principal building.
(L) Rental residential units may be maintained above the ground floor but not on the main floor.
(1) Minimum apartment space shall be the following:
Efficiency unit
500 square feet
1-bedroom unit
600 square feet
2 or more bedroom
720 square feet
(2) Residential garages or carports shall have a minimum setback 10 feet from rear property
lines and 10 feet from side yard.
(M) Buildings and uses customarily necessary to any of the above uses.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.352 COMMERCIAL RESTRICTIONS.
The uses permitted shall be subject to the following conditions:
(A) Such businesses and sales or display or storage areas shall be confined within a building beyond
normal business hours except that the City Council by resolution or by ordinance may allow an exception
for city-wide promotions and activities.
(B) A public entrance to such businesses shall be from the principal street upon which the property
abuts.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.353 CONDITIONAL USES.
The following uses may be permitted upon recommendation of the Planning Commission and
approval of the City Council:
(A) Automobile service including auto equipment sales, car wash service, new and used car sales
lots, trailer sales areas, gasoline service stations and auto repair garages.
(B) Recreation services including theaters, bowling alleys, pool and billiard rooms, dance halls,
Zoning Code
195
roller and ice skating rinks.
(C) Hotels, motels, private clubs and lodges; wholesale establishments, night clubs, and on and off
liquor stores.
(D) Drive-in restaurants, drive-in banks and other drive-in services.
(E) Open air display areas for the sale of products such as garden furniture, hardware items, nursery
stock or automobiles or areas used to display rental equipment such as tools or trailers.
(F) Wholesale businesses.
(G) Transportation terminals and distributing stations.
(H) Buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the uses listed in this section when located
on the same property.
(I) Churches, chapels and similar places of worship, parish homes, rectories and convents.
(Ord. 280, passed 7 21 2005, amended by Ord. 2018-07, passed 11-19-2018)
' 152.354 BUILDING HEIGHT.
No building or structure hereafter erected or altered shall exceed 60 feet in height, or more than 4
stories.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.355 LOT AREA, FRONTAGE, LOT COVERAGE, YARD SIZE AND LOADING SPACE.
For allowed (non-residential) uses there will be no requirements for lot area, frontage, lot coverage,
yard sizes or loading space. For uses requiring special exception permits, lot area, frontage, lot
coverage, yard size, parking and loading space shall be specified by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
B-1 HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT
' 152.365 PURPOSE.
The B-1 Highway Business District is established to encourage the functional grouping of those
Zoning Code
196
commercial enterprises which cater primarily to either local or through motorists. Typical uses offer
accommodations and services to motorists, specialized outlets and commercial amusement enterprises.
The requirements of this district are developed to minimize traffic hazards.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.366 USES PERMITTED.
(A) Automobile service including auto equipment sales, car wash service, new and used car sales
lots and trailer sales areas, gasoline service stations, convenience stores, truckstops and auto repair
garages. All businesses under this sub-section shall have a principal building with a permanent
continuous perimeter foundation.
(B) Business services including banks, offices, public administration and postal stations.
(C) Clothing services including dry cleaning and laundry establishments, laundromats, dressmaking
and tailor shops and shoe repair shops.
(D) Equipment services including radio and television shops, electrical appliance shops, showrooms.
(E) Medical services including clinics, hospitals, and animal clinics.
(F) Food services including grocery stores, fruit, vegetable and meat markets, supermarkets,
restaurants, delicatessens, candy shops and bakeries.
(G) Personal services including barber and beauty shops, reducing salons, photographic shops and
funeral homes.
(H) Retail services including drug stores, hardware stores, stationery and bookstores, news shops,
apparel shops, show room, flower shops and commercial landscape nurseries.
(I) Recreation services including theaters, bowling alleys, pool and billiard rooms, dancing
academies and roller and ice skating rinks and miniature golf courses.
(J) Motels, hotels, private clubs and lodges, wholesale establishments, night clubs, on and off
liquor stores, sales rooms, public utility buildings, transformer stations without storage yards and
highway department garages and shops.
(K) Research facilities, and wholesale businesses.
(L) Residence when included as an integral part of the principal building to be occupied by the
owner or his or her employee.
Zoning Code
197
(M) Any similar commercial establishment or professional service or commercial service.
(N) Drive-in restaurants, drive-in banks and drive-in services or businesses not herein strictly
prohibited.
(O) Open air display areas for the sale of manufactured products such as garden furniture, hardware
items and nursery stock, or rental of manufactured products or equipment.
(P) Buildings used for storage, distributing stations, but not including fuel yards, junk yards or used
automobile parts or wrecking establishments or businesses handling waste or junk and those businesses
which are offensive by reason of sight, odor, noise, smoke or vibration to the surrounding neighborhood.
(Q) Buildings and uses customarily necessary to any of the above permitted uses.
(R) Buildings and uses customarily necessary to any of the above permitted uses, but which will not
be detrimental either by reason of sight, odor, smoke, noise, dust or vibration to the surrounding
neighborhood.
(S) Rental residential units may be maintained above the ground floor. In such buildings the ground
floor must be commercial space only.
(T) Lumber yards.
(U) Churches, chapels and similar places of worship, parish homes, rectories and convents.
(Ord. 280, passed 7 21 2005, amended by Ord. 2018-07, passed 11-19-2018)
' 152.367 CONDITIONAL USES.
The following may be permitted upon recommendation of the Planning Commission and approval of
the City Council:
(A) Recreational camping areas.
(B) Open sales lot (must have a principal building with a permanent continuous perimeter
foundation.)
(C) Used auto parts.
(D) Commercial kennels.
(E) Libraries.
Zoning Code
198
(F) Broadcasting or reception towers or antenna over 45 feet in height.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
Zoning Code
199
' 152.368 BUILDING HEIGHT.
(A) No building or structure hereafter erected or altered shall exceed 60 feet in height, and a
maximum of 4 stories.
(B) When the property is within the vicinity of the city's airport, the airport's zoning height
requirements within various control zones shall take precedent over the limits shown above. Please refer
to the city=s airport zoning map and document for further information.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.369 LOT AREA AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
(A) The following minimum requirements shall apply:
Lot Area
Sq. Ft.
Lot Width at
Bldg.
Setback Line
Front Yard
Side Yard
Rear Yard*
Side
(Interior)
Side
(Street)
20,000
200 ft.
40 ft.
10 ft.
40 ft.
20 ft.
* When a rear yard abuts a street, there shall be a 40-foot setback.
(B) On all state trunk highways there needs to be a minimum setback of 65 feet.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.370 LOT COVERAGE.
The area of the lot and common area covered by buildings or roofed areas, excluding permitted
projecting eaves, shall not exceed 40%.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
Zoning Code
200
I-1 LIGHT MANUFACTURING/INDUSTRIAL
' 152.380 PURPOSE.
The purpose of the I-1, Light Manufacturing/Industrial District is to provide for the establishment of
warehousing and light industrial development. The overall character of the I-1 District is intended to
have low impact manufacturing/warehouse character. All activities in the district shall be carried on in a
manner not injurious or offensive to the occupants of adjacent premises.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.381 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES.
Within a I-1 District, unless otherwise provided by this chapter, no uses are permitted except for the
following:
(A) Manufacturing. Any light manufacturing or process including repairs, assembling, fabricating,
altering, converting, finishing, processing, treating, testing, packaging, or bottling; except any use or
process hereinafter specifically excluded or which would not be in keeping with the purpose of the
District as stated above. Such determination shall be made by the Planning Commission upon review of
the building permit application. Manufacturing includes the storage of goods or materials related to the
manufacturing process.
(B) Offices.
(C) Office-showroom buildings.
(D) Warehousing, storage and wholesaling. The storage, handling, assembly and distribution of
goods and materials for retail, wholesale or on-site use, except any hazardous combustible materials
and/or flammable liquids or gases. The determination of hazardous materials shall be made by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer following the standards and guidelines. This classification does not include
truck terminals, which are defined as warehouse and distribution businesses specializing in the shipment
of goods or materials and-which generate significant numbers of semi-trailer trucks.
(E) Vocational and technical schools.
(F) Cafes and restaurants.
(G) Public utility buildings, repair garages, public garages, and public work and highway garages
and shops.
(H) Churches, chapels and similar places of worship, parish homes, rectories and convents.
Zoning Code
201
(Ord. 280, passed 7 21 2005, amended by Ord. 2018-07, passed 11-19-2018)
' 152.382 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
The following shall be permitted accessory uses within an I-1 District:
(A) Any accessory use, building or structure customarily incidental to a principal use permitted
above, and located on the same lot therewith.
(B) Specialized freight and yard equipment, private utility structures, secondary processing
structures and similar specialized structures.
(C) Parking and loading facilities.
(D) Signs as regulated.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.383 CONDITIONAL USES.
The following uses may be permitted upon recommendation of the Planning Commission and
approval of the City Council:
(A) Any production, processing, assembly, manufacturing, cleaning service, repair, testing or
storage of goods or products excepting those which may be injurious or offensive to the occupants of
adjacent premise by reason of the emission of or creation of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors or
noxious materials.
(B) Motor vehicle body shops, dog kennels, open sales lots, building material sales, auto and truck
washes, motor fuel stations and retail sales.
(C) Bulk storage of liquid, construction storage yards, open storage as a primary use, broadcasting
or reception towers or antenna over 45 feet in height, contractors storage yards and grain, feed and
agriculture storage.
(D) Airports and heliports.
(E) Rock crushing and gravel processing.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
Zoning Code
202
' 152.384 LIGHT MANUFACTURING/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT SPECIAL
REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Storage, auxiliary to the permitted use, is permitted in the open, but not within 20 feet of the
property lines.
(B) Open storage of lumber, metals, machinery or other materials shall be enclosed by a solid fence
of dense hedge or shrub to a minimum of 8 feet in height.
(C) Waste materials incidental to the principal operation shall be kept in neatly stored containers
screened from public view and shall be removed and emptied periodically so no wastes shall be piled on
open grounds. Storage of waste materials must be in accordance with all applicable state and federal
regulations and laws.
(D) Screening shall be provided at lot boundaries abutting a Residential District, and may consist of
solid fencing or dense hedge or shrub to a minimum of 8 feet in height.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.385 BULK REGULATIONS.
The following requirements apply:
(A) Lot area, width and yard requirements.
Sq. Ft.
Lot Width at
Bldg.
Setback Line
Yards
Front
Side*
(Interior)
Side***
(Street)
Rear **
20,000
100 ft.
25 ft.
20 ft.
40 ft.
40 ft.
* A minimum side yard of 40 feet shall be required on that side of the property abutting any
AG or Residential District.
** A minimum rear yard of 60 feet shall be required when the use backs up to any AG or
Residential District.
*** A minimum side yard of 40 feet shall be required on that side of the property abutting
any street.
(B) Height restrictions. No building or structure hereafter erected or altered shall exceed 45 feet in
height. When the property is within the vicinity of the city's airport, the airport's zoning height
Zoning Code
203
requirements within various control zones shall take precedent over the limits shown above. Please refer
to the city=s airport zoning map and document for further information.
(C) Lot coverage. The area of the lot covered by buildings or roofed areas, excluding permitted
projecting eaves, shall not exceed 40%.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
I-2 HEAVY MANUFACTURING/INDUSTRIAL
' 152.395 PURPOSE.
The I-2 Manufacturing Districts are intended to provide for areas for manufacturing, warehousing
and related commercial operations. All activities in the District shall be carried on in a manner not
injurious or offensive to the occupants of adjacent premises.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.396 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES.
Within a I-2 District, unless otherwise provided by this chapter, no uses are permitted except
for the following:
(A) Manufacturing. Any light manufacturing or process including repairs, assembling, fabricating,
altering, converting, finishing, processing, treating, testing, packaging, or bottling; except any use or
process hereinafter specifically excluded or which would not be in keeping with the purpose of the
District as stated above. Such determination shall be made by the Planning Commission upon review of
the building permit application. Manufacturing includes the storage of goods or materials related to the
manufacturing process.
(B) Offices, and office-showroom buildings.
(C) Agriculture or grain elevators and feed milling.
(D) Warehousing, storage and wholesaling. The storage, handling, assembly and distribution of
goods and materials for retail, wholesale or on-site use, except any hazardous combustible materials
and/or flammable liquids or gases. The determination of hazardous materials shall be made by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer following the standards and guidelines. This classification does not include
truck terminals, which are defined as warehouse and distribution businesses specializing in the shipment
of goods or materials and which generate significant numbers of semi-trailer trucks.
Zoning Code
204
(E) Vocational and technical schools.
(F) Research facilities.
(G) Utility substations, public utility buildings and storage, public highway department garages and
shops, and public works garages and shops.
(H) Churches, chapels and similar places of worship, parish homes, rectories and convents.
(Ord. 280, passed 7 21 2005, amended by Ord. 2018-07, passed 11-19-2018)
' 152.397 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
The following shall be permitted accessory uses within an I-2 District:
(A) Any accessory use, building or structure customarily incidental to a principal use permitted
above, and located on the same lot therewith.
(B) Specialized freight and yard equipment, private utility structures, secondary processing
structures and similar specialized structures.
(C) Parking and loading facilities.
(D) Signs as regulated.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.398 CONDITIONAL USES.
The following uses may be permitted upon recommendation of the Planning Commission and
approval of the City Council:
(A) Any production, processing, assembly, manufacturing, cleaning service, repair, testing or
storage of goods or products excepting those which may be injurious or offensive to the occupants of
adjacent premise by reason of the emission of or creation of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors or
noxious materials.
(B) Motor vehicle body shops, dog kennels, open sales lots, building material sales, auto and truck
washes, motor fuel stations and retail sales.
(C) Bulk storage of liquid, construction storage yards, open storage as a primary use, broadcasting
or reception towers or antenna over 45 feet in height, contractors storage yards and grain and feed
storage.
Zoning Code
205
(D) Airports and heliports.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.399 HEAVY MANUFACTURING/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT SPECIAL
REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Storage, auxiliary to the permitted use, is permitted in the open, but not within 20 feet of the
property lines.
(B) Open storage of lumber, metals, machinery or other materials shall be enclosed by a solid fence
of dense hedge or shrub to a minimum of 8 feet in height.
(C) Waste materials incidental to the principal operation shall be kept in neatly stored containers
screened from public view and shall be removed and emptied periodically so no wastes shall be piled on
open grounds. Storage of waste materials must be in accordance with all applicable state and federal
regulations and laws.
(D) Screening shall be provided at lot boundaries abutting a Residential District, and may consist of
solid fencing or dense hedge or shrub to a minimum of 8 feet in height.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.400 BULK REGULATIONS.
The following requirements apply:
(A) Lot area, width and yard requirements.
Sq. Ft.
Lot Width at
Bldg.
Setback Line
Yards
Front
Side*
(Interior)
Side (Street)
Rear **
1 acre
200 ft.
25 ft.
20 ft.
40 ft.
40 ft.
* A minimum side yard of 40 feet shall be required on that side of the property abutting any
AG or Residential District.
** A minimum rear yard of 60 feet shall be required when the use backs up to any AG or
Residential District.
Zoning Code
206
(B) Height restrictions. No building or structure hereafter erected or altered shall exceed 60 feet in
height. When the property is within the vicinity of the city's airport, the airport's zoning height
requirements within various control zones shall take precedent over the limits shown above. Please refer
to the city=s airport zoning map and document for further information.
(C) Lot coverage. The area of the lot covered by buildings or roofed areas, excluding permitted
projecting eaves, shall not exceed 35%.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
“HMU” HEALTHCARE MIXED USE DISTRICT
§ 152.401 PURPOSE. The purpose of the Healthcare Mixed Use District is to permit and provide for
healthcare and medical office uses, health oriented professional and administrative offices, retail and
service uses supporting healthcare uses, and medium to high density housing uses which benefit from
immediate proximity to healthcare.
§ 152.402 PRINCIPAL USES.
(A) The following are permitted uses in the HMU District:
(1) Hospitals including ancillary uses such as pharmacy, cafeteria, gift shop, florist,
dispensary of surgical supplies and similar customary uses associated with hospitals.
Definition: An institution providing primary health services and medical or surgical care to persons,
including inpatients, suffering from illness, disease, injury, and other abnormal physical or mental
conditions and including, as a related part of the institution, facilities such as laboratories, outpatient
facilities, training facilities, medical offices, and staff residences.
(2) Medical clinics/offices. Definition: a use involving establishments dispensing health
services.
(3) Extended care, intermittent care, and long term care facilities. Definition: A nursing
home licensed under Minn. Stat. §§ 144A.02 – 144A.10 or a boarding care home licensed under Minn.
Stat. §§ 144.50 to 144.56, as it may be amended.
(4) Residential care, congregate care, and assisted living facilities. Definition: A building,
complex, or distinct part thereof, consisting of fully self-contained, individual living units with a
service or package of services advertised, marketed, or otherwise described, offered, or promoted using
the phrase "assisted living" either alone or in combination with other words, whether orally or in
writing, and which is subject to the requirements of this Minn. Stat. §§ 144G.01 – 144G.06 as it may be
amended.
Zoning Code
207
(5) Outpatient surgical, diagnostic, testing, and rehabilitative services. Definition:
Specialized services including diagnostic and treatment services provided under the direction of a
licensed physician to patients not requiring hospitalization.
(6) Professional offices of doctors, dentists, optometrists, and other medical professionals
including incidental sales of medical and dental aids.
(7) Urgent care centers. Definition: Health care services provided on a walk-in, no
appointment basis for acute illness or injury that is not life threatening.
(8) Essential services. Definition: Services and utilities needed for the health, safety, and
general welfare of the community such as underground, surface, or overhead electrical, gas,
telecommunication, water, sewer, and other utilities and the equipment and appurtenances necessary for
such systems to furnish an adequate level of service for the area in which it is located. Essential
services do not include utility scale power generation appurtenances or equipment.
§ 152.403 CONDITIONAL USES.
(A) The following uses require a conditional use permit as provided for by Code Section
152.220:
(1) Health and fitness centers.
(2) Adult and child care center, freestanding Definition: An establishment providing for
the care, supervision, and protection of children or adults.
(3) Learning center. Definition: See “child care center”.
(4) Health related educational institutions.
(5) Drug stores and pharmacies.
(6) Emergency air transportation landing facilities.
(7) Senior independent living facilities. Definition: A building, complex, or distinct part
thereof, consisting of fully self-contained, individual apartment units with full kitchen and restroom
facilities in each unit which are specifically marketed to mature adults.
(8) State licensed residential facility or a housing with services establishments. Definition:
A group home, family foster home, or other publicly supported out-of-home residential facility,
including any out-of-home residential facility licensed by the state, county, or other political
subdivision, or any agency thereof, to provide foster care.
Zoning Code
208
(9) Restaurants, food service establishments, delicatessens, coffee shops with or without
drive up windows.
(10) Medical equipment and supplies sales and services.
(11) Public buildings.
(12) Hotels.
(13) Public parks and trails.
(14) Fire, ambulance, and emergency medical services.
§ 152.404 ACCESSORY USES.
(A) The following accessory uses are allowed within the HMU District:
(1) Accessory uses, other than signs, customarily incident to the uses permitted in §§
152.402 and 152.403.
§ 152.405 BUILDING HEIGHT.
(A) No building or structure hereafter erected or altered shall exceed 60 feet in height, and a
maximum of 4 stories.
(B) When the property is within the vicinity of the City’s airport, the airport’s zoning height
requirements within various control zones shall take precedent over the limits shown above. Please
refer to the city’s airport zoning map and document for further information.
§ 152.406 LOT AREA AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
(A) The following minimum requirements shall apply:
(1) Lot Area 20,000 Sq. Ft.
(2) Lot Width at Building Setback Line 200 ft.
(3) Front Yard 40 ft.
(4) Side Yard:
(a) Interior Side: 10 ft.
(b) Street Side: 40 ft.
Zoning Code
209
(5) Rear Yard: 20 ft., except when a rear yard abuts a street, then there shall be a 40 foot
setback.
(B) On all state trunk highways there needs to be a minimum setback of 65 feet.
§ 152.407 LOT COVERAGE.
(A) The area of the lot and common area covered by buildings or roofed areas, excluding permitted
projecting eaves, shall not exceed 40%.
(Ord. 2016-04, passed 09-19-2016; and re-incorporated into Code by Ord. 2018-04, passed 03-05-2018)
OLIVIA REGIONAL AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT
§ 152.500 INTRODUCTION.
This section is an ordinance regulating and restricting the height of structures and objects of natural
growth, and otherwise regulating the use of property, in the vicinity of the Olivia Regional Airport by
creating the appropriate zones and establishing the boundaries thereof; providing for changes in the
restrictions and boundaries of such zones; defining certain terms used herein; referring to the Olivia
Regional Airport zoning map which is incorporated in and made a part of this ordinance; providing for
enforcement; establishing a board of appeals; and imposing penalties. It is hereby ordained by the Olivia
City Council pursuant to the authority conferred by Minnesota statutes 360.061 B 360.074, as follows.
' 152.501 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.
The Olivia Airport Advisory Board, created and established by the City Council, pursuant to the
provisions and authority of M.S. ' 360.063, as it may be amended from time to time, hereby finds and
declares that:
(A) An airport hazard endangers the lives and property of users of the Olivia Regional Airport, and
property or occupants of land in its vicinity, and also if of the obstructive type, in effect reduces the size
of the area available for the landing, takeoff, and maneuvering of aircraft, thus tending to destroy or
impair the utility of the Olivia Regional Airport and the public investment therein.
(B) The creation of establishment of an airport hazard is a public nuisance and an injury to the
region served by the Olivia Regional Airport.
(C) For the protection of the public health, safety, order, convenience, prosperity and general
Zoning Code
210
welfare, and for the promotion of the most appropriate use of land, it is necessary to prevent the creation
or establishment of airport hazards.
(D) The prevention of these airport hazards should be accomplished, to the extent legally possible,
by the exercise of the police power without compensation.
(E) The prevention of the creation or establishment of airport hazards and the elimination, removal,
alteration, mitigation, or marking and lighting of existing airport hazards are public purposes for which
political subdivisions may raise and expend public funds.
(Ord. 166, passed 11-21-1978; Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.502 SHORT TITLE.
This Overlay District shall be known as Olivia Regional Airport Zoning Ordinance. Those sections
of land affected by the Olivia Regional Airport Zoning Ordinance are indicated in Exhibit A which is
attached to this chapter.
(Ord. 166, passed 11-21-1978; Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.503 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the Overlay District, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
AIRPORT. Means the Olivia Regional Airport located in portions of Troy Township, Bird Island
Township, and Winfield Township.
AIRPORT ELEVATION. Means the established elevation of the highest point on the usable landing
area which elevation is established to be 1,088 feet above mean sea level.
AIRPORT HAZARD. Means any structure or tree or use of land which obstructs the airspace
required for, or is otherwise hazardous to, the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at the airport; and
any use of land which is hazardous to persons or property because of its proximity to the airport.
COMMISSIONER. Means the Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Transportation.
DWELLING. Means any building or portion thereof designed or used as a residence or sleeping
place of 1 or more persons.
ESTABLISHED RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOOD IN A BUILT-UP URBAN AREA
(ERN-BUUA). Means an area, which, if it existed on or before January 1, 1978 (for low density
structures and lots) and an area which, if it existed on or before July 2, 1979 (all other land uses), shall
Zoning Code
211
be considered a conforming use that shall not be prohibited except as provided (1 below in ' 152.415.)
The following criteria shall be applied and considered in determining what constitutes an ERN-BUUA:
(1) Location of the airport;
(2) Nature of the terrain within Safety Zones A and B;
(3) Existing land uses and character of the neighborhood around the airport;
(4) Population of the community;
(5) That the average population density in all areas within 1 mile of any point on a runway be
equal to or greater than 1 dwelling unit per acre;
(6) Population density near the airport compared with population density in other areas of the
community;
(7) The age and the economic, political and social stability of the neighborhood and the
community as a whole;
(8) The proximity of supporting school, commercial, religious, transportation and other
facilities and their degree of integration with residential land uses;
(9) Presence or absence of public utilities including, but not limited to, public sanitary sewer
system, electric service and gas mains;
(10) Whether or not the factor listed in divisions (8) and (9) above tend to make the community
surrounding the airport a self-sufficient unit;
(11) Whether the areas within 1 mile of the perimeter of the airport property would be
considered primarily residential in character; and
(12) Other material factors deemed relevant by the governmental unit in distinguishing the area
in question as established, residential, urban, and built-up.
HEIGHT. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this chapter and
shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
LANDING AREA. Means the area of the airport used for the landing, taking off or taxiing of
aircraft.
LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL LOT. Means a single lot located in an area which is zoned for
single-family or 2-family residences and in which the predominant lands use is such type of residences.
Zoning Code
212
LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE. Means a single-family or 2-family home.
NONCONFORMING USE. Means any preexisting structure, tree, natural growth, or use of land
which is inconsistent with the provisions of this subchapter or an amendment hereto.
NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY. Means a runway having an existing or planned
straight-in instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance,
and for which no precision approach facilities are planned or indicated on an approved planning
document.
PERSON. Means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock
association, or body politic, and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, administrator, executor, guardian,
or other representative.
PLANNED. As used in this subchapter, refers only to those proposed future airport developments
that are so indicated on a planning document having the approval of the Federal Aviation Administration,
Mn/DOT, Office of Aeronautics, and the city.
RUNWAY. Means any existing or planned paved surface or turf covered area of the airport which is
specifically designated and used or planned to be used for the landing and/or taking off of aircraft.
SLOPE. Means an incline from the horizontal expressed in an arithmetic ratio of horizontal
magnitude to vertical magnitude.
slope = 3:1 = 3 feet horizontal to 1 foot vertical
STRUCTURE. Means an object constructed or installed by man,
including, but without limitations, buildings, towers, smokestacks, and
overhead transmission lines.
STRUCTURE. Means an object constructed or installed by man, including, but without
limitations, buildings, towers, smokestacks, and overhead transmission lines.
TRAVERSE WAYS. For the purposes of determining height limits as set forth in this subchapter
shall be increased in height by 17 feet for interstate highways; 15 feet for all other public roadways; 10
feet or the height of the highest mobile object that would normally traverse the road, whichever is
greater, for private roads; 23 feet for railroads; and for waterways and all other traverse ways not
previously mentioned an amount equal to the height of the highest mobile object that would normally
traverse it.
TREE. Means any object of natural growth.
Zoning Code
213
UTILITY RUNWAY. Means a runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by
propeller-driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and less.
VISUAL RUNWAY. Means a runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual
approach procedures, with no straight-in instrument approach procedure and no instrument designation
indicated on an approved planning document.
WATER SURFACES. For the purpose of this subchapter, shall have the same meaning as land for
the establishment of protected zones.
(Ord. 166, passed 11-21-1978; Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.504 AIRPORT OBSTRUCTION ZONES.
In order to carry out the purposes of this subchapter, as set forth above, the following airspace zones
are hereby established: Primary zone, Horizontal Zone, Conical Zone, Approach Zone, and Transitional
Zone and whose locations and dimensions are as follows:
(A) Primary Zone.
(1) All that land which lies directly under an imaginary primary surface longitudinally centered
on a runway and:
(a) Extending 200 feet beyond each end of Runway 11/29.
(b) Coinciding with each end of Runway 3/21.
(2) The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest
point on the runway centerline. The width of the primary surface is:
(a) Five hundred feet for Runway 11/29.
(b) Two hundred and fifty feet for Runway 3/21.
(B) Horizontal Zone.
(1) All that land which lies directly under an imaginary horizontal surface 150 feet above the
established airport elevation, or a height of 1,238 feet above mean sea level, the perimeter of which is
constructed by swinging arcs of specified radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of each
runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs.
(2) The radius of each arc is: 6,000 feet for Runway 11/29 and Runway 3/21.
Zoning Code
214
(C) Conical Zone. All that land which lies directly under an imaginary conical surface extending
upward and outward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20:1 for a horizontal
distance of 4,000 feet as measured radially outward from the periphery of the horizontal surface.
(D) Approach Zone.
(1) All that land which lies directly under an imaginary approach surface longitudinally
centered on the extended centerline at each end of a runway. The inner edge of the approach surface is at
the same width and elevation as, and coincides with, the end of the primary surface. The approach
surface inclines upward and outward at a slope of:
(a) Forty to 1 for Runway 11/29.
(b) Twenty to 1 for Runway 3/21.
(2) The approach surface expands uniformly to a width of:
(a) Three thousand, five hundred feet for Runway 11/29 at a distance of 10,000 feet to the
periphery of the conical surface.
(b) Two thousand, two hundred and fifty feet for Runway 3/21 at a distance of 10,000 feet
to the periphery of the conical surface.
(E) Transitional Zone. All that land which lies directly under an imaginary surface extending
upward and outward at right angles to the runway centerline and centerline extended at a slope of 7:1
from the sides of the primary surfaces and from the sides of the approach surfaces until they intersect the
horizontal surface or the conical surface. Transitional surfaces for those portions of the precision
instrument approach surface which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a
distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the precision instrument approach surface
and at right angles to the extended precision instrument runway centerline.
(F) Height restrictions. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, and except as necessary and
incidental to airport operations, no structure or tree shall be constructed, altered, maintained, or allowed
to grow in any airspace zone created in ' 152.413(A), so as to project above any of the imaginary
airspace surfaces described in said ' 152.413(A) hereof. Where an area is covered by more than 1 height
limitation, the more restrictive limitations shall prevail.
(G) Boundary limitations. The airspace obstruction height zoning restrictions set forth in this
section shall apply for a distance not to exceed 12 miles beyond the perimeter of the airport boundary
and in that portion of an airport hazard area under the approach zone for a distance not exceeding 2 miles
from the airport boundary.
(Ord. 166, passed 11-21-1978; Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
Zoning Code
215
' 152.505 LAND USE SAFETY ZONE BOUNDARIES.
In order to carry out the purpose of this subchapter, as set forth above and also, in order to restrict
those uses which may be hazardous to the operational safety of aircraft operating to and from the Olivia
Regional Airport, and furthermore to limit population and building density in the runway approach areas,
thereby creating sufficient open space so as to protect life and property in case of an accident, there are
hereby created and established the following land use safety zones:
(A) Safety Zone A. All land in that portion of the approach zones of a runway, as defined in
' 152.413(A) , which extends outward from the end of the primary surface a distance equal to 2/3 of the
planned length of the runway, which distance shall be:
(1) Two thousand, eight hundred and sixty-seven for Runway 11/29.
(2) One thousand, nine hundred and thirty-three for Runway 3/21, etc.
(3) See the detail in Exhibits B and C relating to the Runway 29 approach for modification to
Zone A and Zone B, dated June 24, 1999.
(B) Safety Zone B. All land in that portion of the approach zones of a runway, as defined in
Subsection IV A hereof, which extends outward from Safety Zone A a distance equal to 1/3 of the
planned length of the runway, which distance shall be:
(1) One thousand, four hundred and thirty-three for Runway 11/29.
(2) Nine hundred and sixty-seven for Runway 3/21.
(C) Safety Zone C.
(1) All that land which is enclosed within the perimeter of the horizontal zone, as defined in
' 152.413(A), and which is not included in Zone A or Zone B.
(2) No established residential neighborhoods exist. See exception below in division (C)(3).
(3) Exception: An isolated low density residential building lot and low density residential
structures: The following property on the aforesaid established residential lot with structures is hereby
designated as an isolated, low-density residential building lot with low-density residential structures. A
low-density residential structure shall mean a single-family or 2-family home and an isolated low-density
residential building lot shall mean a single lot located in an area which is zoned for a single-family or
2-family residences and in which the predominant land use is such type of residence. This sporadic
low-density use which was in existence since February 1, 1999, is subject to special provisions set forth
Zoning Code
216
in ' 152.415(E), exemption located in Zone A and Zone B described below:
(a) A 5-acre building site in the East half of the East half of the NE Quarter, Section 14,
Troy Township 115. (See Exhibit D and E for an explanation and legal description.)
(b) Runway 11/29, Runway 29 Approach.
(Ord. 166, passed 11-21-1978; Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.506 USE RESTRICTIONS IN ZONES.
The following use restrictions apply:
(A) General. Subject at all times to the height restrictions set forth in ' 152.413, no use shall be
made of any land in any of the safety zones defined in ' 152.414 which creates or causes interference
with the operations of radio or electronic facilities on the airport or with radio or electronic
communications between airport and aircraft, makes it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport
lights and other lights, results in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impairs visibility in the
vicinity of the airport, or otherwise endangers the landing, taking off, or maneuvering of aircraft.
(B) Zone A. Subject at all times to the height restrictions set forth in ' 152.413 and to the general
restrictions contained in ' 152.414 areas designated as Zone A shall contain no buildings, temporary
structures, exposed transmission lines, or other similar aboveground land use structural hazards, and
shall be restricted to those uses which will not create, attract, or bring together an assembly of persons
thereon. Permitted uses may include, but are not limited to, such uses as agriculture (seasonal crops),
horticulture, wildlife habitat, light outdoor recreation (nonspectator), cemeteries, and automobile
parking.
(C) Zone B. Subject at all times to the height restrictions set forth in ' 152.413, and to the general
restrictions contained in ' 152.414, areas designated as Zone B shall be restricted in use as follows:
(1) Each use shall be on a site whose area shall not be less than 3 acres.
(2) Each use shall not create, attract, or bring together a site population that would exceed 15
times that of the site acreage.
(3) Each site shall have no more than 1 building plot upon which any number of structures may
be erected.
(4) A building plot shall be a single, uniform and non-contrived area, whose shape is
uncomplicated and whose area shall not exceed the following minimum ratios with respect to the total
site area:
Zoning Code
217
Site Area at
Least (Acres)
But Less Than
(Acres)
Ration of Site
Area to Bldg.
Plot Area
Building Plot
Area (Sq. Ft.)
Max. Site
Population
(15 persons/A)
3
4
12:1
12:1
10,900
45
4
6
10:1
10:1
17,400
60
6
10
8:1
8:1
32,700
90
10
20
6:1
6:1
72,600
150
20
and up
4:1
218,000
300
(5) The following uses are specifically prohibited in Zone B: Churches, hospitals, schools,
theaters, stadiums, hotels and motels, trailer courts, campgrounds, and other places of frequent public or
semi-public assembly.
(D) Zone C. Zone C is subject only to height restrictions set forth in ' 152.413, and to the general
restrictions contained in ' 152.414.
(E) Exemption. Exemption: An isolated low density residential building lot and low density
residential structures:
(1) Land uses which come into existence after June 24, 1999 are subject to the Zone A or Zone
B restrictions as the case may be.
(2) (a) Land uses which violate any of the following restrictions are prohibited as safety
hazards and must be acquired, altered, or removed at public expense.
(b) Those conditions are as follows: The following land uses if they exist in Safety Zones
A and B and in an ERN-BUUA are considered by the Commissioner to constitute airport safety hazards
so severe, either to persons on the ground or to the air-traveling public, or both, that they must be
prohibited under local airport zoning ordinances;
1. Any structure which a person or persons customarily use as a principal residence
and which is located entirely inside Safety Zone A within 1,000 feet of the end of the primary zone;
2. Any structure which a person or persons customarily use as a principal residence
Zoning Code
218
and which is located entirely within Safety Zones A and B and which penetrates an imaginary approach
surface as defined by ' 152.413;
3. Any land use in Safety Zone A or B which violates any of the following standards:
a. The land use must not create or cause interference with the operation of radio
or electronic facilities on the airport or with radio or electronic communications between the airport and
aircraft;
b. The land use must not make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport
lights and other lights;
c. The land use must not result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport or
impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport.
4. Any isolated residential building lot zoned for single-family or 2-family residences
on which any structure, if built, would be prohibited by division (E)(2)(a), (b)1., (b)2. or (b)3. above.
An ISOLATED residential building lot is one located in the area in which the predominant land use is
single-family or 2-family residential structures; and
5. Any other land use which presents, in the opinion of the Commissioner, a material
danger to the landing, taking off or maneuvering of aircraft or to the safety of persons on the ground. In
making such a determination, the Commissioner shall consider the following factors:
a. Possibility that the land use may contribute to or cause a collision of 2 or more
aircraft or an aircraft and some other object;
b. Possibility that the land use may, in case of an aircraft accident, cause an
explosion, fire or the release of harmful or noxious fumes, gases or substances;
c. Tendency of the land use to increase the number of persons that would be
injured in case of an aircraft accident;
d. Effect of the land use on availability of clear areas for emergency landings;
and
e. Flight patterns around the airport, the extend of use of the runway in question,
the type of aircraft using the airport, whether the runways are lighted, whether the airport is controlled,
and other similar factors.
(Ord. 166, passed 11-21-1978; Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.507 BOUNDARY LIMITATIONS.
Zoning Code
219
The land use zoning restrictions set forth in this section shall apply for a distance not to exceed 1
mile beyond the perimeter of the airport boundary and in that portion of an airport hazard area under the
approach zone for a distance not exceeding 2 miles from the airport boundary.
(Ord. 166, passed 11-21-1978; Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.508 AIRPORT ZONING MAP.
The several zones herein established are shown on the Olivia Regional Airport Zoning Map
consisting of 13 sheets, prepared by Short Elliott Hendrickson Inc., and dated June 24, 1999, which is
incorporated by reference as if appearing in total and made a part hereof, which map, together with such
amendments thereto as may from time to time be made, and all notations, references, elevations, data,
zone boundaries, and other information thereon, shall be and the same is hereby adopted as part of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 166, passed 11-21-1978; Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.509 NONCONFORMING USES.
(A) Regulations are not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this subchapter shall not be
construed to require the removal, lowering, or other changes or alteration of any structure or tree not
conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of the ordinance creating this subchapter, or
otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use. Nothing herein contained shall
require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or
alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of the ordinance creating this subchapter, and is
diligently prosecuted and completed within 2 years thereof.
(Ord. 166, passed 11-21-1978; Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
(B) Nonconforming Uses Abandoned or Destroyed: Whenever the zoning administrator determines
that a nonconforming structure or tree has been abandoned or more than 50% torn down, deteriorated, or
decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable
height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations. Whether application is made for a permit
under this paragraph or not, the zoning administrator may order the owner of the abandoned or partially
destroyed nonconforming structure, at his or her own expense, to lower, remove, reconstruct, or equip
the same in the manner necessary to conform to the provisions of this Ordinance. In the event the owner
of the nonconforming structure shall neglect or refuse to comply with such order for ten days after
receipt of written notice of such order, the zoning administrator may, by appropriate legal action,
proceed to have the abandoned or partially destroyed nonconforming structure lowered, removed,
reconstructed, or equipped and assess the cost and expense thereof against the land on which the
structure is or was located. Unless such an assessment is paid within ninety days from the service of
notice thereof on the owner of the land, the sum shall bear interest at the rate of eight per cent per annum
from the date the cost and expense is incurred until paid, and shall be collected in the same manner as are
Zoning Code
220
general taxes.
' 152.510 PERMITS, FUTURE USES.
Except as specifically provided in divisions (A) and (B) below, no material change shall be made in
the use of land and no structure shall be erected, altered, or otherwise established in any zone hereby
created unless a permit therefore shall have been applied for and granted by the Zoning Administrator,
hereinafter, provided for. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is
desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such
determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted.
(A) However, a permit for a tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground
shall not be required in the horizontal and conical zones or in any approach and transitional zones beyond
a horizontal distance of 4,200 feet from each end of the runway except when such tree or structure,
because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, would extend the height or land use limit
prescribed for the respective zone.
(B) Nothing contained in this foregoing exception shall be construed as permitting or intending to
permit any construction, alteration, or growth of any structure or tree in excess of any of the height
limitations established by this chapter as set forth in ' 152.413 and the land use limitations set forth in
' 152.414.
(Ord. 166, passed 11-21-1978; Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.511 PERMITS, EXISTING USES.
Before any existing use or structure may be replaced, substantially altered or impaired, or rebuilt
within any zone established herein, a permit must be secured authorizing such replacement, change, or
repair. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an airport hazard or
permit a nonconforming use, structure, or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was
on the effective date of this chapter or any amendments thereto, or than it is when the application for a
permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for such a permit shall be granted.
(Ord. 166, passed 11-21-1978; Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.512 PERMITS, NONCONFORMING USES ABANDONED OR DESTROYED.
Whenever the Zoning Administrator determines that a nonconforming structure or tree has been
abandoned or more than 50% torn down, deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would
allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning
regulations. Whether application is made for a permit under this paragraph or not, the Zoning
Administrator may order the owner of the abandoned or partially destroyed nonconforming structure, at
Zoning Code
221
his or her own expense, to lower, remove, reconstruct, or equip the same in the manner necessary to
conform to the provisions of this subchapter. In the event the owner of the nonconforming structure shall
neglect or refuse to comply with such order for 10 days after receipt of written notice of such order, the
Zoning Administrator may, by appropriate legal action, proceed to have the abandoned or partially
destroyed nonconforming structure lowered, removed, reconstructed, or equipped and assess the cost and
expense thereof against the land on which the structure is or was located. Unless such an assessment is
paid within 90 days from the service of notice thereof on the owner of the land, the sum shall bear
interest at the rate of 8% per annum from the date the cost and expense is incurred until paid, and shall
be collected in the same manner as are general taxes.
(Ord. 166, passed 11-21-1978; Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.513 VARIANCES.
Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any
tree, or use his or her property not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this subchapter may
apply to the Board of Appeals, hereinafter provided for, for a variance from such regulations. If a person
submits an application for a variance by certified mail to the members of the Board and the Board fails to
grant or deny the variance within the required 60 days or 120 days if a 60-day extension is applied for,
after the last member receives the application, the variance shall be deemed to be granted by the Board.
When the variance is granted by reason of the failure of the Board to act on the variance, the person
receiving the variance shall notify the Board and the Commissioner by certified mail that the variance has
been granted. The applicant shall include a copy of the original application for the variance with this
notice to the Commissioner. The variance shall be effective 60 days after this notice is received by the
Commissioner subject to any action taken by the Commissioner pursuant to M.S. ' 360.063, subd. 6a, as
it may be amended from time to time. A variance from the literal provisions of this zoning code may be
granted by the Board of Appeals and Adjustments only when the variance is in harmony with the general
purposes and intent of the zoning code and the variance is consistent with the comprehensive plan, if the
city has adopted one. A variance may be granted when the applicant for the variance establishes that
there are PRACTICAL DIFFICULTIES in complying with the zoning ordinance. PRACTICAL
DIFFICULTIES as used in connection with granting a variance, means the property owner proposes to
use the property in a reasonable manner not permitted by the zoning code; the plight of the landowner is
due to circumstances unique to the property not created by the landowner; and the variance, if granted,
will not alter the essential character of the locality. Economic considerations alone do not constitute
practical difficulties. Practical difficulties include, but are not limited to, inadequate access to direct
sunlight for solar energy systems. Any variance so allowed may be subject to any reasonable conditions
that the Board or Commissioner may deem necessary to effectuate the purpose of this subchapter.
' 152.514 HAZARD MARKING AND LIGHTING.
(A) Nonconforming uses. The owner of any nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to
permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed
Zoning Code
222
necessary by the Zoning Administrator to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport
the presence of such airport hazards. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained
at the expense of the City of Olivia owners of the Olivia Regional Airport.
(B) Permits and variances. Any permit or variance deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of
this subchapter and be reasonable to effectuate the purpose of this subchapter and be reasonable in the
circumstances, and granted by the Zoning Administrator or Board, shall require the owner of the
structure or tree in question, at his or her own expense, to install, operate, and maintain thereon such
markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to pilots the presence of an airport hazard.
(Ord. 166, passed 11-21-1978; Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.515 AIRPORT ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed
herein. Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the Board of Appeals upon a form
furnished the Administrator. Permit applications shall be promptly considered and granted or denied by
the Administrator in accordance with the regulations prescribed herein. Variance applications shall be
forthwith transmitted by the Zoning Administrator for action by the Board hereinafter provided for.
(Ord. 166, passed 11-21-1978; Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.516 BOARD OF APPEALS.
(A) Establishment. The Board of Appeals shall consist of 5 members appointed by the City
Council, and each shall serve for a term of 3 years, or until removed by the City Council, or until his or
her successor is duly appointed and qualified. Of the members first appointed, 1 shall be appointed for a
term of 1 year, 2 for a term of 2 years, and 2 for a term of 3 years. Upon their appointment, the
members shall select a chairperson to act at the pleasure of the Board. Members may be removed by the
City Council without cause, after a hearing.
(B) Powers. The Board of Appeals shall have and exercise the following powers:
(1) To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made
by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement of this subchapter.
(2) To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this subchapter upon which such
Board of Appeals under such regulations may be required to pass.
(3) To hear and decide specific variances.
(C) Procedures.
Zoning Code
223
(1) The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules for its governance and procedure in harmony with
the provisions of this subchapter. Meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the Zoning
Administrator and at such other times as the Board of Appeals may determine. The Chairperson, or in
their absence, the Acting Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All
hearings of the Board of Appeals shall be public. The Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its
proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which
shall immediately be filed in the office of the Zoning Administrator and shall be a public record.
(2) The Board of Appeals shall make written findings of facts and conclusions of law giving the
facts upon which it acted and its legal conclusions from such facts in reversing, affirming, or modifying
any order, requirement, decision or determination which comes before it under the provisions of this
chapter.
(3) The concurring vote of a majority of the members present of the Board of Appeals shall be
sufficient to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator or to
decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this subchapter, or
to effect any variation in this subchapter.
(Ord. 166, passed 11-21-1978; Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.517 APPEALS.
The appeals process is as follows:
(A) Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator
made in his or her administration of this subchapter may appeal to the Board of Appeals. Such appeals
may also be made by any governing body of Olivia City Council, which is of the opinion that a decision
of the Zoning Administrator is an improper application of this subchapter as it concerns such governing
body or board.
(B) All appeals hereunder must be commenced within 30 days of the Zoning Administrator's
decision, by filing with the Zoning Administrator a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The
Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Appeals all the papers constituting the
record upon which the action appealed from was taken. In addition, any person aggrieved, or any
taxpayer affected by any decisions of the Zoning Administrator made in his or her administration of this
subchapter who desires to appeal such decision shall submit an application for a variance by certified
mail to the members of the Board of Appeals in the manner set forth in M.S. ' 360.068, Subd. 2, as it
may be amended from time to time.
(C) An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the
Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board of Appeals, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it,
Zoning Code
224
that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent
peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the Board of
Appeals on notice to the Zoning Administrator and on due cause shown.
(D) The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give public notice and due
notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any
party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
(E) The Board of Appeals may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm,
in whole or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may
make such order, requirement, decision or determination, as may be appropriate under the
circumstances, and to that end shall have all the powers of the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 166, passed 11-21-1978; Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.518 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected by any decision of the Board of Appeals, or any
governing body of the City Council, which is of the opinion that a decision of the Board of Appeals is
illegal may present to the District Court of Renville County a verified petition setting forth that the
decision or action is illegal, in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such
petition shall be presented to the court within 30 days after the decision is filed in the office of the Board
of Appeals. The petitioner must exhaust the remedies provided in this subchapter before availing himself
or herself of the right to petition a court as provided by this section.
(Ord. 166, passed 11-21-1978; Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.519 PENALTIES.
Every person who shall construct, establish, substantially change, alter or repair any existing
structure or use, or permit the growth of any tree without having complied with the provision of this
subchapter or who, having been granted a permit or variance under the provisions of this subchapter,
shall construct, establish, substantially change or substantially alter or repair any existing growth or
structure or permit the growth of any tree, except as permitted by such permit or variance, shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and shall be punished accordingly. Each day a violation continues to exist shall
constitute a separate offense. The Airport Zoning Administrator may enforce all provisions of this
subchapter through such proceedings for injunctive relief and other relief as may be proper under the
laws of M.S. ' 360.073, as it may be amended from time to time, and other applicable law.
(Ord. 166, passed 11-21-1978; Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.520 CONFLICTS.
Zoning Code
225
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this
subchapter and any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to
the height of structures or trees, the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or
regulation shall govern and prevail.
(Ord. 166, passed 11-21-1978; Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.521 SERVERABILITY.
(A) In any case in which the provision of this subchapter, although generally reasonable, is held by
a court to interfere with the use of enjoyment of a particular structure or parcel of land to such an extent,
or to be so onerous in their application to such a structure or parcel of land, as to constitute a taking or
deprivation of that property in violation of the constitution of this state or the constitution of the United
States, such holding shall not affect the application of this subchapter as to other structures and parcels of
land, and to this end the provisions of this subchapter are declared to be severable.
(B) Should any section or provision of this subchapter be declared by the courts to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the subchapter as a whole or any
part thereof other than the parts so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. 166, passed 11-21-1978; Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.522 EFFECTIVE DATE.
(A) This Ordinance be effective as of the 28th day of July, 2005. Copies thereof shall be filed with
the Commissioner through the Office of Aeronautics, State of Minnesota, and the Register of Deeds,
Renville, Minnesota. Upon the recommendation of the Airport Advisory Board, this Ordinance was
passed and adopted after a public hearing was held by the Olivia City Council this 27th day of June,
2005.
Zoning Code
226
§ 152.523 EXHIBIT A
This Ordinance affects all or a portion of the following sections of land:
Name and Number of
Township
AIRSPACE OBSTRUCTION
ZONING: Section IV of
Ordinance; Pages 5 - 11 of 13 of
Zoning Map
LAND USE SAFETY
ZONING: Section V of
Ordinance; Page 12 of 13 of
Zoning map
Troy
Township
T 115 N
R 35 W
Sections: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10
11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 20
21, 22,23, & 24
Sections: 1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 10,
11
12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 22 & 23
Bird Island
Township
T 115 N
R 34 W
Sections: 6, 7, and 8
Sections:
Winfield
Township
T 116 N
R 35 W
Sections: 33, 34, 35, and 36
Sections:
Zoning Code
227
§ 152.524 EXHIBIT B
General Restrictions
No use shall be made of any land in any of the safety zones which creates or causes interference with the
operation of radio or electronic facilities on the airport or with radio or electronic communications
between the airport and aircraft, makes it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and
other lights, results in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impairs visibility in the vicinity of the
airport, or otherwise endangers the landing, take off, or maneuvering of aircraft.
Safety Zone AA@ shall contain no buildings, temporary structures, exposed transmission lines or other
similar land use structural hazards, and shall be restricted to those uses which will not create, attract or
bring together an assembly of persons thereon. Permitted uses may include but are not limited to, such
uses as agriculture (seasonal crops), horticulture, raising of livestock, animal husbandry, wildlife habitat,
light outdoor recreation (nonspectator), cemeteries, and auto parking.
Zoning Code
228
§ 152.525 EXHIBIT C
Safety Zone AB@ shall be restricted in use as follows. Each use shall be on a site whose area shall not be
less than three acres. Each use shall not create, attract, or bing together a site population that would
exceed 15 times that of the site acreage. Each site shall have no more than one building plot upon which
any number of structures may be erected.
The following uses are specifically prohibited in Zone B:
churches, hospitals, schools, theaters, stadiums, hotels and motels, trailer courts, camp grounds, and
other places of public or semipublic assembly.
Safety Zone AC@ is subject to the general restrictions. Safety Zone AC@ is enclosed within the perimeter of
the horizontal zone.
Zoning Code
229
§ 152.526 EXHIBIT D
CITY OF OLIVIA
RESOLUTION NO. 2000-74
A RESOLUTION STATING THE CITY HAS ACTED IN GOOD FAITH
TO KEEP ANY AND ALL BUILDING STRUCTURES OUT OF ZONE A
ACCORDING TO THE AIRPORT MASTER PLAN
Whereas, Gary McRell, 33007 820th Avenue, Olivia, Minnesota has a 5 acre building site in the East
half of the East half of the NE Quarter, Section 14, (Troy) Township 115. The City of Olivia was
notified Mr. McRell has made application to Renville County Planning and Zoning to construct a
miscellaneous storage shed on said parcel of property where a single family residential dwelling was
constructed in Spring of 1999. (Legal description attached.)
Whereas, The City of Olivia acknowledges Renville County has building permit authority for this
application but would like to express concerns relating to the proposed location of the building in
proximity to the Olivia Regional Airport. It is noted the Minnesota Aviation guidelines have established
that Gary McRell's property lies both in Zone A and Zone B. The Airport Master Plan identifies
restrictions on lands located in the designated safety zones. The purpose of these zones are to protect the
safety and well being of the Airport, aircraft and adjacent land owners.
Whereas, According to aviation restrictions, no buildings shall be permitted or allowed@ to be placed in
Zone A, however; buildings may be allowed and constructed in Zone B with elevation restrictions.
According to MNDOT, Office of Aeronautics, the City of Olivia risks future state and federal Airport
funding if any type of building structure is found to be located in Zone A. Currently, the City of Olivia
receives 60% state grant funds for airport improvement projects.
Whereas, after careful consideration by Short Elliot & Hendrickson, City Engineers, it appears the
proposed building/shed would penetrate Zone A. Based on current information available, it was the
recommendation of SEH, that the propose building location be moved an additional 20' to the east in
Zone B.
Whereas, at the Regular Meeting of the Olivia City Council on October 16, 2000, the Council moved to
recommend Renville County Planning & Zoning grant a building permit to Gary McRell based on our
City Engineers recommendation to move the building 20' straight to the east in Zone B; providing
Renville County verify the final location of the building which would bring the new structure in
compliance with the City's Airport Layout Plan.
Therefore Be It Resolved, that based on the new revised site plan submitted by Gary McRell dated
October 25, 2000, the City of Olivia recommends that Renville County approve the permit. Because
based on the site plan, the building is clearly to be constructed/located in Zone B, which allows for
structures.
Zoning Code
230
Therefore Be It Further Resolved, that said Resolution No. 2000-74 shall be recorded with the Gary
McRell property and the Olivia Airport Layout Plan.
Said Resolution No. 2000-74 was passed and adopted this 6th day of November 2000.
Zoning Code
231
§ 152.527 EXHIBIT E
LEGAL DESCRIPTION
That part of the East Half of the East Half of the Northeast Quarter (E1/2 of E1/2 of NE 1/4) of Section
14, Township 115, Range 35, described as follows: Commencing at the Northeast Corner of said Section
14; thence South 00 degrees 22 minutes 51 seconds East, an assumed bearing, along the east side of said
Northeast Quarter (NE1/4) a distance of 444.50 feet; thence South 88 degrees 40 minutes 50 seconds
West 490.14 feet; thence North 00 degrees 21 minutes 45 seconds West 444.50 feet to the north line of
said Northeast Quarter (NE1/4) of section 14; thence North 88 degrees 40 minutes 50 seconds East along
said north line 490.00 feet to the point of beginning; containing 5.0 acres, more or less.
(Ord. 166, passed 11-21-1978; Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
Zoning Code
232
MISCELLANEOUS
' 152.640 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
It shall be the duty of all architects, contractors, subcontractors, builders and other persons having
charge of the erecting, altering, changing or remodeling of any building or structure including mobile
homes, before beginning or undertaking any such work, to see that such work does not conflict with and
is not a violation of the terms of this chapter. Any such architect, builder, contractor or other person
doing or performing any such work of erecting, repairing, altering, changing or remodeling and in
violation of, or in conflict with the terms of this chapter, shall be deemed guilty of a violation hereof in
the manner and to the same extent as the owner of the premises or the person or persons for whom such
buildings are erected, repaired, altered, changed or remodeled in violation hereof and shall be held
accountable for such violation.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.641 RELIEF FROM PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY.
Any claim based upon an act or omission of an officer or employee exercising due care in the
execution of any valid or invalid portions of this chapter and any claim based upon the performance of
the failure to exercise or perform a discretionary function or duty whether or not the discretion is abused,
are hereby enumerated as exceptions to M.S. ' 466.02, as it may be amended from time to time, and said
section does not apply. The city shall defend, save harmless and indemnify any of its officers or
employees whether elective or appointed, against any tort claim or demand whether groundless or
otherwise arising out of an alleged act or omission occurring in the performance of duty in the
enforcement and administration of this chapter except as provided in M.S. ' 466.07, as it may be
amended from time to time.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
' 152.998 VIOLATIONS.
Any building or structure being erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or
maintained, or any building, structure or site hereafter erected or maintained, or land use made or
permitted in violation of this chapter, is hereby declared unlawful. In the event of violation or threatened
violation of this chapter or other official control adopted under M.S. '' 394.21 to 394.37, as they may
be amended from time to time, in addition to other remedies, the City Council or any member thereof
may institute appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such violation or
threatened violations and it is the duty of the City Attorney to institute such actions.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
Zoning Code
233
' 152.999 PENALTY.
Any person, firm, corporation or entity who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or any
order of the Zoning Administrator issued in accordance with this chapter, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine and/or imprisonment as defined by law for
each offense, plus the costs of prosecution. Each day that a violation is committed, or permitted to exist,
shall constitute a separate offense. The imposition of any fine or sentence shall not exempt the offender
from compliance with the requirements of this chapter, and the city may pursue, by appropriate actions
or proceedings, any or all additional remedies.
(Ord. 280, passed 7-21-2005)
(Title 15 Amended by Ordinance 2018-03, passed 02-05-2018)