OAK GROVE, MINNESOTA CITY CODE 
____________ 
Published in 2013 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
____________ 
Mark Korin 
Mayor 
____________ 
Dan Denno 
Mike Wylie 
Scott Lawrence 
Paul Tradewell 
City Council 
____________ 
Rick Juba 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Robert Vose 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Katie Ostendorf 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Anoka County Sheriff 
Police Services 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Oak Grove, Minnesota. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the Prior Code, as supplemented through April 29, 2012, and ordinances adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the Prior Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE CD1:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Stephanie C. Benesh, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Robert J.V. Vose, City Attorney, Mr. Rick Juba, City Administrator, and Ms. Sherry Fiskewold, City Clerk, for cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Oak Grove, Minnesota. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Oak Grove, Minnesota. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Oak Grove, Minnesota. 2013. 
Ordinance 13-05 
CITY OF OAK GROVE 
COUNTY OF ANOKA 
STATE OF MINNESOTA 
AN ORDINANCE REPEALING AND REPLACING THE OAK GROVE CITY CODE 
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF OAK GROVE DOES ORDAIN: 
    Section 1. Minnesota Statutes, Sections 41.5.02, 415.021 and 599.13 authorize the City to codify its ordinances, and print them in book or loose-leaf form. The City has contracted with Municipal Code Corporation to recodify the City's existing codified ordinances, and the City Council has directed City staff and the City Attorney to assist with such recodification. 
    Section 2. The Code entitled "Oak Grove, Minnesota City Code," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 109, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 3. All ordinances previously codified as Titles 100-1700, with the exception of ordinances enacted after April 30, 2012 including Ordinance 13-03, and with the exception of any special or transitory ordinance or franchise not embodied in ordinances previously codified as Titles 100-1700, and with the exception of those ordinances included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are hereby repealed. 
    Section 4. Ordinances adopted after April 30, 2012 that adopt, amend or refer to ordinances codified in the Code shall be construed to adopt, amend or refer to the Code. 
    Section 5. Nothing in the Code is to be construed to modify, abrogate or abridge the qualifications or terms of office of City officers as they existed on June 24, 2013. 
    Section 6. This ordinance shall become effective from and after its passage and publication. 
Passed and adopted by the City Council of the City of Oak Grove this 24 th day of June 2013. 
      Mark R. Korin, Mayor         Sheryl F. Fiskewold, City Clerk   (SEAL) 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. Ord. 13-03 Included 1 Ord. 13-05 Included 1 Ord. 13-06 Included 2 Ord. 13-08 Included 2 Ord. 15-01 Included 3 Ord. 15-02 Included 3 Ord. 15-04 Included 4 Ord. 15-05 Included 4 Ord. 15-06 Included 4 Ord. 15-07 Included 4 Ord. 16-01 Included 5 Ord. 16-02 Included 5 Ord. 16-03 Included 5 Ord. 17-01 Included 6 Ord. 18-01 Included 7 Ord. 18-02 Included 7 Ord. 18-03 Omitted 7 Ord. 18-06 Included 8 Ord. 18-07 Included 8 Ord. 18-08 Included 8 Ord. 18-09 Included 8 Ord. 19-01 Included 9 Ord. 19-02 Included 9 Ord. 19-03 Included 9  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated the "Oak Grove, Minnesota, City Code" and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as the "Oak Grove City Code." The Code consists of parts I and II. 
State Law reference- Codification of ordinances, Minn. Stats. § 415.021. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    The following definitions and rules of construction shall apply to this Code and to all ordinances and resolutions unless the context requires otherwise: 
    Generally. When provisions conflict, the specific shall prevail over the general. All provisions shall be liberally construed so that the intent of the city council may be effectuated. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words, technical phrases and words and phrases that have acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings in law shall be construed according to such meanings. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
    Alternative remedies. All provisions of this Code establishing procedures or providing remedies are in addition and supplemental to any procedures or remedies authorized or provided by law. 
    City. The term "city" means the City of Oak Grove, Minnesota. The term "city" includes designated representatives of the city. 
    City council or council. The term "city council" or "council" means the council of the City of Oak Grove, Minnesota. 
    Code. The term "Code" means the Oak Grove, Minnesota, City Code, as designated in section 1-1. The Code consists of parts I and II. 
    Computation of time. 
(1)  When the term "successive weeks" is used in any ordinance providing for the publication of notices, the term "weeks" shall be construed as calendar weeks. The publication upon any day of such weeks shall be sufficient publication for that week, but at least five days shall elapse between each publication. At least the number of weeks specified in "successive weeks" shall elapse between the first publication and the day for the happening of the event for which the publication is made. 
(2)  When in any ordinance the lapse of a number of months before or after a certain day is required, such number of months shall be computed by counting the months from such day, excluding the calendar month in which such day occurs, and including the day of the month in which the last month so counted having the same numerical order as the day of the month from which the computation is made, unless there are not so many days in the last month so counted, in which case the period computed shall expire with the last day of the month so counted. 
(3)  Where the performance or doing of any act, duty, matter, payment or thing is ordered or directed, and the period of time or duration for the performance or doing thereof is prescribed and fixed by law or ordinance, the time, except as otherwise provided in subsections (1) and (2) of this section, shall be computed so as to exclude the first and include the last day of the prescribed or fixed period or duration of time. When the last day of the period falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, that day shall be omitted from the computation. 
(4)  When an application, payment, return, claim, statement or other document is to be delivered to or filed with a department, agency or instrumentality of the city on or before a prescribed date and the prescribed date falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, it is timely delivered or filed if it is delivered or filed on the next succeeding day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Minn. Stats. §§ 645.13-645.151. 
    Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either ... or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, except that when appropriate from the context, the terms "and" and "or" are interchangeable: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The term "either ... or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
    County. The term "county" means Anoka County, Minnesota. 
    Delegation of authority. The term "delegation of authority" means a provision that authorizes or requires a city officer or city employee to perform an act or make a decision and authorizes such officer or employee to act or make a decision through subordinates. 
    Following. The term "following" means next after. 
    Gender. Words of one gender include all other genders. 
    Includes. The term "includes" does not limit a term to a specified example. 
    Joint authority. Words giving a joint authority to three or more persons give such authority to a majority of such persons. 
    May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
    May not. The term "may not" states a prohibition. 
    Minn. Rules. The abbreviation "Minn. Rules" means the Minnesota Rules, as amended. 
    Minn. Stats. The abbreviation "Minn. Stats." means the Minnesota Statutes, as amended. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Must. The term "must" shall be construed as being mandatory. 
    Number. Words in the singular include the plural. Words in the plural include the singular. 
    Oath. The term "oath" means a solemn affirmation is the equivalent to an oath and a person shall be deemed to have sworn if such person makes such an affirmation. 
    Officers, departments, etc. References to officers, departments, boards, commissions or employees are to city officers, city departments, city boards, city commissions and city employees. 
    Owner. The term "owner," as applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or part of such property. 
    Person. The term "person" means any human being, any governmental or political subdivision or public agency, any public or private corporation, any partnership, any firm, association or other organization, any receiver, trustee, assignee, agent, or other legal representative of any of the foregoing or any other legal entity. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" means any property other than real property. 
    Preceding. The term "preceding" means next before. 
    Premises. The term "premises," as applied to real property, includes land and structures. 
    Property. The term "property" includes real property, personal property and mixed property. 
    Public property and public place. The terms "public property" and "public place" mean any place, property or premises dedicated to public use, owned by the city, occupied by the city as a lessee, or occupied by the city as a street by reason of an easement, including, but not limited to, streets, parks or parking lots so owned or occupied. 
    Real property, real estate, land and lands. The terms "real property," "real estate," "land," and "lands" include lands, buildings, tenements and hereditaments and all rights and interests therein, except chattel interests. 
    Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curbline, or the lateral lines of a roadway where there is no curb, and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. If there is no public area between the lateral lines of the roadway and the abutting property line, then the area immediately abutting the street line shall be construed as the sidewalk. 
    Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the signer or subscriber cannot write. In such situations, such person's name shall be written near the mark by a witness who writes his own name near such person's name. 
    State. The term "state" means the State of Minnesota. 
    Street. The term "street" means the entire area dedicated to public use, or contained in an easement or other conveyance or grant to the city, and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, boulevards, sidewalks, alleys, and other public property between lateral property lines in which a roadway lies. 
    Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," as applied to a building or land, includes: 
(1)  Any person holding, either alone or with others, a written or oral lease of such building or land. 
(2)  Any person who, either alone or with others, occupies such building or land. 
    Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses. The future tense includes the present tense. 
    Will. The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory and not permissive. 
    Writing. The term "writing" includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes; references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and are not titles of such sections, or of any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any such section, including the catchline, is amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parenthesis after sections in this Code have no legal effect and only indicate legislative history. Editor's notes and State law references and other footnotes that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters or sections are to chapters or sections of this Code. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Minn. Stats. § 645.49. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  Unless specifically provided otherwise, the repeal of an ordinance does not revive any repealed ordinance. 
(b)  The repeal or amendment of an ordinance does not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor does such repeal or amendment affect any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the amendment or repeal. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Minn. Stats. §§ 645.35, 645.36. 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of the Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. Portions of this Code repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. 
(b)  Amendments to provisions of this Code may be made with the following language: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) _____ of the Oak Grove, Minnesota, City Code is hereby amended to read as follows:...." 
(c)  If a new section, subdivision, division, article or chapter is to be added to the Code, the following language may be used: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) _____ of the Oak Grove, Minnesota, City Code is hereby created to read as follows:...." 
(d)  All provisions desired to be repealed should be repealed specifically by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as appropriate, or by setting out the repealed provisions in full in the repealing ordinance. 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of the supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as necessary to do so in order to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units. 
(2)  Supply appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be included in the Code and make changes in any such catchlines, headings and titles or in any such catchlines, headings and titles already in the Code. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be added to the Code. 
(4)  Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections. 
(5)  Change the words "this ordinance" or similar words to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," "this subdivision," "this section" or insert section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the Code. 
(6)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted in the Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(4)  Counseling, aiding or abetting a violation of this Code as defined above. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof; provided, however, that if the violation is declared to be a petty misdemeanor, the penalty shall be a fine not exceeding $300.00. In any case, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall pay the costs of prosecution. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance: 
(1)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(2)  With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each act is a separate offense. 
(e)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(f)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief. 
State Law reference- Authorized penalty for ordinance violations, Minn. Stats. §§ 410.33, 412.231, 609.0332, 609.034. 
Sec. 1-8. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    The sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code and all provisions adopted by reference in this Code are severable so that if any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause and phrase of this Code or of any provision adopted by reference in this Code is declared unconstitutional or invalid by a valid judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect the validity of any other section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause and phrase of this Code or of any provision adopted by reference in this Code, for the council declares that it is its intent that it would have enacted this Code and all provisions adopted by reference in this Code without such invalid or unconstitutional provisions. If any provision of this Code is declared to be inapplicable to specific property by a valid judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not restrict the applicability of such provision to other property. 
Sec. 1-9. - Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation previously adopted by the city relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatement and continuation thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-10. - Code does not affect prior offenses or rights. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established before the effective date of the ordinance adopting this Code. Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code creates or eliminates any preexisting nonconforming uses. 
Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any ordinance or portion of an ordinance listed below. Such ordinances continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code and include ordinances which involve: 
(1)  Annexing property into the city. 
(2)  Deannexing property or excluding property from the city. 
(3)  Providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code. 
(4)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(5)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement. 
(6)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(7)  Fixing or establishing any fee or charge. 
(8)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(9)  Vacating any easement or parkland. 
(10)  Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan. 
(11)  Levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(12)  Creating a special district. 
(13)  Dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street. 
(14)  Establishing the grade of any street or sidewalk. 
(15)  Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision. 
(16)  Levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes not codified in this Code. 
(17)  Establishing traffic regulations for specific locations not codified in this Code. 
(18)  Rezoning specific property. 
(19)  Any ordinance: 
a.  That is temporary, although general in effect. 
b.  That is special, although permanent in effect. 
c.  The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Statutory cities generally, Minn. Stats. § 412.013 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Incorporation, corporate limits and form of government. 
(a)  The city was incorporated on December 20, 1993. 
(b)  The corporate limits of the city are described as follows: Section 1 through 36, Township 33, Range 24, Anoka County, Minnesota. 
(c)  The city is a statutory city of the fourth class. The optional plan A form of government was adopted at the time of incorporation. 
State Law reference- Fourth class cities designated, Minn. Stats. § 410.01; optional plan A, Minn. Stats. § 412.572 et seq. 
Secs. 2-2-2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- City council generally, Minn. Stats. § 412.191 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-21. - Council composition and election. 
    The council shall be composed of a mayor and four councilmembers. The mayor and four councilmembers shall be elected at large. Each councilmember and the mayor shall serve for a term of four years and until a successor is elected and qualifies. The terms of councilmembers shall be staggered so that two councilmembers are elected during each election period. 
Sec. 2-22. - Salaries for mayor and councilmembers. 
(a)  The annual salary of the mayor shall be $4,700.00, payable in monthly installments. 
(b)  The annual salary of each councilmember shall be $4,100.00, payable in monthly installments. 
(c)  Salaries for the mayor and councilmembers are paid in full monthly unless there has been an unexcused absence from more than one regular meeting. 
Secs. 2-23-2-46. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE 

Sec. 2-47. - Suspension and amendment. 
    The provisions of this division, except as required by state law, may be temporarily suspended by a majority vote of all the councilmembers and shall not be repealed or amended except by ordinance adopted by a majority vote of the whole council after notice has been given at some preceding council meeting. 
Sec. 2-48. - Meetings. 
(a)  Day, time and place. Regular meetings of the council shall be held on the second Monday of each month and on the last Monday of each month at 7:00 p.m. Any regular meeting falling upon a holiday shall be held on the next following business day at the same time and place or on another date as reasonably set by the council. All meetings, including special and adjourned meetings, shall be held at city hall, unless otherwise specifically posted. 
(b)  Required actions at first regular meeting in January. At the first regular council meeting in January of each year the council shall: 
(1)  Designate the depositories of city funds; 
(2)  Authorize signers on all city accounts and depositories; 
(3)  Designate the official newspaper; 
(4)  Designate city posting locations; 
(5)  Appoint a member of the council as the acting mayor in accordance with Minn. Stats. 412.121; and 
(6)  Appoint such officers and employees and such members of boards, commissions and committees as may be necessary. 
(c)  Open meetings. All regular, special and emergency meetings of the council shall be conducted in accordance with the Minn. Stats. ch. 13D after notice as required by law. 
State Law reference- Meetings, Minn. Stats. § 412.191, subd. 2. 
Sec. 2-49. - Presiding officer; rules of order. 
(a)  The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the council. In the absence of the mayor, the acting mayor shall preside. In the absence of both, the city administrator shall call the meeting to order and shall preside until the councilmembers present at the meeting choose one of their members to act temporarily as presiding officer. 
(b)  The presiding officer shall preserve order, enforce the rules of procedure herein prescribed and determine without debate, subject to the final decision of the council on appeal, all questions of procedure and order. 
(c)  The proceedings of the council shall be conducted in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised; provided, however, that the presiding officer may suspend such rules from time to time as deemed necessary or appropriate. 
(d)  A member may appeal to the council from a ruling of the presiding officer. If the appeal is seconded, the member may speak once solely on the question involved, and the presiding officer may explain the ruling, but no other councilmember shall participate in the discussion. The appeal shall be sustained if it is approved by a majority of the members present, exclusive of the presiding officer. 
(e)  Whoever fails to comply with the city's rules of conduct for public meetings or assemblies shall, after verbal notice by the presiding officer, be ordered by the presiding officer to leave and depart the premises and, upon failure to timely do so, shall be guilty of trespass. 
(Ord. No. 18-02, § 1, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 2-50. - Minutes. 
(a)  Minutes of each council meeting shall be kept by the city clerk or, in the absence thereof, by the city administrator. In the absence of both, the presiding officer shall appoint a secretary pro tem. Ordinances, resolutions and claims need not be recorded in full in the minutes if they appear in other permanent records of the city clerk and can be accurately identified from the description given in the minutes. 
(b)  The minutes of each meeting shall be typed, signed by the city clerk and copies delivered to each councilmember via council agenda packets when the minutes are placed on the agenda for approval. The council shall take formal action to approve the minutes as submitted or amended. 
Sec. 2-51. - Quorum and voting. 
(a)  At all council meetings a majority of all the councilmembers elected shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time. 
(b)  The votes of the members on any question pending before the council may be by voice vote, standing vote or in any other manner of voting which signifies the intention of the members. For any appropriation of money, except for payments of judgments, claims, and amounts fixed by statute, there shall be a roll call or call out vote, and the names of those voting for and against the question shall be recorded in the minutes. If any member, being present, does not vote, the minutes, as to the member's name, shall be marked "abstain." 
(c)  A majority vote of all members of the council shall be necessary for approval of any ordinance unless a larger number is required by statute. Except as otherwise provided by statute, a majority vote of a quorum shall prevail in all other cases. 
State Law reference- Quorum, Minn. Stats. § 412.191, subd. 1. 
Sec. 2-52. - Ordinances, resolutions, motions, petitions and communications. 
(a)  Every ordinance and resolution shall be presented in writing and may be read in full before a vote is taken thereon at the discretion of the presiding officer. All motions shall be recorded in the minutes and stated in full before they are submitted to a vote by the presiding officer. All petitions and other communications addressed to the council shall be in writing and may be read in full upon presentation of the same to the council at the discretion of the presiding officer. They shall then be recorded in the minutes by title and filed with the minutes in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Every ordinance and resolution passed by the council shall be signed by the mayor, attested by the city clerk and filed in the ordinance or resolution book. Proof of publication of every ordinance shall be attached to and filed with the ordinance. 
(c)  Every ordinance or resolution repealing a previous ordinance or resolution or a section or subdivision thereof shall give the number, if any, and the title of the ordinance or resolution to be repealed in whole or in part. No ordinance or resolution or section or subdivision thereof shall be amended by reference to the title alone, but such an amending ordinance or resolution shall set forth in full each section or subdivision to be amended. 
State Law reference- Ordinances, Minn. Stats. § 412.191, subd. 4. 
Sec. 2-53. - Committees. 
(a)  All committees shall be appointed upon the recommendation of the mayor and majority vote of all of the members of the council. 
(b)  Any matter brought before the council for consideration may be referred by the council to the appropriate committee or to a special committee appointed for such purpose for a written report and recommendation before it is considered by the council. 
(c)  Councilmembers may also serve on commissions or other community boards or advisory groups. Each such organization that is recognized by the council shall have at least one councilmember appointed to it to the extent allowed by applicable law. 
(d)  Section 2-49(e) shall apply to all committees. 
(Ord. No. 18-02, § 2, 3-12-2018) 
Secs. 2-54-2-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Officers and employees generally, Minn. Stats. § 412.121 et seq.; vacancies, resignations and removals from public office, Minn. Stats. ch. 351. 

Sec. 2-80. - Employment background checks. 
(a)  Applicants for city employment. The purpose and intent of this section is to establish regulations that will allow the designated law enforcement agency access to the state's computerized criminal history information for the specified noncriminal purposes of employment background checks for positions described in subdivision (b) of this section. 
(b)  Criminal history employment background investigations. 
(1)  The law enforcement agency designated by the city is hereby authorized to perform a criminal history background investigation on applicants for all seasonal, temporary, regular part-time, and full-time employees, paid on-call firefighters of the city, and other positions that work with children or vulnerable adults within the city, unless the city's hiring authority concludes that a background investigation is unnecessary. 
(2)  In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to screen employment applicants, the designated law enforcement agency is authorized to access data maintained in the state bureau of criminal apprehension's computerized criminal history information system in accordance with BCA polices. Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the designated law enforcement agency under the care and custody of the chief law enforcement official or his designee. A summary of the results of the computerized criminal history data may be released by the designated law enforcement agency to the hiring authority, including the city council, the city administrator, or other city staff involved in the hiring process. 
(3)  Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize the designated law enforcement agency, by written consent, to undertake the investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of Minn. Stats. ch. 13, the "Minnesota Government Data Practices Act," regarding the collection, maintenance, use, and release of the information. Except for the positions set forth in Minn. Stats. § 364.09, the city will not reject an applicant for employment on the basis of the applicant's prior conviction of a crime unless the crime is directly related to the position of employment sought and the conviction is for a felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If the city rejects the applicant's request on this basis, the city shall notify the applicant in writing of the following: 
a.  The grounds and reasons for the denial. 
b.  The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in Minn. Stats. § 364.06. 
c.  The earliest date an applicant may reapply for employment. 
d.  That all relevant evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon reapplication. 
(Prior Code, ch. 104; Ord. No. 10-07) 
State Law reference- Criminal history background checks by public employees, Minn. Stats. § 364.021. 
Sec. 2-81. - Enforcement officials; investigations and inspections. 
    Such officers, employees, or agents as the city council or city administrator may designate "enforcement officers" shall enforce the provisions of this Code. Enforcement officers shall make inspections or investigations as necessary to determine whether an immediate health hazard exists as a result of a violation of this Code. The findings of the enforcement officer shall then be reported to the city administrator. Enforcement officers may enter upon any land without consent of the owner and without being subject to any action of trespass; provided, however, that should entry into an enclosed building be necessary to perform their duties, they shall, prior to entry, obtain the consent of the owner, occupant, or person in control of such premises to enter the building. If permission cannot be obtained, a warrant to enter the building may be obtained. The enforcement officer shall carry and produce, at the request of any owner, occupant, or person in control of the premises upon which such officials request access in the performance of their duties, identification in a form approved by the city council. 
(Prior Code, ch. 601, subd. 7; Ord. No. 10-01) 
Sec. 2-82. - City administrator. 
(a)  A city administrator may, at the discretion of the city council, be appointed for an indefinite term. The city administrator may be removed from office after 30 calendar days' written notice by the city council with or without cause, or in accordance with the administrator's employment contract. 
(b)  The city administrator shall have considerable knowledge of municipal government operation, property procedures, public relations, personnel management, finances, purchasing and all administrative requirements for proper municipal operation. They shall have full knowledge, or the ability to acquire such knowledge, of all laws affecting the city. They shall have the ability to encourage harmonious relations with municipal employees and the general public. They shall have the ability to coordinate development, to collect and analyze material for reporting, and to initiate and implement standards of procedure, operation and organization. 
(c)  The city council may enter into such employment contract with the city administrator as it shall deem necessary or desirable in order to further implement the appointment of the city administrator. 
(d)  The city administrator shall serve at the direction of the city council and shall be responsible to the city council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city, which duties shall include the following: 
(1)  Direct and perform the actual day-to-day supervision and control of the administrative affairs of the city. 
(2)  Compile and prepare all necessary data and information to aid the city council in making decisions, assist the city council in coordinating, administering, and implementing decisions in regard to requests and problems of municipal concerns; research and assist the city council in developing and recommending solutions thereto, and coordinating efforts through directives to other departments, other agencies and the general public. 
(3)  Coordinate the enforcement of all ordinances, regulations, and law enforcement policies of the city council and all laws of the state applicable within the city. 
(4)  Advise and report to the city council a single consolidated budget, including statements relating to projected revenue, proposed sources of revenue, and all proposed expenditures to be made and obligations incurred by the city in the forthcoming fiscal year. 
(5)  Administer expenditures of funds only within limits established and approved by the city council and shall have the authority to sign purchase orders for routine services, equipment and supplies for which the cost does not exceed $5,000.00. 
(6)  Negotiate contracts for any kind of merchandise, materials, equipment or construction work for presentation to the city council. 
(7)  Administrate all capital improvement projects and service programs, as approved by the city council. 
(8)  Subject to council approval, establish such administrative policies and procedures as may be necessary to ensure the proper and efficient operation of all departments and divisions of the city, and issue administrative orders to carry out such policies and procedures. 
(9)  Serve as personnel officer and be responsible for the implementation of city personnel policies. 
(10)  Recommend to the city council the approval or disapproval of applications for licenses or permits, after investigation of the application and receipt of recommendation from the appropriate city inspector or city department. 
(11)  Perform such other duties as the council may from time to time prescribe. 
(e)  All department heads, supervisors, and administrative personnel shall report directly to the administrator. The administrator shall recommend to the council the hiring, promotion, demotion or dismissal of all probationary, temporary, permanent, full-time or part-time employees of the city and may suspend any employee until the next council meeting when the council shall affirm, modify or rescind the suspension. All final determinations with regard to personnel matters shall be made by the city council. 
(f)  The administrator shall exercise control over the expenditures of all departments and divisions of the city and such appropriations or expenditures as appear in the annual city budget, subject to approval of the council. The administrator shall make all purchases and acquisitions in the name of the city, subject to such administrative procedures as are approved by the council. 
(g)  The administrator shall attend and participate in discussions at all meetings of the city council and other official bodies, as directed by the city council. The city administrator shall be responsible for the preparation of the city council agenda and all related items. The city administrator shall represent the city at official functions, as directed by the city council, and maintain good public relations with the citizens of the community. 
Sec. 2-83. - Appointment of professionals. 
    The city council may appoint and contract for the professional services of engineers, lawyers, architects, accountants, and other personal services requiring technical, scientific, or professional training, regardless of the amount of the contract, without the necessity of advertisement for bids, upon such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon. At the first meeting in January, the city council, at its discretion, may designate and appoint: 
(1)  City engineer. The city engineer shall perform engineering services for the city during the year under direction of the city council and, from time to time, may contract with such other professional engineers as deemed necessary for any specified purposes, all without discharging the city engineer. 
(2)  City attorney. The city attorney shall perform legal services for the city during the year under direction of the city council and, from time to time, may contract with such other attorneys as deemed necessary for any specified purposes, all without discharging the city attorney. 
(3)  Prosecuting attorney. The prosecuting attorney shall prosecute criminal and quasi-criminal matters on behalf of the city, all without discharging the city attorney. 
Secs. 2-84-2-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal finance, Minn. Stats. chs. 426-435. 

Sec. 2-110. - Insurance. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, whenever this Code requires that evidence of liability insurance is required in order to obtain a license or a permit or a licensee or permittee is required to obtain and maintain liability insurance: 
(1)  The insurance policy must name the city as an additional insured. 
(2)  The insurance policy shall provide that it shall not be canceled, terminated or amended for any reason without at least ten days' written notice given to the city. 
(3)  The insurance policy will be in an amount that is sufficient to cover the liability limits established in Minn. Stats. § 466.04. In appropriate cases, the city may reduce the amount of required coverage. 
Secs. 2-111-2-133. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-134. - Advisory bodies. 
    All committees and commissions shall serve in an advisory capacity to the city council. 
Sec. 2-135. - Appointments. 
    Prospective committee or commission members shall apply at city hall on forms supplied by the city. Appointments shall be made by the city council. Committee and commission members shall serve staggered terms of three years and may be removed by a majority vote of the full city council. New appointees shall assume office at the first meeting following their appointment. Commission members shall hold office until their successors have been appointed. All vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as for an expired term, but the appointment shall be only for the unexpired term. A committee or commission member may be removed by the council for any reason or no reason. 
Sec. 2-136. - Membership. 
    All members of the committee or commission shall be residents of the city. City employees may not serve on committees or commissions. Commission members shall receive a quarterly stipend in an amount approved by the city council. Commission members must be present at the regular monthly meeting to be compensated. Absence from or cancellation of the regular monthly meeting will result in no pay. 
Sec. 2-137. - Chairperson. 
    The chairperson shall be chosen from the committee or commission membership annually to serve for one year; provided, however, that no chairperson shall be elected who has not completed at least one year as a member of the committee or commission. Any committee or commission chairperson may be removed by the council for misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance in office and his position filled as any other vacancy. 
Sec. 2-138. - Regular meetings. 
    Each committee and commission shall hold its regular meeting at a time established and approved by the council. 
Sec. 2-139. - Staff and council liaisons. 
    The city administrator or designee shall be the staff liaison to all committees and commissions. There shall be a city councilmember appointed as a liaison to each committee. 
Secs. 2-140-2-161. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-162. - Establishment. 
    There is hereby established a planning commission. The planning commission shall be the city planning agency in accordance with Minn. Stats. § 462.354, subd. 1. 
Sec. 2-163. - Composition. 
    The planning commission shall be made of up to seven members appointed by the city council. 
Sec. 2-164. - Duties and powers. 
    The planning commission shall have the powers and duties typically given to planning agencies, including the following powers: 
(1)  Prepare, recommend to the city council, and keep current a comprehensive plan for meeting requirements and such future needs as may be foreseen. 
(2)  Prepare and recommend to the city council ordinances, regulations and other proposals promoting orderly development in accordance with the comprehensive plan. 
(3)  Determine whether specific proposed developments conform to the principles and requirements of the comprehensive plan and city ordinances. 
(4)  Advise the city council on matters which have an impact on the future development of the city, including, but not limited to, major public improvements, annexations and vacations of streets or alleys. 
(5)  Conduct such public hearings as required to review applications for conditional use permits, interim use permits, rezonings, variances and subdivisions and to recommend to the city council approval or denial of such applications. 
(6)  Any other tasks assigned by the city council. 
Secs. 2-165-2-181. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PARK COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-182. - Established. 
    There is hereby established a parks commission. 
Sec. 2-183. - Composition. 
    The parks commission shall be made of up to seven members appointed by the city council in accordance with this article. 
Sec. 2-184. - Duties and powers. 
    The parks commission shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  Recommend park and trail projects to the city council, subject to available funding sources. 
(2)  Recommend policies affecting the use of the city's park and trail system. 
(3)  Recommend the allocation of park fields in a fair and equitable manner, based on recommendations from users and city staff. 
(4)  Prepare and recommend a comprehensive plan for the future development of the city park and trail system, to be submitted to the city council for implementation, and to maintain said plan, and recommend amendments of the plan to the city council, as may become necessary or desirable. 
(5)  Any other tasks assigned by the city council. 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- General authority to regulate animals, Minn. Stats. § 412.221, subd. 21; animal health, Minn. Stats. ch. 35; cruelty to animals, Minn. Stats. ch. 343; stray animals and companion animals, Minn. Stats. ch. 346; dogs and cats, Minn. Stats. ch. 347. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal shelter means any premises designated by the city for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter. 
    Animal unit. The following animals constitute one animal unit equivalency: 
(1)  One cow or steer; 
(2)  One horse, donkey or burrow; 
(3)  Three sheep or goats; or 
(4)  Ten fowl, or an equivalent thereof. 
    Animals, domestic, means animals commonly kept for house pets such as dogs and similar animals. 
    Animals, exotic, means any animal, reptile or fowl that is not naturally tame or gentle but is of a wild nature or disposition or that, because of its vicious nature or other characteristics, would constitute a danger to human life or property. 
    Animals, nondomestic, means livestock and poultry commonly kept for productive purposes on a farm, such as cattle, swine, horses, sheep, goats, chickens and other similar animals. 
    At large. 
(1)  The term "at large" means an animal that is off the premises of the owner and is: 
a.  Not on a leash held by a responsible person; or 
b.  Not accompanied by and under the direct control of a responsible person so as to be effectively restrained by command. 
(2)  An animal shall not be determined to be at large if it is: 
a.  Engaged in wild game or animal hunting and under the control of its owner or a responsible person; 
b.  Engaged in obedience training and under the control of its owner or a responsible person; or 
c.  Running loose on the owner's property, or property under the owner's control and under the control of a responsible party. 
(3)  If the animal is running loose on the owner's property and runs onto adjacent public or private properties and does not respond to a person, then the animal is considered at large. 
    City includes designated officers or employees of the city or independent contractors performing functions pursuant to contract with the city. 
    Dangerous dog means any dog that has: 
(1)  Without provocation, inflicted substantial bodily harm on a human being on public or private property; 
(2)  Killed a domestic animal without provocation while off the owner's property; or 
(3)  Been found to be potentially dangerous, and after the owner has received notice that the dog is potentially dangerous, the dog aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals. 
    Kennel means any place where four or more dogs over six months of age are owned, boarded, bred or offered for sale. 
    Owner means any person, firm or corporation owning, harboring or keeping animals. 
    Potentially dangerous dog means any dog that: 
(1)  When unprovoked, inflicts bites on a human or domestic animal on public or private property; 
(2)  When unprovoked, chases or approaches a person, including a person on a bicycle, upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public or private property, other than the dog owner's property, in an apparent attitude of attack; or 
(3)  Has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack unprovoked, causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety of humans or domestic animals. 
(Prior Code, ch. 605, subd. 2) 
Sec. 4-2. - Impounding. 
(a)  A police officer or firm designated by the city shall impound any animal found in violation of this chapter in an animal shelter. The animal shelter shall house and feed any animal held in a humane manner. 
(b)  Impounded animals shall be kept for not less than five regular business days unless reclaimed prior to that time by their owners. All fees incurred are the responsibility of the owner upon reclamation of the animal. 
(c)  The city shall charge a daily boarding fee to the owner of any animal impounded and held, and the amount of this fee shall be equal to the fee that the city is charged for said boarding by the firm designated by the city. The city shall have the authority to file citations and other legal complaints against the violators of this chapter. 
(d)  If the owner of said animal is known, written notice of impounding shall be given to the owner thereof either by mail or personal service. The owner shall remain subject to all penalties contained in this chapter. 
(e)  Any impounded animal that is not claimed within the specified number of days may be evaluated and sold for adoption. Any animal that is not claimed by the owner or sold for adoption may be humanely destroyed. 
(Prior Code, ch. 605, subds. 5, 6) 
Sec. 4-3. - Permissible return of unrestrained animal. 
    If an animal is found unrestrained and its owner can be identified and located, such animal need not be impounded but may, instead, be taken to the owner. In such cases, however, proceedings may be taken against the owner for violation of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, ch. 605, subd. 7) 
Sec. 4-4. - Prohibited animals. 
(a)  The following animals are prohibited within the city: 
(1)  Any animal or species prohibited by state or federal law. 
(2)  All large cats of the family Felidae, such as lions, tigers, jaguars, leopards, cougars and ocelots, except commonly accepted domesticated house cats. 
(3)  All members of the family Canidae, such as wolves, foxes, coyotes, dingoes and jackals, except domesticated dogs. 
(4)  All other animals which are not listed explicitly above, but which can be easily defined in this chapter as an exotic animal, including bears, wolverines, and badgers. 
(b)  Persons keeping animals for a public zoo as volunteers, docents or otherwise, any bona fide research institution or veterinary hospital are exempt from the provisions of this chapter, provided protective devices adequate to prevent such animals from escaping or injuring the public are provided. 
(Prior Code, ch. 605, subd. 11) 
Sec. 4-5. - Special regulations for the keeping of non-domestic animals. 
(a)  On all parcels of land maintaining non-domestic animals, there shall be a roofed or covered structure to protect the animals from the elements. 
(b)  On all parcels of land maintaining non-domestic animals, there shall be a secure fence or corral to contain said animals. Said fence shall be set back a minimum of two feet from a side or rear lot line to prevent the non-domestic animals from destroying vegetation from neighboring property. 
(c)  Manure shall be handled and treated in such a manner so as not to create a public nuisance or impact the environment or groundwater. Corrals, pens, stables, and similar enclosures shall be maintained in a manner to minimize fly breeding. No person shall leave accumulations of manure on any street or sidewalk. 
(d)  No non-domestic animal shall be treated cruelly or inhumanely by any person or in violation of state statutes preventing cruelty to animals. 
(Prior Code, ch. 605, subd. 12) 
Sec. 4-6. - Animal welfare. 
(a)  Care of animals. No owner shall fail to provide any animal with sufficient wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary care when needed and humane care and treatment. 
(b)  Abuse of animals. No person shall beat, treat cruelly, torment or otherwise abuse any animal, or cause or permit any dog fight. Abandonment of any animal is prohibited. 
(Prior Code, ch. 605, subd. 13) 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, Minn. Stats. § 343.20 et seq. 
Sec. 4-7. - Running at large. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any animal under such person's care, custody or control to run at large. 
Secs. 4-8-4-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Dogs and cats, Minn. Stats. ch. 347. 

Sec. 4-29. - Rabies vaccination. 
    Every owner or keeper of a dog shall cause the same to be vaccinated at least once in every three-year period and prior to the time such dog shall reach the age of six months. 
(Prior Code, ch. 605, subd. 9) 
State Law reference- Local rabies control programs authorized, Minn. Stats. § 346.52. 
Sec. 4-30. - Number of dogs allowed per household; kennel license. 
(a)  Generally. No more than four dogs over six months of age shall be allowed per household except pursuant to the issuance of a kennel license. 
(b)  Kennel licenses. No person, firm or corporation shall operate or maintain a kennel without first securing a kennel license. A kennel license may be issued as an interim use permit. Applications for a kennel license shall be made on forms provided by the city with the following information provided by the applicant: 
(1)  Location and size of the kennel, if applicable. If the dogs are to be kept primarily within the home or other building or the residence of the applicant or of any other person, the application shall state such. 
(2)  The maximum number of dogs to be kept on the premises. 
(3)  The location and type of fencing, if applicable. Fencing shall be of such quality, design and height so that it will contain the animals. 
(4)  Method to be used in keeping the premises in a sanitary condition. 
(Prior Code, ch. 605, subd. 3; Ord. No. 08-10; Ord. No. 18-08, § 1, 10-8-2018) 
State Law reference- Kennel licenses, Minn. Stats. § 347.31 et seq. 
Sec. 4-31. - Certain dogs declared nuisances. 
    It shall be the obligation and responsibility of the owner or custodian of any dog in the city, whether permanently or temporarily therein, to prevent such animal from committing any act which constitutes a nuisance. Failure on the part of the owner or custodian to prevent his animal from committing an act of nuisance shall be subject to the penalty hereinafter provided. The following dogs are hereby declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Any dog that barks, bays, cries, howls or makes any other noise continuously for a period of ten minutes, or that barks intermittently for one-half hour or more, and in so doing disturbs other persons. Evidence of such disturbance must be provided from 50 percent of the adult residents living within 300 feet of the property line of the residence of the animals complained about, or from two adult persons from different households living within 500 feet of the property line of the residence of the animals complained about. 
(2)  Any dog running at large. 
(Prior Code, ch. 605, subd. 4) 
Sec. 4-32. - Dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs. 
    The provisions of Minn. Stats. §§ 347.50-347.565 are adopted by reference as if set out at length in this chapter. 
(Prior Code, ch. 605, subd. 8) 
Chapter 6 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency management, Minn. Stats. ch. 12. 

Sec. 6-1. - Charges for emergency services. 
(a)  Statutory authority. This section is adopted pursuant to Minn. Stats. §§ 415.01, 366.011, and 366.012. 
(b)  Authorized. The city may impose a reasonable service charge for emergency services, including fire, rescue, medical, and related services provided or contracted for by the city. 
(c)  Collection of unpaid service charges and fees. If the service charge remains unpaid 30 days after notice is sent to the recipient of the service or the recipient's representative or estate, the city may use any lawful means for collection of unpaid service charges via assessment of taxable real property. 
(Prior Code, ch. 120, subds. 1-3; Ord. No. 08-15) 
Chapter 8 - ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Water wells. 
    Any public or private supply of water for domestic purposes must meet or exceed the standards for water quality of the state department of health and the state pollution control agency and administrative procedures of the city. Private wells must be located, constructed, maintained, and sealed in accordance with or in a more thorough manner than the Water Well Construction Code of the state department of health. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1008, subd. 1) 
State Law reference- Groundwater protection, Minn. Stats. ch. 103H. 
Sec. 8-2. - Individual sewage disposal systems. 
(a)  Purpose, applicability, and authority. 
(1)  Purpose. It is the purpose and intent of this section to establish standards for the design, location, construction, operation, and maintenance of subsurface sewage treatment systems (SSTS). 
(2)  Applicability. This section shall apply to those sites or facilities that are licensed, permitted, or otherwise regulated by county or city section. The sewer provisions of this section shall also apply to any premises in the city that are not served by a sewage treatment system permitted by the state pollution control agency. 
(3)  Authority. This section is adopted pursuant to the authorization and requirements contained in Minn. Stats. §§ 145A.05, 115.55, and Minnesota Administrative Rules chapter 7082. 
(b)  General provisions. 
(1)  Treatment required. All sewage generated, in unsewered areas shall be treated and dispersed by an approved SSTS or a system permitted by the state pollution control agency. 
(2)  Administrative policy and procedures. The provisions of the city Code chapter 1, section 1-7, as amended, apply to the administration and enforcement of this section, unless otherwise expressly provided for in this section. 
(3)  Administration. This section shall be administered by the city building official or their designee. 
(4)  Compliance. No person shall cause or permit the location, construction, alteration, extension, conversion, operation, or maintenance of a subsurface sewage treatment system, except in full compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(5)  Conditions. Violation of any condition imposed by the city on a license, permit, or variance, shall be deemed a violation of this section and subject to the penalty provisions set forth in this section. 
(6)  Site evaluation, system design, construction, inspection, and servicing. Site evaluation, and system design, construction, inspection, and system servicing shall be performed by the state pollution control agency licensed SSTS businesses or qualified employees of local governments or persons exempt from licensing in Minnesota Administrative Rules 7083.0700. For lots platted after April 1, 1996, a design shall evaluate and locate space for a second soil treatment area. 
(7)  Inspection. No part of an individual sewage treatment system shall be covered until it has been inspected and approved by the building official. If any part of the system is covered before being inspected and approved as herein provided, it shall be uncovered upon the direction of the building official. The building official shall cause such inspections as are necessary to determine compliance with this section. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to notify the building official that the system is ready for inspection. If the integrity of the system is threatened by adverse weather if left open and the building official is unable to conduct an inspection, the permittee may, after receiving permission from the building official, document compliance with the section by photographic means that show said compliance and submit that evidence to the building official prior to final approval being sought. 
(8)  Compliance inspection required. An SSTS compliance inspection is required: 
a.  For a new or replacement SSTS. 
b.  When altering an existing structure to add a bedroom. 
c.  When a parcel having an existing system undergoes development, subdivision, or split. 
(9)  Imminent public health and safety threat; failing system; and surface discharge. 
a.  A subsurface sewage treatment system that poses an imminent threat to public health and safety shall immediately abate the threat according to instructions by the building official and be brought into compliance with this section in accordance with a schedule established by the building official, which schedule will not exceed ten months. 
b.  A failing system, an SSTS that is not protective of groundwater, shall be brought into compliance within 24 months after receiving notice from the building official. 
c.  An SSTS discharging raw or partially treated wastewater to ground surface or surface water is prohibited unless permitted under the national pollution discharge elimination system. 
(10)  Septic tank maintenance. The owner of a sewage tank, or tanks, shall regularly, but not less frequently than every three years (unless otherwise approved by the building official due to limited use), inspect the tank(s) and measure the accumulations of sludge, and scum. If the system is pumped, measurement is not needed. The owner shall remove and sanitarily dispose of septage whenever the top of the sludge layer is less than 12 inches below the bottom of the outlet baffle or the bottom of the scum layer is less than three inches above the bottom of the outlet baffle. Removal of septage shall include complete removal of scum and sludge. 
(11)  Non-complying systems. Existing systems that are non-complying, but not an imminent health or safety threat, failing, or discharging to surface, may continue in use so long as the use is not changed or expanded. If the use changes or is expanded, the non-complying elements of the existing system must be brought into compliance. 
(12)  Non-complying work. New individual sewage treatment system construction that is non-compliant, or other work on a system that is non-complying, must be brought into compliance with this section in accordance with a schedule established by the building official, which schedule will not exceed seven days unless the building official finds extenuating circumstances. 
(13)  Change in use. A certificate of compliance may be voided if, subsequent to the issuance of the certificate, the use of the premises or condition of the system has changed or been altered. 
(14)  Setback reduction. Where conditions prevent the construction, alteration, and/or repair of an individual sewage treatment system on an existing developed parcel of real property, the building official may reduce property line and building setbacks and system sizing requirements provided said reduction does not endanger or unreasonably infringe on adjacent properties and with the concurrence of the affected properties. 
(15)  Floodplain. An SSTS shall not be located in a floodway or floodplain. Location within the flood fringe is permitted provided that the design complies with this section and all of the rules and statutes incorporated by reference. 
(16)  Class V injection wells. All owners of new or replacement SSTS that are considered to be Class V injection wells, as defined in the Code of Federal Regulations, title 40, part 144, are required by the Federal Government to submit SSTS inventory information to the Environmental Protection Agency. 
(c)  Standards adopted. 
(1)  Minnesota Rules adopted. Minnesota Administrative Rules chapters 7080 and 7081, that are in effect on the date of passage of this section, relating to subsurface sewage treatment systems, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this section as if fully set forth herein. 
(2)  Rules amended. The rules, adopted in subsection (c)(1) are amended as follows: 
a.  Compliance inspection-15 percent vertical separation reduction. Minnesota Administrative Rules 7080.1500, subp. 4D, is amended to allow 15 percent reduction of vertical separation (separation distance no less than 30.6 inches) may be determined to be compliant for existing systems to account for settling and variable interpretation of soil characteristics. 
(3)  Holding tanks. Holding tanks may be allowed for the following applications; as replacement to a failing existing system, an SSTS that poses an imminent threat to public health and safety, or for an existing lot in which an SSTS cannot feasibly be installed and the building official finds extenuating circumstances. 
(4)  System abandonment. An SSTS, or component thereof, that is no longer intended to be used must be abandoned in accordance with the adopted standards of this section. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permit required. No person shall cause or allow the location, construction, alteration, extension, conversion, or modification of any subsurface sewage treatment system without first obtaining a permit for such work from the building official. No person shall construct, alter, extend, convert, or modify any structure that is or will utilize subsurface sewage treatment system without first obtaining a permit. 
a.  All work performed on an SSTS shall be done by an appropriately licensed business, qualified employees or persons exempt from licensing. Permit applications shall be submitted by the person doing the individual subsurface sewage treatment system construction on forms provided by the building official and accompanied by required site and design data, and permit fees. 
b.  Permits shall only be issued to the person doing the individual sewage treatment system construction. 
c.  Permit applications for new and replacement SSTS shall include a management plan for the owner that includes a schedule for septic tank maintenance. 
d.  A permit is not required for minor repairs or replacement of damaged or deteriorated components that do not alter the original function, change the treatment capacity, change the location of system components, or otherwise change the original system's design, layout, or function. 
(2)  Operating permit. An operating permit shall be required of all owners of new holding tanks, Type IV and V systems; MSTS and other SSTS that the building official has determined requires operational oversight. 
a.  Application. Application for an operating permit shall be made on a form provided by the building official. 
b.  Holding tanks. The owner of holding tanks installed after the effective date of this section shall provide the building official with a copy of a contract with a licensed sewage maintenance business for monitoring and removal of holding tank contents. 
(e)  Violations and penalties. 
(1)  Misdemeanor. Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this section may be charged with a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished therefore, as provided by law. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(2)  Injunctive relief. In the event of a violation or a threat of violation of this section, the building official may institute appropriate actions or proceedings to include injunctive relief to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate such violations or threatened violations; and the city attorney may institute a civil action. 
(3)  Civil action. In the event of a violation of this section, the city may institute appropriate actions or proceedings to include injunctive relief to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate such violations, or threatened violations, and the city attorney may institute such action. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1004, subds. 2-10; Ord. No. 13-03, § 2, 5-13-2013) 
State Law reference- Individual and alternative discharging sewage treatment systems, Minn. Stats. § 115.55 et seq.; local subsurface sewage treatment system ordinances, Minn. Stats. § 115.55(2)(b). 
Sec. 8-3. - Application of septage to land. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Groundwater means the water contained below the surface of the earth in a saturated zone, including, without limitation, all waters, whether under-confined, unconfined, or perched condition, in near-surface unconsolidated sediment or regolith, or in rock formations deeper underground. 
    Incorporation means the mixing of septage with topsoil concurrent with application or immediately thereafter, by means such as discing, mold-board plowing, chisel plowing or rototilling. 
    Nonresidential septage means solids or liquids removed from a nonresidential septic tank, aerobic tank, holding tank or sewage system. 
    Residential septage means solids or liquids removed from a residential septic tank, aerobic tank, holding tank or sewage system. 
    Setback means a separation distance measured horizontally. 
    Soil classification. Where soil particle sizes or textures are specified in these guidelines, they refer to the Guide for USDA Soil Textural Classification. 
(b)  Standards. 
(1)  Application. 
a.  Nonresidential septage shall not be applied to land in the city. 
b.  Application of septage shall be conducted in such a manner so as to avoid ponding or runoff of septage liquids. Tank trucks used in septage application shall be equipped with deflectors or splash plates or other appropriate equipment so as to induce a uniform application. 
c.  Septage shall be incorporated within 48 hours after application to the ground. 
d.  Septage shall not be applied by spray or any other method that produces airborne particles. 
e.  Septage shall not be applied upon the following: 
1.  Wetlands; 
2.  Coarse sand; 
3.  Gravel; 
4.  Lands within an area designated as a ten-year floodplain; 
5.  Peat or muck solids that are not drained; 
6.  Lands within four feet of maximum groundwater elevation upon medium- and fine-textured soil; or 
7.  Lands within eight feet of maximum groundwater elevation upon coarse-textured soil. 
f.  Septage may be applied only to land zoned for agricultural purposes that consists of at least 40 contiguous acres. 
(2)  Setbacks. The following setbacks shall be maintained when applying septage to land: 
Water wells 200 feet Public road right-of-way 100 feet Property lines 25 feet Residential dwellings 600 feet Surface waters (May-October) 1,000 feet (lake) 
300 feet (river) Surface waters (November-April) Not allowed  
(3)  Application rates. The quantity of septage applied to any site shall not exceed the amount permitted in the permit issued for that site. In no case shall the quantity of septage applied to a site exceed 15,000 gallons per acre per year unless approved by the city in writing. 
(4)  Site management. Soils to which septage has been applied shall not be used for growing vegetable crops for human consumption until three years have passed since the last application. Such lands shall not be used for grazing or harvest of forage materials until at least three weeks have passed since the last application of septage. 
(5)  Permit and application provisions. No septage shall be applied to land in the city without obtaining a permit from the building official. Permit applications shall be submitted to the building official together with a permit fee in an amount to be determined from time to time by the city council. The permit application shall contain a legal description of the applicant's entire property and a description of the parcel where the septage will be applied. The application shall also contain the property owner's name, address and telephone number, and a statement as to how the adjacent land is used; the name and address of the persons who have permission to apply the septage; the quantity of septage to be applied; the time when the septage will be applied; and a description of crops to be grown upon the septage application site. A permit shall be valid for the period described therein, but it may be revoked in the event of noncompliance with this section. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1010, subds. 2-6) 
Sec. 8-4. - Open burning permits. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Burning permit means a written permit issued by a city fire warden. 
    Control equipment means any device, approved by the state pollution control agency, that has the function of controlling or abating the emission of air contaminants to the atmosphere. 
    Fire warden means a volunteer who is commissioned by a DNR forestry office to issue open burning permits for a specific geographic area. 
    Illegal burn means any non-recreational fire set without a burning permit, not conforming to this chapter. 
    Open burning means the burning of any matter whereby the resultant combustion products are emitted directly into the open atmosphere without passing through any adequate control equipment. 
    Person means any person, any municipality or other governmental or political subdivision or other public agency, any public or private corporation, any partnership, firm, association or other organization, any receiver, trustee, assignee, agent or other legal representative of any of the foregoing, or any legal entity, but does not include the pollution control agency. 
    Recreational fire means a fire set for cooking, warming or ceremonial purposes that is not more than three feet in diameter by three feet high and which has had the ground within five feet of its base cleared of all combustible material. 
(b)  Open burning prohibited. Except as herein otherwise provided, open burning shall be prohibited and deemed an illegal burn within the city. 
(c)  Exemptions. Open burning of the types, and subject to the conditions, hereinafter stated shall be exempt from the prohibition of subsection (b) of this section: 
(1)  Recreational fires. 
a.  Burning shall be allowed daily between 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless a burning ban is in effect. 
b.  Recreational fires shall not exceed three feet in diameter with a flame height of approximately three feet. 
c.  Only clean wood or charcoal shall be burned, not trash or leaves. 
d.  Recreational fires shall be constantly attended by a person knowledgeable in the use of fire extinguishing equipment. Such attendant shall supervise the fire until it is extinguished. 
e.  Fire extinguishing equipment such as buckets, shovels, or garden hoses shall be readily available for use at such fires. 
f.  Recreational fires shall not be conducted within 25 feet of a structure or combustible material unless contained within a fire pit. Conditions which would cause a fire to spread to within 25 feet of a structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition. 
g.  Fire pits in outdoor locations shall be constructed of concrete or other approved noncombustible materials. 
h.  Fire pits outside buildings shall not be located within ten feet of combustible walls or roofs or other combustible material. 
(2)  Fires under managed supervision, for which a written burning permit has first been obtained from the fire marshal, and from the pollution control agency, but limited to the following: 
a.  Fires purposely set for the instruction and training of public and industrial firefighting personnel from the fire department. 
b.  Fires set for the elimination of a fire hazard which cannot be abated by any other practicable means by the fire department. 
c.  Fires purposely set for forest and game management purposes by the fire department. 
d.  Any exemption hereafter adopted by the state pollution control agency. 
(3)  Fires under managed supervision for which a written burn permit has first been obtained from a fire warden are subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Limited to the burning of trees, brush, grass and other vegetable matter in the clearing of land, the maintenance of street, road and highway rights-of-way, and in accepted agricultural and management practices. 
b.  Material must originate on site. 
c.  Piles shall not exceed 16 feet in height or diameter and only one pile shall be burning at any time. 
d.  Larger or multiple piles require written fire department permission. 
e.  Burning piles of leaves or leaves not attached to branches is prohibited. 
f.  Materials prohibited from open burning yearround include oil, rubber, plastics, chemically-treated materials, and any other material that produces excessive or noxious smoke, including, but not limited to, tires, railroad ties, chemically-treated paint, and paint filters. In addition, the open burning of hazardous waste, industrial solid waste, demolition debris, and motor vehicles or parts is prohibited yearround. State law also prohibits the open burning of garbage. 
g.  Permits from a fire warden are not necessary if there are three inches of unbroken snow cover surrounding the site; however, the other provisions of subsection (c)(3) of this section still apply. 
(4)  Exemption to conduct fires under this section does not excuse a person from the consequences, damages or injuries which may result therefrom nor does it exempt any person from regulations promulgated by the state pollution control agency or any other governmental unit exercising jurisdiction in matters of pollution or fire hazard regulation. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1012; Ord. No. 04-03) 
State Law reference- Open burning, Minn. Stats. § 88.171. 
Secs. 8-5-8-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MINERAL EXCAVATION AND LAND RECLAMATION 

Sec. 8-27. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Demolition landfill means an area of land used for the disposal of demolition waste without creating nuisance or hazards to the environment, public health and safety and is operated in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
    Demolition waste means solid waste which consists of concrete, blacktop, bricks, blocks, structural metal, wood free from leachable toxic chemicals, trees and tree trimmings and other inert waste materials as may be approved by the city. 
    Excavation means the removal or storage of rock, sand, gravel, clay, silt or other like material. 
    Land reclamation means to fill with rock, sand, gravel, clay, silt or other like material. A permit and/or license may be needed to remove, fill with, or store rock, sand, gravel, clay, silt or other like material. 
    License means an authorization by the city to persons, corporations or firms engaging in the business of excavation within the limits of the city. 
    Minerals means nonmetallic materials found in the earth, including, but not limited to, rock, sand, gravel, clay, silt and soil which may be covered by overburden. 
    Overburden means those materials that lie between the surface of the earth and the material to be excavated. 
    Permit means an authorization by the city to excavate on the land. 
    Processing means the crushing, washing, compounding or treating of rock, gravel, clay, silt, or other like materials. 
    Rehabilitation means to renew the land to a self-sustaining, long-term use that is compatible with contiguous land used in accordance with the standards set forth in this article. 
    Sanitary landfill means a solid waste facility employing a method of disposing of solid waste, including, but not limited to, garbage, refuse, sludge from a water supply treatment plant, wastewater collection treatment system or air containment treatment facility, construction and demolition debris, and other discarded waste materials and sludges, and solid, semi-solid, liquid, or materials contained in gaseous form, resulting from residential, industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations, and from community activities, on or into land by various forms of excavation, placement, burial, compaction, or covering, by utilizing the principles of engineering to confine the solid waste to the smallest practical areas, to reduce it to the smallest practical volume, and to cover it with a layer of earth at the conclusion of each day's operation, or at such more frequent intervals as may be required by the state pollution control agency or the city, consistent with the laws of the state. 
    Topsoil means that portion of the overburden which lies closest to the surface of the earth and which supports the growth of vegetation. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1014, subd. 1; Ord. No. 04-03) 
Sec. 8-28. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to any of the following: 
(1)  Excavation for the purpose of the foundation, cellar, or basement of some immediately pending superstructure to be erected, built, or placed thereon contemporaneously with or immediately following such excavation, provided that a building permit has first been issued. 
(2)  Excavation by the state, county, or city authorized in connection with construction or maintenance of roads or highways or utilities, provided that such activity is conducted within said road or highway right-of-way or utility easement. 
(3)  Curb cuts, utility hookups, or street openings for which another permit is required from the city. 
(4)  Excavations 1,000 cubic yards or less. 
(5)  Excavation or grading for agricultural purposes. 
(6)  Where another license or permit is not required or obtained, the excavation license provided for in this article shall be required. 
(7)  Enlarging constructed ponds that are part of a constructed stormwater system with the approval of the city engineer or wetlands with Anoka Conservation District approval, and maintaining private drainage ditches, provided that the total volume removed is less than 1,000 cubic yards and that the excavation does not significantly alter existing drainage patterns. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1014, subd. 2(D); Ord. No. 04-03; Ord. No. 12-03, § 4, 4-30-2012) 
Sec. 8-29. - General standards. 
    The following standards shall apply to all excavation operations within the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Boundary. Excavation operations shall be conducted within the confines of the excavation site described in the application. 
(2)  Prohibited areas. Excavation operations shall not be conducted within the following: 
a.  Ten feet of the right-of-way of an existing public utility easement. 
b.  50 feet of any property line. 
(3)  Fencing. During excavation operations, access to any area where collections of water are 11/2 feet in depth or more or where excavation slopes are steeper than one foot vertical to 11/2 feet horizontal and any other areas where obvious danger to the public exists shall be controlled by a four-foot tall fence with support posts spaced every ten feet. 
(4)  Appearance and screening. 
a.  All machinery shall be kept operational. 
b.  Abandoned machinery and rubbish shall be periodically removed from the excavation site at a maximum of 30-day intervals. 
c.  Within 90 days after the termination of excavation operations or within 90 days after the expiration of the excavation permit/license provided by this article, the applicant or owner shall dismantle buildings and structures incident to excavation operations and shall grade the excavation site as well as complete all rehabilitation on the site as provided by the rehabilitation plan. 
d.  When required, the perimeter of the excavation site shall be planted or otherwise screened. 
e.  Existing tree and ground cover shall be preserved to the maximum extent feasible, maintained, or supplemented by selective cutting, transplanting and replanting of trees, shrubs and other ground cover along all setback areas. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1014, subd. 5; Ord. No. 04-03) 
Sec. 8-30. - Excavation operating standards. 
(a)  Noise. Maximum noise level at the perimeter of the excavation site shall comply with the limits of standards established by the state pollution control agency and the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
(b)  Hours. All excavation operations shall be conducted between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday only. The city may restrict excavation, processing, or related operations on legal holidays if such activities cause noise or other disturbances offensive to adjacent property owners. 
(c)  Explosives. The use and handling of explosives at the excavation site shall be coordinated with the sheriff's department. Blasting shall occur only at hours specified in the excavation license. 
(d)  Fugitive dust. Excavation operators shall use all practical means to reduce the amount of fugitive dust generated by excavation operations. In any event, the amount of dust or other particular matter generated by the excavation shall not exceed air pollution standards established by the state pollution control agency. 
(e)  Water pollution. Excavation operators shall comply with all applicable state, federal and local regulations for the protection of water quality, including, but not limited to, regulations promulgated by the state pollution control agency, department of natural resources, and the United States Environmental Protection Agency. No waste products or processing residue including untreated wash water shall be deposited in any public waters of the state. 
(f)  Topsoil preservation. All topsoil shall be retained at the excavation site until the completion of rehabilitation work in accordance with the rehabilitation plan. 
(g)  Slopes during excavation operations. During the entire period of operations, all excavations other than the working space shall be sloped on all sides to a maximum ratio of three feet horizontal to one foot vertical, unless a steeper slope is approved by the city. Where excavations are adjacent to a public roadway or other right-of-way, the excavation shall have a maximum slope of four feet horizontal to one foot vertical. Slopes adjacent to waterways shall not exceed six feet horizontal to one foot vertical. 
(h)  Waiver. The city, at the time of issuance of the excavation permit/license, may waive or modify any of the provisions in this section or impose additional requirements if it finds that the plan of operation or other materials submitted with the application or other factors make appropriate more suitable measures for standards consistent with the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1014, subd. 6; Ord. No. 04-03) 
Sec. 8-31. - Reclamation standards. 
(a)  Reclamation and rehabilitation. Reclamation and rehabilitation shall be a continuing process occurring within six months after the excavation or reclamation operation has moved into another part of the excavation or reclamation site. 
(b)  Slopes. All banks and slopes shall be reclaimed and rehabilitated in accordance with the reclamation plan submitted with the excavation license application. No reclamation or rehabilitation slope shall be steeper than four feet horizontal to one foot vertical, except that steeper slopes may be permitted in accordance with the rehabilitation plan when said slopes are planned for slope-related uses, including, but not limited to, ski hills and sliding hills. 
(c)  Cover and planting. Slopes, graded and backfilled areas shall be surfaced with at least three inches of topsoil and planted with ground cover sufficient to contain the soil. Such ground cover shall be tended as necessary until it is self-sustaining. 
(1)  Germination shall occur within 30 days. 
(2)  If adequate germination has not occurred within 30 days, additional planting is required. 
(3)  If, after 30 days after second planting, self-sustaining germination has not occurred, the project shall stop. 
(d)  Slopes to water bodies. No slope descending to a water body shall exceed one foot vertical to six feet horizontal. 
(e)  Water bodies. All water areas resulting from excavation/reclamation shall be rehabilitated as follows: All standing water bodies shall either be filled with acceptable fill materials at the end of each excavation construction season or preserved in the discretion of the city, consistent with the public health, safety and welfare. 
(f)  Site restoration. All grading, mining and filling sites shall be restored immediately after operations cease. Restoration shall be complete within 90 days of the cessation of operations. The following standards shall apply to restoration: 
(1)  The peaks and depressions of the site shall be graded and backfilled to a surface which will result in a gently rolling topography in substantial conformity to the land area immediately surrounding the site and which will minimize erosion due to rainfall. No finished slope shall exceed four feet horizontal to one foot vertical. 
(2)  Restoration shall begin after the grading, mining and/or filling of 25 percent of the total area to be mined or five acres, whichever is less, occurs. Once these areas have been graded, mined or filled, they shall be sloped and seeded as per the restoration plan. 
(3)  Restored areas shall be surfaced with a soil of a quality as least equal to the topsoil of land areas immediately surrounding the site, and to a depth of at least six inches. The topsoil shall be seeded, sodded, or planted with grasses. Trees and shrubs may also be planted, but not as a substitute for grasses. Such planting shall adequately retard soil erosion. 
(4)  The finished grade shall be such that it will not adversely affect the surrounding land or future development of the site and shall be consistent with the end use plan. 
(5)  Within 30 days after the deposit of approved fill materials, the filled area shall be covered with a minimum of six inches of clean fill, and the depth of the fill shall be controlled to blend with the surrounding ground conditions. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1014, subds. 7, 13; Ord. No. 04-03) 
Secs. 8-32-8-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GRASS, TREES AND WEEDS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Minnesota Noxious Weed Law, Minn. Stats. § 18.75 et seq. 

Sec. 8-51. - Regulation of trees, grass, and weeds. 
    The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain, and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the right-of-way or boundary of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, and public grounds as may be necessary to ensure the public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of public grounds. No other planting may be done without consent of the city. 
(Prior Code, ch. 609, subd. 1) 
Sec. 8-52. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Urban density property means a platted residential lot within a residential subdivision where the average residential lot size is less than one acre. 
    Urban section road means a section of road platted within a platted residential subdivision with curb and gutter. 
(Prior Code, ch. 609, subd. 2; Ord. No. 11-03) 
Sec. 8-53. - Tree removal. 
    The city may remove or cause to be removed, if the property owner refuses to remove or cause to be removed, any tree or part thereof that is in an unsafe condition or that by reason of its nature may be injurious to any person, public utility, or public or private improvement likely to sustain significant physical damage. 
(Prior Code, ch. 609, subd. 3) 
Sec. 8-54. - Duty of property owners to cut grass and weeds. 
    Every owner of urban density property on urban section road shall cause the grass and weeds to be cut on his property and from the line of such property nearest the street to the edge of the pavement of such street. If the grass or weeds in such a place attain a height in excess of ten inches, it shall be prima facie evidence of a failure to comply with this article. When determining the level of maintenance necessary on any given urban density property, that level shall reflect the character of similar properties in the neighborhood. 
(Prior Code, ch. 609, subd. 4) 
Sec. 8-55. - City may order work done. 
    The city may, in cases of failure to comply with this article, perform such work with employees of the city, or by other means, keeping an accurate account of the cost thereof for each lot, piece or parcel of land abutting upon such street. 
(Prior Code, ch. 609, subd. 5) 
ARTICLE IV. - REGULATION OF DISCHARGES INTO THE MUNICIPAL STORM SEWER SYSTEM 

Sec. 8-56. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city through the regulation of illicit discharges to the municipal storm drainage system as required by federal and state law. This chapter establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the MS4 permit issued to the city by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) under the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this chapter are: 
1.  To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by stormwater discharges by any user. 
2.  To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal storm sewer system. 
3.  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring, and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-01, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 8-57. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this section the terms and definitions shall apply except as herein stated and together with the following additional definitions: 
    Best management practice (BMP) means erosion and sediment control, water quality, and permanent storm water management practices that are the most effective and practicable means of controlling, preventing, and minimizing the degradation of surface water, including construction-phasing, minimizing the length of time soil areas are exposed, prohibitions, and other management practices published by state or designated area-wide planning agencies. 
    Discharge means adding, introducing, releasing, leaking, spilling, casting, throwing, or emitting any pollutant, or placing any pollutant in a location where it is likely to pollute the municipal storm sewer system. 
    Erosion means the process by which ground surface is worn away by action of wind, water, ice, or gravity. 
    Groundwater means water contained below the surface of the earth in the saturated zone including, without limitation, all waters whether under confined, unconfirmed, or perched conditions, in near surface unconsolidated sediment or regolith, or rock formations deeper underground. 
    Illicit discharge means illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the municipal storm sewer system. 
    Illicit connection means illicit connection is defined as either of the following: 
(1)  Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface that allows an illicit discharge to enter the municipal storm sewer system including but not limited to sewage, process wastewater, wash water and any connections to the storm drainage system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drainage system that has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
    MPCA means the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) means the system of conveyances (including sidewalks, roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) owned and operated by the city and designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water. 
    Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the municipal storm sewer system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    NPDES means the national pollutant discharge elimination system; the program for issuing, modifying, revoking, reissuing, terminating, monitoring, and enforcing permits under the Clean Water Act authorizing the discharge of pollutants to water of the United States. 
    Person means any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, franchise, association or governmental entity. 
    Pollutant means any substance which, when discharged has potential to or does: obstruct or cause damage to waters of the MS4; change water color, odor, or usability as a drinking water source through causes not attributable to natural stream processes affecting surface water or subsurface processes affecting groundwater; add an unnatural surface film on the water; adversely change other chemical, biological, thermal, or physical conditions, in any surface water or stream channel; degrade the quality of ground water; or harm human life, aquatic life, or terrestrial plant and wildlife. Pollutant includes dredged soil, solid waste, incinerator residue, garbage, wastewater, wastewater sludge, chemical waste, biological materials, radioactive materials, rock, sand, dust, industrial waste, sediment, nutrients, toxic substance, pesticide, herbicide, trace metal, automotive fluid, petroleum-based substance, and oxygen-demanding material. 
    Pollute means to discharge pollutants into the municipal storm sewer system. 
    Pollution means the direct or indirect distribution of pollutants into the municipal storm sewer system.. 
    State means the State of Minnesota. 
    Storm sewer system means a conveyance or system of conveyances that is owned and operated by the city or other entity and designated or used for collecting or conveying storm water. 
    Storm water means precipitation runoff, storm water runoff, snow melt runoff, and any other surface runoff and drainage as defined under Minn. Rule 7077.0105, subpart 41(b). 
    Surface waters means all waters of the state other than ground waters, which include ponds, lakes, rivers, streams, tidal and nontidal wetlands, public ditches, tax ditches, and public drainage systems except those designed and used to collect, convey, or dispose of sanitary sewage. 
(Ord. No. 15-01, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 8-58. - Discharge prohibitions and exemptions. 
    Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the MS4 any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than storm water. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illicit discharge to the municipal storm sewer system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
(a)  Discharges from the following sources are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this section: flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, springs, uncontaminated groundwater infiltration, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, uncontaminated water from foundation or footing drains, crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensate, irrigation water, lawn watering discharge, individual residential car washing, water hydrant flushing or other water treatment or distribution system, discharges from potable water sources, and street wash water. 
(1)  Discharge of swimming pools, crawl spaces, sump pumps, footing drains, and other sources that flow over a vegetated area to allow filtering of pollutants, evaporation of chemicals, and infiltration of water. 
(2)  Discharges or flow from firefighting and other discharges to protect public health and safety. 
(3)  Discharges associated with dye testing. 
(4)  Discharges associated with the necessary use of snow and ice control materials on paved surfaces. 
(5)  Any non-stormwater discharge permitted under and NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA), provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drainage system. 
(Ord. No. 15-01, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 8-59. - NPDES permits compliance. 
    Any person subject to an industrial activity NPDES storm water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city prior to allowing discharges to the municipal storm sewer system. All facilities that have storm water discharges associated with industrial activity which are, or may be, the source of an unlawful discharge shall be required to implement, at their expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the storm sewer system. Such BMPs shall be part of a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit. 
(Ord. No. 15-01, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 8-60. - Prohibited discharge, action required. 
    Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected unlawful discharge into the storm sewer system or waters of the state, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of the release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the city no later than the next business day. 
(Ord. No. 15-01, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 8-61. - Access to buildings for inspection, monitoring and/or dye testing. 
(a)  Facility operators shall allow the city ready access to all parts of the building/site for the purposes of inspection, sampling, dye testing, examination and copying of records that relate to the discharge of storm water. 
(b)  The city shall have the right to set up at any building/site devices necessary to conduct monitoring, sampling and/or dye testing of the facility's storm water discharge. 
(c)  The city has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. 
(d)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a building/site is a violation of this chapter. 
(e)  If the city has been refused access to any part of the building/site from which storm water is discharged, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this section, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample to verify compliance with this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 15-01, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 8-62. - Suspension of storm sewer system access. 
(a)  Suspension due to unlawful discharges in emergency situations. The city may, without prior notice, suspend storm sewer system discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent or substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the storm sewer system or waters of the state. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the city may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the storm sewer system or waters of the state, or to minimize danger to persons. 
(b)  Any person discharging to the storm sewer system in violation of this chapter may have the person's storm sewer system access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an unlawful discharge. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates storm sewer system access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the city. 
(Ord. No. 15-01, 2-9-2015) 
Chapter 10 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- General authority relative to fire prevention, Minn. Stats. § 412.221, subd. 17; state fire code, Minn. Stats. § 326B.02, subd. 6. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Interference with fire department. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to give or make, or cause to be given or made, an alarm of fire without probable cause, to neglect or refuse to obey any reasonable order of the chief at a fire, or to interfere with the department in the discharge of its duties. 
(Prior Code, ch. 112, subd. 8) 
State Law reference- Obstructing firefighting, Minn. Stats. § 609.50. 
Sec. 10-2. - Charges for false fire alarms. 
(a)  Authority. This section is adopted pursuant to Minn. Stats. §§ 415.01, 366.011, and 366.012. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Call means a response by the fire department to a dispatched call for emergency services. 
    False fire alarm means a fire call in response to an alarm activated by malfunction or intentional or unintentional human operation. 
(c)  Charges described. There are certain extraordinary calls for which the cost of said call shall be funded through a charge for service, rather than through the funding authority of the local units of government financing the fire department. The charges shall be defined, set, and administered as follows: 
(1)  False fire alarm charge. In recognition of the fact that a false fire alarm is not an uncommon occurrence for alarm systems, the intent of this policy is to defray the cost to respond to excessive calls for false fire alarms at the same site. A fee, which shall be referred to as a "false fire alarm charge," shall be imposed for a call for a false fire alarm when three or more false fire alarms have occurred at the same structure within the previous 12 months. This charge shall apply equally to all false fire alarms in commercial, industrial, public and single or multiple-family residential properties. 
(2)  Setting of fees. The charges for services shall be set and amended from time to time by resolution of the city council and included on the fee schedule of the city. 
(3)  Responsibility for cost. In recognition of the fact that the services provided by the fire department are not necessarily provided at the request of the party receiving the benefit of those services, the intent of this section is to charge the party most benefiting from the services rendered. The fire chief is charged with the responsibility of determining the party most responsible for the call and including that information on the report for the call. 
(d)  Application within mutual aid. This section shall not apply to services provided under a mutual aid agreement of the fire department to the extent that they are expressly prohibited in said agreement. 
(Prior Code, chs. 112, subd. 1, 122; Ord. No. 08-15) 
State Law reference- False fire alarms, Minn. Stats. § 609.686. 
Sec. 10-3. - Ignition devices and underage persons. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ignition device, for the purpose of this section, means matches, lighters, and any other materials when used for purposes of ignition. 
(b)  Prohibitions. 
(1)  No minor may possess any ignition device, unless under the direct supervision of, or with the direct permission of, a parent or legal guardian. 
(2)  No person may sell, give, deliver, or make accessible any ignition device to a minor. 
(c)  Confiscation. Any ignition device possessed by a minor may be confiscated by any peace officer, fire chief, or authorized designee of the fire chief. Once confiscated, the ignition device shall become property of the confiscating authority and shall be processed accordingly as evidence in the commission of a crime or made inoperable and disposed of properly. 
(d)  Penalties. 
(1)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(2)  In addition to any other penalties provided for in this Code, the judge of any court of competent jurisdiction may order any person found guilty of violating this section to any educational programs as the court deems appropriate, and include as part of the penalty therein that such person pay the costs of such educational program. 
(Prior Code, ch. 112, subd. 10; Ord. No. 98-01; Ord. No 99-06) 
Secs. 10-4-10-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Volunteer Firefighters Relief Association Financing Guidelines Act of 1971, Minn. Stats. § 69.771 et seq.; volunteer firefighters' retirement, Minn. Stats. chs. 353G, 424A; firefighter training and education, Minn. Stats. ch. 299N. 

Sec. 10-25. - Fire department established. 
    There is hereby established in the city a volunteer fire department consisting of a chief, an assistant chief, and not less than ten or more than 60 probationary, regular, and reserve firefighters. 
(Prior Code, ch. 112, subd. 1; Ord. No. 05-10) 
Sec. 10-26. - Appointment of fire chief and assistant chief. 
    The chief of the fire department shall be a member of the fire department and appointed by the city council. The assistant chief shall be a member of the fire department and shall be elected annually by the members of the fire department. Each officer shall hold office for one year or until a successor has been elected and qualified. Each officer may be removed by the city council after the council has held a hearing and found cause in its sole discretion for such removal. 
(Prior Code, ch. 112, subd. 2) 
Sec. 10-27. - Duties of chief. 
    The fire chief shall be the administrative head of the fire department. In such position, it shall be the chief's duty to: 
(1)  Establish management organization. Recommend the management organization of the department, including, but not limited to, such matters as determining how the department shall be organized into companies and naming officers for the various companies. 
(2)  Control apparatus. Have control of all firefighting apparatus and equipment and be responsible for their care and condition. 
(3)  Prepare budget. Prepare and submit to the mayor/administrator the annual preliminary budget for the fire department. 
(4)  Prepare long-range plans. Prepare projections describing what the fire department shall accomplish during periods of one, five, ten, and 20 years. These reports shall be adjusted as frequently as changing conditions dictate and shall include predicted annual budget requisites for personnel and equipment, as well as capital expenditures. 
(5)  Reports. Make reports to the city council or to the public as directed by the city council. 
(6)  Assignments. Supervise work assignments so as to properly utilize the working forces of the department. 
(7)  Training. Ensure the proper training of the members of the fire department. At least one meeting of the fire department members and at least one drill per month shall be held. Such meetings and drills may be held on the same night if sufficient time is allocated for each. Records shall be kept of the names and the numbers of the firefighters present at each meeting or drill, what each drill consists of, and any other pertinent information deemed necessary by the city council or the state fire marshal. 
(8)  Ancillary functions. To perform such other functions as are necessary to properly administer the fire department. 
(Prior Code, ch. 112, subd. 3) 
Sec. 10-28. - Assistant chief. 
    In the absence or disability of the fire chief, the assistant chief shall perform all the functions and exercise all authority of the chief. 
(Prior Code, ch. 112, subd. 4) 
Sec. 10-29. - Personnel. 
(a)  Appointment and promotion. All appointments to and promotions within the fire department shall be made on the basis of merit and ability. All members of the fire department shall be qualified to perform their administrative and firefighting duties. The fire chief shall prepare departmental regulations and personnel standards and procedures, if such are necessary, to accomplish these objectives. The fire chief shall recommend appointment, promotion, suspension, or removal of the members of the fire department, subject to the confirmation or approval of the city council. 
(b)  Qualifications. The firefighters shall be able-bodied and not less than 18 years of age. 
(c)  Physical examination. Each candidate, before becoming a probationary firefighter, shall undergo a thorough physical examination by a licensed doctor of medicine and submit such doctor's written report thereof with an application for membership in the department. Such report shall contain a statement whether or not, in such doctor's opinion, there is evidence of any myocarditis, coronary sclerosis, or pneumonia or their equivalent or other limiting condition in the candidate at the time of his examination. Such report shall be retained and permanently kept in the files of the fire department. 
(d)  Probationary period. Each candidate shall serve a probationary period of six months before receiving a firefighter rating. 
(e)  Compensation. The members and officers of the fire department shall receive compensation as determined by the city council from time to time. In computing compensation for fires, one hour shall be considered the minimum to be paid to any firefighter or officer. The chief shall certify and submit a report to the city council showing the compensation to which each member or officer is entitled for the period. No payment of compensation shall be paid to any member or officer until such report is filed. 
(f)  Loss of membership. To remain in good standing in the fire department, each officer, member, or probationary member shall attend at least 50 percent of the monthly drills held in any one year. In addition, any officer, member, or probationary member shall not be absent from three consecutive drills, unless such absence is excused by the chief. The failure to so attend shall be deemed sufficient cause for removal of the member from the fire department. Firefighters may be removed from office by the fire chief. The firefighter shall have the right to demand in writing a hearing before the city council. The city council shall give seven days' written notice before the hearing. The city council may determine in its sole discretion that there is sufficient cause for removal of a firefighter. The fire chief shall have authority to suspend a firefighter pending such hearing. A firefighter shall receive no pay while suspended. 
(Prior Code, ch. 112, subd. 5) 
Sec. 10-30. - Fire marshal. 
    The responsibilities of the office of fire marshal shall rest with the fire chief. The city fire marshal may perform the following duties or delegate them to a subordinate. It shall be the fire marshal's duty to: 
(1)  Enforce ordinances. Enforce ordinances or other laws directed toward fire prevention. 
(2)  Inspect premises. Inspect, or cause to be inspected, all potentially hazardous premises and cause the abatement or removal of all fire hazards. Pursuant to such duty, the fire marshal shall have the authority to obtain search warrants if such are necessary to accomplish an inspection, provided that the applicable constitutional requirements relating to the procurement of such search warrants in effect at the time are met. 
(3)  Investigate fires. Investigate, or cause to be investigated, the cause, origin, and circumstances of each fire occurring within the city in which a person has been injured or killed or where property has been destroyed or damaged when such destruction or damage exceeds $100.00. All fires of unknown origin shall be investigated. The fire marshal shall make investigation as to whether such fire was the result of carelessness, accident, or design. All investigations shall begin within two days of the occurrence of the fire. 
(4)  Make reports. To make such reports as may from time to time be required by the state fire marshal or the city. 
(Prior Code, ch. 112, subd. 6) 
Chapter 12 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Grounds for denial of license, permits, etc.; background checks. 
(a)  A business license, permit or other city approval or authorization of any kind may be granted only to an applicant who: 
(1)  Has complied with all relevant statutory and ordinance requirements; 
(2)  Has paid all fees, charges, taxes, special assessments and other debts or obligations that are due from the applicant and payable to the city regarding any matter; and 
(3)  Is in compliance with all ordinance requirements and attached conditions regarding other city approvals that have been granted to the applicant for any matter. 
(b)  The requirements of subsections (a)(2) and (a)(3) may be waived in the following circumstances: 
(1)  The applicant has provided sufficient safeguards to assure payment of debts or compliance with city requirement within a reasonable time after the city approval; 
(2)  Enforcement of the requirements would result in a significant hardship to the applicant through no fault of the applicant or would result in an otherwise unfair situation; or 
(3)  The applicant is in another political subdivision or public authority created pursuant to state law. 
(c)  A license may be denied to an applicant solely or in part due to a prior conviction of a crime by said applicant only upon a finding that such conviction directly relates to the occupation for which the license is sought, and then only after considering evidence of rehabilitation and such other evidence as may be presented, all in accordance with Minn. Stats. ch. 364; provided, however, that an applicant must show his present fitness to perform the occupation. 
(d)  In this subsection, the term "police department" means the agency providing police services to the city. The following provisions apply to law enforcement access to the state's computerized criminal history information for specified non-criminal purposes of licensing background checks: 
(1)  The police department is authorized, as the exclusive entity within the city, to do a criminal history background investigation on the applicants for the following licenses issued by the city. 
(2)  In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to screen license applicants, the police department is authorized to access data maintained in the state bureau of criminal apprehensions computerized criminal history information system in accordance with BCA policy. 
(3)  Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the police department under the care and custody of the chief of police or his designee. 
(4)  A summary of the results of the computerized criminal history data may be released by the police department to the licensing authority, including the city council, the city clerk, or other city staff involved in the license approval process. 
(5)  Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize the police department by written consent to undertake the investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of Minn. Stats. ch. 13 regarding the collection, maintenance, and use of the information. 
Secs. 12-2-12-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USES 

Sec. 12-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult use includes adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult motion picture rental, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult massage parlors, adult steam room/bathhouse/sauna facilities, adult companionship establishments, adult rap/conversation parlors, adult health/sport clubs, adult cabarets, adult novelty businesses, adult motion picture arcades, adult modeling studios, adult hotels/motels, adult body painting studios, and other premises, enterprises, establishments, businesses or places open to some or all members of the public, at or in which there is an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas which are capable of being seen by members of the public. 
(1)  The term "specified anatomical areas" means: 
a.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
b.  Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(2)  The term "specified sexual activities" means: 
a.  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; 
b.  Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
c.  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; 
d.  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breast; 
e.  Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes, who are engaged in activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other physical restraint of any such persons; 
f.  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or 
g.  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
    Adult use, accessory, means a use, business, or establishment having ten percent or less of its stock in trade or floor area allocated to, or 20 percent or less of its gross receipts derived from, any adult use. 
    Adult use, principal, means a use, business, or establishment having more than ten percent of its stock in trade or floor area allocated to, or more than 20 percent of its gross receipts derived from, any adult use. 
    Adult use body painting studio means an establishment or business that provides the service of applying paint or other substance, whether transparent or non-transparent, to or on the body of a patron when such body is wholly or partially nude in terms of specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult use bookstore means a building or portion of a building used for the barter, rental or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audio tape, videotape, or motion picture film, if such building or portion of a building is not open to the public generally, but only to one or more classes of the public, excluding minors by reason of age, and if a substantial or significant portion of such items is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult use cabaret means a building or portion of a building used for providing dancing or other live entertainment, if such building or portion of a building excludes minors by reason of age and if such dancing or other live entertainment is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult use companionship establishment means a companionship establishment that excludes minors by reason of age and provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion between an employee of the establishment and a customer, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult use conversation/rap parlor means a conversation/rap parlor that excludes minors by reason of age and provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, or discussion, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult use health/sport club means a health/sport club that excludes minors by reason of age, if such club is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult use hotel or motel or adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel from which minors are excluded from patronage by reason of age and wherein material is presented that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexually activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult use massage parlor/health club means a massage parlor or health club that excludes minors by reason of age and provides the services of massage, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult use mini-motion picture theater means a building or portion of a building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material, if such building or portion of a building, as a prevailing practice, excludes minors by reason of age, and if such material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult use modeling studio means an establishment whose major business is the provision, to customers, of figure models who are so provided with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and who engage in specified sexual activities or display specified anatomical areas while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted by such customers. 
    Adult use motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled or operated still or motor picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult use motion picture theater means a building or portion of a building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material, if such building or portion of a building, as a prevailing practice, excludes minors by reason of age and if such material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult use novelty business means a business that has as a principal activity the sale of devices that stimulate human genitals or devices which are designed for sexual stimulation. 
    Adult use sauna means a sauna that excludes minors by reason of age and provides a steam bath or heat-bathing room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided by the sauna is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult use steam room/bathhouse facility means a building or portion of a building used for providing a steam bath or heat-bathing room used for the purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if such building or portion of a building excludes minors by reason of age and if the service provided by the steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Church means a building, structure, or group of buildings or structures that, by design and construction, is primarily intended for the conducting of organized religious services and associated accessory uses. 
    School means a public school, nonpublic school or nonsectarian nonpublic school. 
    Youth facility means a public playground, park, public swimming pool, public library or licensed day care facility. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1328, subd. 2) 
Sec. 12-22. - Findings. 
(a)  The city council finds it necessary to provide for the regulation of businesses or commercial enterprises that operate as massage parlors, saunas, rap parlors, conversation parlors, adult sensitivity groups, adult encounter groups, escort services, dancing services, hostess services, and similar adult-oriented services operating under different names in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and to guard against the inception and transmission of disease. The city council further finds that commercial enterprises such as the type described above, and all other similar establishments whose services include sessions offered to adults, conducted in private by members of the same or the opposite sex, and employing personnel with no specialized training, are susceptible to operation in a manner contravening, subverting, or endangering the morals of the community by being sites of acts of prostitution, illicit sex, and occurrences of violent crimes, thus requiring close inspection, licensing and regulation. 
(b)  The city council finds that control and regulation of commercial enterprises of these types, in view of the abuses often perpetrated, require intensive police and public health efforts by the city and local governmental units contracting with the city to provide such services. As a consequence, the concentrated use of such services in such control detracts from and reduces the level of services available to the rest of the community and thereby diminishes the ability of the city to promote the general health, welfare, morals, and safety of the community. The city council finds that the regulations of this article will protect property values, eliminate or reduce blight, prevent deterioration of neighborhoods, prevent the exodus of residents and businesses from city neighborhoods, and prevent the increase of crime and juvenile delinquency. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1328, subd. 1) 
Sec. 12-23. - Purpose. 
    The nature of adult uses is such that they have been found by the city to have adverse secondary characteristics, particularly when they are accessible to minors and located near residential property or related residential uses such as schools, day care centers, libraries or parks. Furthermore, the nature of adult uses requires that they not be allowed within certain zoning districts, or within minimum distances from each other or residential uses. Special regulation of adult uses is necessary to ensure that the adverse secondary effects do not contribute or enhance criminal activity in the area of such uses nor contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding property and lessening of its value. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1328, subd. 3(A)) 
Sec. 12-24. - General restrictions. 
    Adult uses as defined in this article shall be subject to the following general provisions: 
(1)  Adult uses, either principal or accessory, shall be prohibited from locating in any building that is also utilized for residential purposes. 
(2)  Adult uses, either principal or accessory, shall be prohibited from locating in any place that is also licensed for the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  An adult use that does not qualify as an accessory use pursuant to section 12-26 shall be classified as an adult use, principal. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1328, subd. 3(B)) 
Sec. 12-25. - Adult uses, principal. 
(a)  Every adult use, principal shall be located at least 1,000 feet, as measured in a straight line from the closest point of the property line of the building upon which the adult use, principal is located, from the property line of: 
(1)  A licensed day care center; 
(2)  A public or private educational facility classified as a preschool, or an elementary, junior high or senior high school; 
(3)  A public library; 
(4)  A public park; 
(5)  Another adult use, principal; 
(6)  An on-sale liquor establishment; or 
(7)  Any church or church-related facility or organization. 
(b)  Every adult use, principal, shall be classified as one use. No two adult uses, principal shall be located in the same building or upon the same property, and each use shall be subject to the provisions of this section. 
(c)  Every adult use, principal, shall adhere to the following signing regulations: 
(1)  Sign messages shall be generic, not graphic in nature, and shall only identify the type of business which is being conducted. 
(2)  Sign messages shall not contain material classified as advertising. 
(3)  Signs shall comply with the requirements of size and number for the district in which they are located. 
(d)  Every adult use, principal, shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight for its hours of operation. A differing time schedule may be approved by the city if it can be satisfactorily demonstrated by the operator to the city that extended operational hours: 
(1)  Will not adversely impact or affect uses or activities within 1,000 feet. 
(2)  Will not result in increased policing and related service calls. 
(3)  Are critical to the operation of the business. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1328, subd. 3(C)) 
Sec. 12-26. - Adult uses, accessory. 
(a)  Every adult use, accessory, shall: 
(1)  Comprise no more than ten percent of the floor area of the establishment in which it is located. 
(2)  Comprise no more than 20 percent of the gross receipts of the entire business operation. 
(3)  Not involve or include any activity except the sale or rental of merchandise. 
(b)  Every adult use, accessory, shall be restricted from and prohibit access to minors by the physical separation of such items from areas of general public access: 
(1)  Movie rentals. Display areas shall be restricted from general view and shall be located within a separate room, the access of which is in clear view and under the control of the persons responsible for the operation of the business. 
(2)  Magazines. Publications classified or qualifying as adult uses shall not be physically accessible to minors and shall be covered with a wrapper or other means to prevent display of any material other than the publication title. 
(3)  Other use. Any adult uses, accessory not specifically cited shall comply with the intent of this section, subject to the approval of the city. 
(c)  Every adult use, accessory, shall be prohibited from both internal and external advertising and signing of adult materials and products. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1328, subd. 4) 
Secs. 12-27-12-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Alcoholic beverages, Minn. Stats. ch. 340A; local restrictions on alcohol authorized, Minn. Stats. § 340A.509. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-56. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverage means all liquor, beer, malt liquor, and wine. 
    Applicant means any person making an application for a license under this article. 
    Application means a form furnished by the city clerk and uniformly required to be completed by an applicant as a prerequisite to the consideration by the city of the issuance or renewal of a license. 
    Application fee means the fee that must be paid to the city by the applicant upon submission of the application for a license in such amount as provided in the schedule of fees adopted by the city council from time to time. 
    Beer means any beer, ale, or other beverage made from malt by fermentation that contains not less than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume. 
    Club means any incorporated organization duly organized under the laws of the state for civic, fraternal, social or business purposes, for intellectual improvement or as a congressionally chartered veterans' organization that: 
(1)  Has been existence for at least three years; 
(2)  Has more than 30 members; 
(3)  Has owned or rented a building or space in a building for more than one year that is suitable and adequate for the accommodation of its members; and 
(4)  Is directed by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at a meeting held for that purpose. No member, officer, agent, or employee shall receive any profit from the sale of alcoholic beverages to the members of the club or their guests beyond a reasonable salary or wages fixed and voted on each year by the governing body. 
    Exclusive liquor store means an establishment used exclusively for the sale of the following: 
(1)  Alcoholic beverages; 
(2)  Tobacco products; 
(3)  Ice; 
(4)  Beverages, either liquid or powder, specifically designated for mixing with intoxicating liquor; 
(5)  Soft drinks; 
(6)  Liqueur-filled candies; 
(7)  Food products that contain more than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume; 
(8)  Cork extraction devices; 
(9)  Books and videos on the use of alcoholic beverages; 
(10)  Magazines and other publications published primarily for information and education on alcoholic beverages; 
(11)  Multiple-use bags designed to carry purchased items; 
(12)  Devices designed to ensure safe storage and monitoring of alcohol in the home in order to prevent access by underage drinkers; 
(13)  Home brewing equipment; and 
(14)  Clothing marked with the specific name, brand, or identifying logo of the exclusive liquor store, and bearing no other name, brand, or identifying logo. 
    Guest means a person that is not a member of the licensed club, but is present on the club's licensed premises at the invitation of a member. 
    Intoxicating liquor or liquor means ethyl alcohol and distilled, fermented, spirituous, vinous, and malt beverages containing an excess of 3.2 percent alcohol by weight. 
    License means a document issued by the city to an applicant permitting the applicant to sell such alcoholic beverages as identified therein upon the licensed premises, subject to this article, Minn. Stats. ch. 340A, and such other terms and conditions as may be expressly provided therein. 
    License fee means the fee that must be paid to the city by the applicant upon the issuance or renewal of a license pursuant to this article in such amount as provided in the schedule of fees adopted by the city council from time to time. 
    License year means the year for licenses issued pursuant to this article commencing on July 1 and ending June 30 of each year, except as otherwise provided herein. 
    Licensed premises means the premises described in the approved application as may be modified or otherwise delineated by the city in the license and subject to section 12-102. In the case of an on-sale license issued for a golf course facility, the licensed premises shall include the entire golf course within the city, except for areas where motor vehicles are regularly parked or operated, unless the city provides otherwise in the license. 
    Licensee means any person who holds a valid, current, unexpired license, issued by the city upon an approved application, that has neither been revoked nor suspended. 
    Manufacturer means any person who, by any process of manufacture, fermenting, brewing, distilling, refining, rectifying, blending or by the combination of different materials, prepares or produces alcoholic beverages for sale. 
    Member means any active member of a club in good standing according to the club's rules and regulations and having evidence of current membership upon his person. 
    Off-sale means the retail sale of any alcoholic beverages in original packages for consumption off or away from the licensed premises only. 
    On-sale means the retail sale of any alcoholic beverages by the glass or other container for consumption on the licensed premises only. 
    Package and original package mean any container or receptacle holding alcoholic beverages, which container or receptacle is corked, capped or sealed by a manufacturer or wholesaler. 
    Restaurant means any establishment, other than a hotel, under the control of a single proprietor or manager, where meals are prepared on the premises and served at tables to the general public, which establishment shall have a dedicated dining area with seating capacity for not fewer than 30 customers. 
    Sale means all barters and all manners or means of furnishing alcoholic beverages for consumption, including such furnishing in violation or evasion of the law. 
    Wholesaler means any person engaged in the business of selling alcoholic beverages to retail dealers. 
    Wine means the product made from the normal alcoholic fermentation of grapes, including still wine, sparkling and carbonated wine, wine made from condensed grape must, wine made from other agricultural products than sound, ripe grapes, imitation wine, compounds sold as wine, vermouth, cider, perry and sake, in each instance containing not less than one-half of one percent nor more than 24 percent alcohol by volume for nonindustrial use. Wine does not include distilled spirits as defined by Minn. Stats. § 340A.101, subd. 9. 
(Prior Code, ch. 402, subd. 1; Ord. No. 01-02; Ord. No. 03-02) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Minn. Stats. § 340A.101. 
Sec. 12-57. - Penalties. 
(a)  Licensees. Any licensee found to have violated any provision or regulation of this article, or whose employee shall have violated any provision or regulation of this article, may be charged an administrative fine of $250.00 for a first violation of this article; $500.00 for a second violation at the same licensed premises within a 24-month period; and $1,000.00 for a third or subsequent violation at the same licensed premises within a 24-month period. In addition, after the third violation, the license shall be suspended for not less than seven days. 
(b)  Penalties non-exclusive. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any violation of this article; or from imposing any revocation, suspension, or fine pursuant to section 12-108. 
(Prior Code, ch. 402, subd. 26) 
Sec. 12-58. - Inspections by law enforcement. 
    Any licensed premises shall at all times be open to inspection by any law enforcement officer to determine whether or not the provisions of this article and all other laws are being observed. All persons, as a condition to being issued a license, consent to such inspections without a warrant for searches or seizures. It is unlawful for any licensee or agent or employee of a licensee to hinder or prevent a law enforcement officer from making such inspection. 
(Prior Code, ch. 402, subd. 19) 
Sec. 12-59. - Responsibility of licensee for conduct on licensed premises. 
    Every licensee under this article shall be responsible for the conduct of his business at the licensed premises and shall maintain conditions of sobriety and order therein. 
(Prior Code, ch. 402, subd. 16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Minn. Stats. § 340A.501. 
Sec. 12-60. - Responsibility of licensee for acts of employees. 
    Any sale of alcoholic beverages in or from any licensed premises by any employee or agent of the licensee authorized to make such sale shall be deemed to be the act of the licensee as well as the employee or agent actually making the sale, and every such licensee is subject to all of the penalties provided by law for such sale to the same extent as the employee or agent actually making the sale. 
(Prior Code, ch. 402, subd. 17) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Minn. Stats. § 340A.501. 
Sec. 12-61. - Hours of consumption in licensed premises. 
    It is unlawful for any person to consume, or any licensee to permit consumption of, alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises more than 20 minutes after the hour when a sale thereof can legally be made. 
(Prior Code, ch. 402, subd. 15(A)) 
State Law reference- Hours and days of sale, Minn. Stats. § 340A.504. 
Sec. 12-62. - Presence of public where sales not permitted. 
    It is unlawful for any person other than an on-sale licensee's bona fide employee engaged in the performance of his duties to be on the licensed premises more than 30 minutes after the hour when a sale of alcoholic beverages can legally be made. 
(Prior Code, ch. 402, subd. 15(D)) 
State Law reference- Hours and days of sale, Minn. Stats. § 340A.504. 
Sec. 12-63. - Consumption in public places. 
    No person shall consume alcoholic beverages on a public roadway or in a public place, except as otherwise expressly provided in this article. This section does not prohibit conduct in a motor vehicle that is not prohibited by Minn. Stats. § 169A.35. 
(Prior Code, ch. 402, subd. 15(B)) 
Sec. 12-64. - Permitting removal of containers from licensed premises. 
    It is unlawful for any on-sale licensee to permit any glass, bottle, or other container containing any alcoholic beverages in any quantity to remain upon any table, bar, stool, or other place where customers are served more than 20 minutes after the hour when a sale thereof can legally be made. 
(Prior Code, ch. 402, subd. 15(C)) 
State Law reference- Hours and days of sale, Minn. Stats. § 340A.504. 
Sec. 12-65. - Lewd or indecent conduct prohibited. 
    No lewd or indecent conduct shall be allowed or permitted on the licensed premises. Any licensee providing live entertainment or dancing must conduct that activity entirely within the licensed premises and must obtain such other permits, licenses, or approvals as may be otherwise required by this Code or other applicable law. 
(Prior Code, ch. 402, subd. 15(E)) 
Sec. 12-66. - Beer restrictions and regulations. 
(a)  No gambling or gambling device shall be permitted on any licensed premises except such as are licensed or authorized under Minn. Stats. ch. 349. 
(b)  No licensee shall, during the effective period of a beer license, be the owner or holder of a federal retail liquor dealer's tax stamp for the sale of intoxicating liquor, unless such owner or holder also holds a liquor license from the city; and ownership or holding thereof shall be grounds for immediate revocation without a hearing. 
(c)  Except as authorized by Minn. Stats. § 340A.301, subd. 7, no beer license shall be granted to a wholesaler or manufacturer of beer or to anyone holding a financial interest in such manufacture or wholesaling. 
(d)  No person who has not attained the age of 18 years shall be employed to sell or serve beer in connection with any temporary on-sale beer license. 
(e)  Every beer license shall be issued subject to the provisions of this article and all other applicable provisions of this Code and other laws and regulations relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages and the operation of the licensee's business. 
(f)  No sales of beer under a temporary on-sale beer license shall be made between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any weekday, Monday through Saturday inclusive. Neither shall any sale of beer under a temporary on-sale beer license be made before 10:00 a.m. on Sunday nor after 1:00 a.m. on the following Monday. 
(g)  For the purpose of this section, any person under 21 years of age shall be considered a minor. It is unlawful for any: 
(1)  Licensee or his employee to permit any minor to consume beer on the licensed premises or to permit any minor to loiter or to remain in the room where on-sale beer is being sold or served, unless accompanied by his parent or legal guardian. 
(2)  Person to knowingly induce another to make an illegal sale of beer. 
(3)  Licensee to fail, where doubt could exist, to require adequate proof of age of a person upon licensed premises. Proof of age for purchasing or consuming alcoholic beverages may be established only by one of the following: 
a.  A valid driver's license or identification card issued by the state, another state, or a province of Canada, and including the photograph and date of birth of the licensed person; 
b.  A valid military identification card issued by the United States Department of Defense; 
c.  A valid passport issued by the United States; or 
d.  In the case of a foreign national, a valid passport. 
(4)  Licensee to sell beer on any day or during any hour when such sales are not permitted by law. 
(5)  Licensee to allow consumption of beer on licensed premises on any day when sales of beer are not permitted by law. 
(6)  Person to purchase beer on any day or during any hour when sales of beer are not permitted by law. 
(Prior Code, ch. 402, subd. 22(B)-(D)) 
State Law reference- Hours and days of sale, Minn. Stats. § 340A.504; sales to underage persons, Minn. Stats. § 340A.503; gambling restrictions, Minn. Stats. § 340.410, subd. 5. 
Sec. 12-67. - Liquor restrictions and regulations. 
(a)  Except as authorized by Minn. Stats. § 340A.301, subd. 7, no liquor license shall be granted to a wholesaler or manufacturer of liquor or to anyone holding a financial interest in such manufacturer or wholesaler. 
(b)  No liquor license shall be effective until a permit shall be issued to a licensee under the laws of the United States if such permit is required under such laws or the state. 
(c)  Every liquor license shall be subject to the provisions of this section and all other applicable provisions of this Code and other laws and regulations relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages and the operation of the licensed business. 
(d)  No gambling or gambling device shall be permitted on any licensed premises except such as are licensed or authorized under Minn. Stats. ch. 349. 
(e)  No person who has not attained the age of 18 years of age shall be employed to sell or serve liquor in any licensed establishment. 
(f)  No licensee shall sell, offer for sale, or keep for sale liquor in any original package which has been refilled or partly refilled. 
(g)  No licensee shall display liquor to the public during hours when the sale of liquor is prohibited by this Code or any other law or regulation relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(h)  No more than one liquor license shall be held by any person within the city. For the purpose of this subsection, any person owning a beneficial interest of five percent or more of any licensed establishment shall be considered a licensee. For golf courses partially within the city and partially in another municipality, the license from the other municipality shall not be considered a violation of this subsection. 
(i)  The council may issue the number of liquor licenses authorized by statute or restrict such number from time to time as it may, in its discretion, deem proper. 
(j)  No on-sale sales of liquor shall be made between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any weekday, Monday through Saturday inclusive. On-sale sales of liquor shall not be permitted on Sunday, unless an on-sale Sunday liquor license is held by the licensee. Hours of Sunday sales shall be those set by Minn. Stats. § 340A.504, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(k)  For the purpose of this subsection, any person under the age of 21 years shall be considered a minor. It is unlawful for any: 
(1)  Licensee to sell liquor on any day or during any hour when sales of liquor are not permitted by law. 
(2)  Person to purchase liquor on any day or during any hour when sales of liquor are not permitted by law. 
(3)  Minor to be in or upon licensed premises, except if accompanied by a parent or guardian; and it is unlawful for the licensee to permit such unaccompanied minor to remain upon licensed premises. 
(4)  Licensee to fail, where doubt could exist, to require adequate proof of age of a person upon licensed premises. Proof of age for purchasing or consuming alcoholic beverages may be established only by one of the following: 
a.  A valid driver's license or identification card issued by the state, another state, or a province of Canada, and including the photograph and date of birth of the licensed person; 
b.  A valid military identification card issued by the United States Department of Defense; 
c.  A valid passport issued by the United States; or 
d.  In the case of a foreign national, a valid passport. 
(Prior Code, ch. 402, subd. 23(B)-(D); Ord. No. 03-02; Ord. No. 17-01, § 1, 6-12-2017) 
State Law reference- Hours and days of sale, Minn. Stats. § 340A.504; sales to underage persons, Minn. Stats. § 340A.503; gambling restrictions, Minn. Stats. § 340.410, subd. 5. 
Secs. 12-68-12-92. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Licenses generally, Minn. Stats. § 340A.401 et seq. 

Sec. 12-93. - Beer license required; classes. 
(a)  Required. It is unlawful for any person to sell, keep or offer for sale beer without a license therefor issued by the city. This subsection shall not apply to sales by manufacturers to wholesalers or to sales by wholesalers to persons holding a license to sell alcoholic beverages, nor shall this subsection apply to sales to the public by persons holding a license to sell on-sale or off-sale intoxicating liquors. 
(b)  License types. Licenses to sell beer shall be limited to the following types: 
(1)  Temporary on-sale beer license. A club or charitable, religious, or nonprofit organization, duly incorporated as a nonprofit or religious corporation under the laws of the state, shall qualify for a temporary on-sale beer license, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  An application for a temporary beer license shall state the exact dates and place of proposed temporary sale. 
b.  No applicant shall qualify for a temporary beer license for more than a total of seven days in any calendar year. 
c.  The council may grant a temporary beer license on premises owned or controlled by the city, but at no time shall the council be under any obligation whatsoever to do so. 
d.  Any temporary beer license may be conditioned, qualified, or restricted as the council sees fit. 
(2)  Off-sale beer licenses. Off-sale beer licenses may be issued, which permit the sale of beer at retail, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Beer may be sold in the original package only. 
b.  Beer may be sold for the consumption off the licensed premises only. 
(Prior Code, ch. 402, subd. 22(A); Ord. No. 02-02; Ord. No. 03-09) 
State Law reference- Licenses for sale of beer or malt liquor, Minn. Stats. § 340A.403, 340A.405. 
Sec. 12-94. - Liquor license required; classes. 
(a)  Generally. It is unlawful for any person to sell, keep or offer for sale any intoxicating liquor without a license therefor from the city. This subsection shall not apply: 
(1)  To possession or handling for sale or otherwise of sacramental wine or to any representative of any religious order or for use in connection with a legitimate religious ceremony; 
(2)  To such potable liquors as are prescribed by licensed physicians and dentists for therapeutic purposes; 
(3)  To industrial alcohol and its compounds not prepared or used for beverage purposes; or 
(4)  Sales by manufacturers to wholesalers duly licensed as such by the state and to sales by wholesalers to persons holding on-sale or off-sale licenses for the sale of liquor issued by the city. 
(b)  License types. Licenses to sell intoxicating liquor shall be limited to the following types: 
(1)  On-sale liquor license. On-sale liquor licenses shall be issued only to restaurants as defined in this article. 
(2)  Off-sale liquor license. These licenses may be issued only to exclusive liquor stores as defined in this article. 
(3)  On-sale Sunday liquor license. These licenses may be issued only to persons who hold a current on-sale liquor license otherwise issued by the city. 
(4)  On-sale special event license. 
a.  The council may authorize any holder of an on-sale liquor license issued by the city or by an adjacent municipality to sell liquor at any convention, banquet, conference, meeting, or social affair conducted on the premises of any sports, convention, or cultural facility owned by the city or instrumentality thereof located within the city. The licensee must be engaged to sell liquor at such an event by the person or organization permitted to use the public facility and may sell liquor only to persons attending the event. Sales of liquor may be limited to designated areas of the public facility. All such sales shall be subject to all laws relating thereto. 
b.  The council may authorize a holder of a retail on-sale intoxicating liquor license issued by the city to dispense intoxicating liquor off premises at a community festival held within the city. The authorization shall specify the area in which the intoxicating liquor must be dispensed and consumed, and shall not be issued unless the licensee demonstrates that it has liability insurance, as prescribed by this article, to cover the event. 
(Prior Code, ch. 402, subd. 23(A)) 
State Law reference- Liquor licenses, Minn. Stats. § 340A.404 et seq. 
Sec. 12-95. - Applications. 
(a)  Generally. All applications shall be made available at the office of the city clerk. Information required in an application may vary depending upon the type of business organization making application and whether the application is for the original issuance of a license or a license renewal. Prior to acceptance of the application by the city clerk, all questions asked or information required by the application shall be answered and fully provided and the application fee shall be remitted to the city clerk by the applicant. The application for a license shall provide the following information: 
(1)  For all applicants: 
a.  Whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation, partnership, or other form of organization. 
b.  The type of license the applicant seeks. 
c.  The legal description of the premises to be licensed, together with a map of the area showing dimensions, location of buildings, street access, parking facilities, and the locations of the nearest place of worship and school. 
d.  The street number where the sale of alcoholic beverages is to be conducted and the rooms where alcoholic beverages are to be sold or consumed. The applicant shall submit a floor plan of the dining rooms that shall be open to the public that shows dimensions and indicates the number of persons intended to be served in each of the rooms. 
e.  The names and addresses of all persons, other than the applicant, who have any ownership, in whole or in part, of the business to be licensed, including buildings, fixtures, furniture, and stock in trade; the nature of such ownership; the amount thereof; and terms for payment or other reimbursement. Those with an ownership shall include, but not be limited to, any lessees, lessors, mortgagees, mortgagors, lenders, lien holders, trustees, trustors and persons who have cosigned notes or otherwise loaned, pledged, or extended security for any indebtedness of the applicant. 
f.  Whether all real estate and personal property taxes that are due and payable for the premises to be licensed have been paid, and if not paid, the years and amounts that are unpaid. 
g.  The name and street address of the business, if it is to be conducted under a designation, name, or style other than the name of the applicant, and a certified copy of the certificate as required by Minn. Stats. § 333.02. 
h.  Such other information as the city may request. In the case of an application for a golf course where a portion of the course is within another municipality, a license from that municipality shall be required. 
(2)  If the applicant is a natural person: 
a.  The name, place and date of birth, and street residence address of applicant. 
b.  Whether the applicant has ever used or been known by a name other than the applicant's given name, and if so, what was such name or names and information concerning dates and places where used. 
c.  Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States or a resident alien. 
d.  Whether the applicant is married or single. 
e.  Whether the applicant is a registered voter and, if so, where. 
f.  Street addresses at which the applicant has lived during the preceding ten years. 
g.  The type, name, and location of every business or occupation the applicant has been engaged in during the preceding ten years. 
h.  Names and addresses of the applicant's employers and partners, if any, for the preceding ten years. 
i.  Whether the applicant, or a parent, brother, sister, or child of the applicant, has ever been convicted of any felony, crime, or violation of any ordinance other than traffic. If so, the applicant shall furnish information as to the time and place of such conviction and the related offense. 
j.  Whether the applicant, or a parent, brother, sister or child of the applicant, has ever been engaged in the operation of a saloon, hotel, restaurant, cafe, tavern or other business that served alcoholic beverages. If so, the applicant shall furnish information as to the time, place and length of time of the involvement in such establishment. 
k.  Whether the applicant has ever been in military service. If so, the applicant shall, upon request, provide evidence of all discharges. 
l.  The name, address and business address of each individual who is engaged in the state in the business of selling, manufacturing or distributing alcoholic beverages and who is nearer of kin to the applicant than second cousin, whether of whole or half blood, computed by the rules of civil law, or who is a brother-in-law or sister-in-law of the applicant. 
(3)  If the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of all general and limited partners and all information concerning each general partner as is required in subsection (a)(2) of this section. The managing partners shall be designated, and the interest of each general and limited partner in the business shall be disclosed. A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be submitted with the application, and if the partnership is required to file a certificate as to a trade name under Minn. Stats. § 333.02, a certified copy of such certificate shall be submitted. The license shall be issued in the name of the partnership. 
(4)  If the applicant is a corporation or other organization: 
a.  The name of the organization and the state of organization. 
b.  A true copy of the certificate of incorporation or, if a foreign corporation, a certificate of authority as described in Minn. Stats. § 303.03. 
c.  The name of the general manager, food/beverage manager, four principal corporate officers, proprietor and other persons in charge of the premises to be licensed and all the information about said persons as is required in subsection (a)(2) of this section. 
d.  A list of all persons who, together with their spouse, parent, brother, sister, or child, own or control an interest as defined herein in the corporation or organization to be licensed, together with their addresses and all the information regarding such persons as is required in subsection (a)(2) of this section. 
(5)  If the applicant is a club: 
a.  The name of the club, and, where appropriate, the name of the establishment serving the club. 
b.  The date that the club was first incorporated, and, where appropriate, the date that the establishment serving the club was incorporated or otherwise established. True copies of the articles of incorporation, bylaws, or other similar governing documents shall be submitted with the application. 
c.  The date that the club was first organized and the place of such organization. 
d.  A sworn statement that the club has been in existence for at least three years. The statement shall be made by a person who has personal knowledge of the facts stated therein. In the event that no person can make such a statement, satisfactory documentary proof may be submitted in support of such facts. 
e.  The number of members of the club. 
f.  The name of the general manager, proprietor, food/beverage manager, corporate officers, and other information regarding such persons as is required in subsection (a)(2) of this section. 
(b)  False statements. It is unlawful for any applicant to intentionally make a false statement or omission upon any application. Any false statement in such application or any willful omission to state any information called for on such application shall, upon discovery of such falsehood or omission, result in an automatic denial of the application or, if a license has already issued, shall render any such license void and of no effect. 
(c)  Application fee. At the time of submitting an application, the applicant shall pay a non-refundable application fee to cover the costs of the city in processing the application and investigating the facts contained therein. 
(d)  Renewal. Applications for renewal of all licenses under this division shall be made at least 60 days prior to the date of expiration of the current license and shall contain such information as is required by the city clerk. This time requirement may be waived by the council for good and sufficient cause. 
(Prior Code, ch. 402, subds. 2-4, 10; Ord. No. 03-02) 
Sec. 12-96. - Persons disqualified. 
(a)  No retail license may be issued to: 
(1)  A person under 21 years of age; 
(2)  A person who has had an intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor license revoked within five years of the license application, or to any person who, at the time of the violation, owns any interest, whether as a holder of more than five percent of the capital stock of a corporation licensee, as a partner or otherwise, in the premises or in the business conducted thereon, or to a corporation, partnership, association, enterprise, business or firm in which any such person is in any manner interested; 
(3)  A person not of good moral character and repute; or 
(4)  A person who has a direct or indirect interest in a manufacturer, brewer, or wholesaler. 
(b)  In addition, no new retail license shall be issued to, and there shall be no license renewal of the license of, a person who, within five years of the license application, has been convicted of a felony or a willful violation of a federal or state law or local ordinance governing the manufacture, sale, distribution, or possession for sale or distribution of an alcoholic beverage. The city council o may require that fingerprints be taken and forwarded to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for purposes of a criminal history check. 
(Prior Code, ch. 402, subd. 9) 
State Law reference- General eligibility requirements for alcoholic beverage licenses, Minn. Stats. § 340A.402. 
Sec. 12-97. - Manager or resident agent. 
(a)  Before a license is issued under this division to an individual who is a nonresident of the city, or more than one individual whether or not they are residents of the city, or to a corporation, partnership, or association, the applicant or applicants shall appoint in writing a natural person who is its manager or agent. Such manager or agent shall, by the terms of his written consent: 
(1)  Take full responsibility for the sale of any alcoholic beverages at the licensed premises; and 
(2)  Serve as agent for service of notices and other processes relating to the license. 
(b)  Such manager or agent must be a person who, by reason of age, character, reputation, and other attributes, could qualify individually as a licensee. If such manager or agent ceases to act in such capacity for the licensee without appointment of a successor, the license shall be subject to revocation or suspension. 
(Prior Code, ch. 402, subd. 8) 
Sec. 12-98. - Delinquent taxes and charges. 
    No license shall be issued under this division for any premises upon which property taxes, assessments, or installments thereof or other financial claims of the city (or in the case of a golf course partially in another municipality, the foregoing obligations to that municipality) are owed by the applicant and are delinquent and unpaid. For the purpose of this section, the term "applicant" includes persons and related persons owning, directly or indirectly, at least a 50-percent interest in the proposed license premises or in the entity making the application. 
(Prior Code, ch. 402, subd. 11; Ord. No. 03-02) 
Sec. 12-99. - Issuance. 
(a)  Public hearing. The city council shall conduct a hearing on the application within a reasonable period following receipt by the city clerk of a complete and accurate application. At least ten days in advance of the city council hearing on an application, the city clerk shall cause notice of the hearing to be published in the official newspaper of the city, setting forth the day, time, and place of the hearing; the name of the applicant; the licensed premises where the sale of alcoholic beverages is to be conducted; and the type of license which is sought. At the hearing, opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or against the granting of the license. Additional hearings on the application may be held if the city council deems additional hearings necessary. After the hearing or hearings on the Application, the city council may, in its discretion, grant or deny the application. 
(b)  Issuance; license fee. The council may approve the issuance of a license pursuant to this division for the period of the remainder of the then-current license year or for the entire ensuing license year. Upon such approval, the city clerk shall prepare the license in the form prescribed by the council. Prior to issuing a license, the applicant shall pay to the city clerk the necessary license fee. For licenses that are to become effective other than on the first day of the license year, the fee to be paid as a condition to issuance shall be a pro rata share of the annual license fee. Licenses shall be valid only at one location and on the licensed premises therein described. 
(Prior Code, ch. 402, subd. 5(A),(B)) 
Sec. 12-100. - Fixing license and application fees. 
    All fees provided for in this article, including application fees and license fees, shall be fixed and determined by resolution of the council. Such fees may, from time to time, be amended by the council by resolution. A copy of the resolution shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and shall be available for inspection during regular business hours of the city. 
(Prior Code, ch. 402, subd. 20) 
State Law reference- Retail license fees, Minn. Stats. § 340A.408. 
Sec. 12-101. - Denial or termination. 
    The council shall refuse to issue or renew a license upon a finding that it is not in the public interest to issue or renew the license, or if the person to whom the license is to be issued or renewed if or the location for which the license is to be issued or renewed is ineligible for such license under state law. Licenses shall terminate only by expiration or revocation. 
(Prior Code, ch. 402, subd. 5(E)) 
Sec. 12-102. - Licensed premises. 
    A license issued under the provisions of this division shall be valid only for the licensed premises specified therein, and all transactions relating to a sale of alcoholic beverages under such license must take place within the area specified as the licensed premises. No person shall consume alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises that are not sold by the licensee of the premises. Prior to issuance or renewal of a license, the licensed premises and the property on which the premises is situated shall be inspected and found to be in conformity with the requirements of this Code, the state building code, and the state fire code. In the case of a golf course partially within another municipality, with both a city license and a license issued by that municipality, alcoholic beverages may be sold in the other municipality and consumed in the city so long as the consumption and sale comply with both licenses. 
(Prior Code, ch. 402, subd. 14; Ord. No. 03-02) 
State Law reference- Retail alcoholic beverage license to be issued only for a space that is compact and contiguous, Minn. Stats. § 340A.410, subd. 7. 
Sec. 12-103. - Financial responsibility of licensees. 
(a)  Proof. No beer or liquor license shall be issued, maintained, or renewed unless and until the applicant has provided proof of financial responsibility with regard to liability imposed by Minn. Stats. § 340A.801 by filing with the city: 
(1)  A certificate that there is in effect an insurance policy issued by an insurer required to be licensed under Minn. Stats. § 60A.07, subd. 4, or by an insurer recognized as an eligible surplus lines carrier pursuant to Minn. Stats. § 60A.206 or pool providing minimum coverages of: 
a.  $100,000.00 because of bodily injury to any one person in any one occurrence, and $300,000.00 because of bodily injury to two or more persons in any one occurrence, and in the amount of $100,000.00 because of injury to or destruction of property of others in any one occurrence; and 
b.  $100,000.00 for loss of means of support of any one person in any one occurrence, and, subject to the limit of one person, $300,000.00 for loss of means of support of two or more persons in any one occurrence (an annual aggregate policy limit for dram shop liability of not less than $300,000.00 per policy may be included in the policy provision); or 
(2)  A bond of a surety company with minimum coverages as provided in subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(b)  City named as additional insured. The insurer or surety shall name the city as an additional insured or covered party under the insurance policy or bonds provided in accordance with this section. 
(c)  Notice of cancellation. A liability insurance policy required by this section must provide that it may not be canceled for: 
(1)  Any cause, except for nonpayment of premium, by either the insured or the insurer unless the canceling party has first given 60 days' notice in writing to the insured of intent to cancel the policy; and 
(2)  Nonpayment of premium unless the canceling party has first given ten days' notice in writing to the insured of intent to cancel the policy. 
In the event of a policy cancellation, the insurer will send notice to the city clerk at the same time that a cancellation request is received from or a notice is sent to the insured. 
(d)  Renewal. Every application for the issuance or renewal of a license must include a copy of each summons received by the applicant under Minn. Stats. § 340A.802 during the preceding year. 
(e)  Documents submitted to commissioner. All proofs of financial responsibility and exemption affidavits filed with the city under this section will be submitted by the city to the state commissioner of public safety. 
(f)  Exemptions. Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to licenses to be issued to licensees who by affidavit establish that: 
(1)  They are on-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor licensees with sales of less than $25,000.00 of 3.2 percent malt liquor for the preceding year; 
(2)  They are off-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor licensees with sales of less than $50,000.00 of 3.2 percent malt liquor for the preceding year; 
(3)  They are holders of on-sale wine licenses with sales of less than $25,000.00 for wine for the preceding year; or 
(4)  They are holders of temporary wine licenses issued under law. 
(Prior Code, ch. 402, subd. 21) 
State Law reference- Insurance requirements, Minn. Stats. § 340A.409. 
Sec. 12-104. - Special conditions. 
    Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the council may, upon a finding of the necessity therefor, place such special conditions and restrictions, in addition to those stated in this division, upon any license as it, in its discretion, may deem reasonable and justified. 
(Prior Code, ch. 402, subd. 13) 
Sec. 12-105. - Transfer. 
    No license may be sold, assigned, or otherwise transferred to another person or location without the written approval of the council. The council shall not approve the transfer upon a finding that the transfer is not in the public interest or if the person to whom the transfer is to be made or the location to which the license is to be transferred is ineligible for such license under state law. 
(Prior Code, ch. 402, subd. 5(D)) 
Sec. 12-106. - Duplicate licenses. 
    Duplicates of all original licenses under this division may be issued by the city clerk without action by the council upon licensee's sworn affidavit that the original has been lost and upon payment of a fee, as provided in the schedule of city fees adopted by the city council from time to time. All duplicate licenses shall be clearly marked "DUPLICATE." 
(Prior Code, ch. 402, subd. 6) 
Sec. 12-107. - Posting. 
    All licensees shall conspicuously post their licenses in the premises for which they are issued. 
(Prior Code, ch. 402, subd. 7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Minn. Stats. § 340A.410, subd. 4. 
Sec. 12-108. - Revocation, suspension, or other discipline of licensee. 
(a)  Upon a finding that the licensee has: 
(1)  Sold alcoholic beverages to another retail licensee for the purpose of resale; 
(2)  Purchased alcoholic beverages from another retail licensee for the purpose of resale; 
(3)  Conducted or permitted the conduct of gambling on the licensed premises in violation of the law; 
(4)  Failed to remove or dispose of alcoholic beverages when ordered by the commissioner to do so under Minn. Stats. § 340A.508, subd. 3; or 
(5)  Failed to comply with an applicable statute, rule, or ordinance relating to alcoholic beverages, the council may: 
a.  Suspend the license for a period not to exceed 60 days; 
b.  Revoke the license; 
c.  Impose a civil fine on the licensee not to exceed $2,000.00 for each violation; or 
d.  Impose any combination of the foregoing sanctions. 
(b)  No suspension, fine, or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing before the council, a committee of the council, or a hearing examiner, as may be determined by the council in an action calling the hearing. Such hearing shall be called by the council upon written notice to the licensee, served in person or by certified mail not less than ten nor more than 30 days prior to the hearing date, stating the time, place, and purpose thereof. The hearing shall comply with Minn. Stats. §§ 14.57-14.69. This section does not require the city to conduct the hearing before an employee of the state office of administrative hearings. 
(c)  The council shall revoke a license upon conviction of any licensee or agent or employee of a licensee for willfully violating any law relating to the sale or possession of alcoholic beverages. If it shall be made to appear at the hearing thereon that such violation was not willful, the council may order suspension or a fine not to exceed $2,000.00, provided that revocation shall be ordered upon the third such violation or offense. The following shall also be grounds for such actions by the city: 
(1)  That the licensee suffered or permitted illegal acts upon the licensed premises unrelated to the sale of alcoholic beverages; 
(2)  That the licensee had knowledge of such illegal acts upon the licensed premises, but failed to report the same to police; 
(3)  That the licensee failed or refused to cooperate fully with police in investigating such alleged illegal acts upon licensed premises; or 
(4)  That the licensee failed to maintain financial responsibility required by this article. 
(Prior Code, ch. 402, subd. 5(F)) 
State Law reference- License revocation or suspension, Minn. Stats. § 340A.415. 
Secs. 12-109-12-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BINGO AND OTHER LAWFUL GAMBLING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Lawful gambling, Minn. Stats. ch. 349; local regulation of lawful gambling, Minn. Stats. § 349.213. 

Sec. 12-130. - Bingo. 
(a)  State regulations adopted. The regulatory provisions of Minn. Stats. §§ 349.11-349.23, which regulate the conduct of bingo games in the state, are hereby adopted by the city. 
(b)  Licenses. An organization wishing to conduct a game of bingo in the city must obtain a license. All licenses shall be obtained from the city clerk only after approval by the city council. Application for licenses shall be filed with the clerk on the forms furnished by the state. The fee for the license shall be annually established by the city council. 
(c)  Review of application. No license shall be issued until the application has been referred to the building inspector, the fire department and the police department for review. 
(d)  Suspension or revocation of license. The city council shall have the power to suspend or revoke the license issued to any organization for violations of any of the regulations or terms of this article. The organization shall be given 20 days' notice and shall be granted an opportunity to be heard before such action is taken. 
(e)  License expiration. All licenses shall expire on December 31 following the date of issuance, unless sooner revoked or suspended for violation of the terms of this article. If a license granted hereunder is not renewed previous to its expiration, then all rights granted by such license shall cease. 
(f)  Exemption. An organization qualifying for exemption pursuant to Minn. Stats. § 349.19 shall apply directly to the city council for such exemption. The city council may, by motion, grant an organization so qualifying permission to conduct the game of bingo. 
(Prior Code, ch. 403; Ord. No. 04-03) 
Sec. 12-131. - Gambling licenses. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Private gambling includes pull-tabs and other games of chance where entries are sold, the game may be played, and prize payments are made, all on the same premises. Private gambling does not include games or contests administered on a state-wide basis, such as state lotteries, nor does it include bingo, which is licensed under section 12-130. 
    Trade area consists of the City of Oak Grove and the Cities of Andover, Anoka, Ham Lake, East Bethel, Bethel, St. Francis, and Nowthen. 
    Temporary gambling license means a license issued pursuant to an application for exempt status, to last for a period of less than six days. 
(b)  State regulations adopted. The regulatory provisions of Minn. Stats. §§ 349.11-349.23 are hereby adopted in the city, with the addition of the provisions of this article. Where the provisions of this article differ from the state statute, the provisions of this article shall control. 
(c)  Local authority. The state gambling control board licenses gambling operations within the state. As part of this licensing, the gambling control board requests that the city either approve or deny applications for any gambling operation located within the city. The city adopts the following measures to guide city approval of private gambling operations, in addition to the requirements imposed by state law: 
(1)  It is a violation of this section to gamble or to operate gambling operations without city approval of a state gambling license. 
(2)  By resolution, the city may restrict the number or frequency of temporary gambling license approvals if the city finds that events held with temporary gambling licenses are detracting from the general welfare of the city or creating a nuisance. A maximum of three non-temporary gambling license approvals shall be issued to organizations in any year, to allow gambling at a maximum of five total locations for the year. 
(3)  A licensed organization conducting private gambling within the jurisdiction of the city shall expend all of its expenditures for lawful purposes on local purposes conducted or located within the trade area of the city. 
(4)  A licensed organization conducting private gambling within the jurisdiction of the city shall contribute ten percent of its net profits derived from lawful gambling conducted at premises within the city's jurisdiction to a fund administered and regulated by the city without cost to the fund, for disbursement by the city for lawful purposes. 
(Prior Code, ch. 405; Ord. No. 99-1; Ord. No. 18-09, § 1, 10-8-2018) 
Secs. 12-132-12-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FIELD PARTIES AND LARGE ASSEMBLIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-161. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Field party is defined as a gathering or projected gathering of more than 50 but less than 3,500 people, held partially or completely out of doors, on public or private property, and at which intoxicating beverages, beer or other intoxicating chemicals are used or dispensed by any participant, whether or not a fee is collected from the participant. For the purposes of this article, field parties do not include family gatherings or weddings held on the premises of a private residence. 
(Prior Code, ch. 404, subd. 1; Ord. No. 98-05) 
Secs. 12-162-12-188. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 12-189. - Required; term. 
(a)  No person shall permit, maintain, promote, conduct, advertise, participate in, be present at, act as entrepreneur, undertake, organize, manage, or sell or give tickets to a field party held in any area of the city, whether on public or private property, unless a license to hold the field party has first been issued by the city clerk. Application for a license must be made at least 45 days in advance of the date that the field party will be held. A police officer, upon discovering a field party that is unlicensed or upon declaring any license to be void, shall order the persons present to disperse, and it shall be unlawful for any person to continue to be present at the field party. 
(b)  No field party license shall be valid for more than a 48-hour period, beginning with the applicant's start time as stated on the permit application. 
(Prior Code, ch. 404, subd. 2; Ord. No. 98-05) 
Sec. 12-190. - Application; fee. 
(a)  Forms. Application shall be made to the city clerk on forms to be supplied by the city and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  The precise location of the proposed field party, including the north, south, east, and west boundaries, the date and specific times during which the field party will be in progress, the dates and times of expected musical or other performances that will be a source of significant noise, the expected number of guests, and the maximum number of tickets to be printed, if the event uses tickets. 
(3)  A written acknowledgment of consent to hold a field party by the owner of the property upon which the field party and any parking by participants of the field party will occur. 
(4)  A statement as to whether or not intoxicating beverages, beer or other intoxicating chemicals will be furnished, and if so, whether a fee of any kind will be sought or collected, or whether voluntary contributions will be sought or collected. If a fee of any kind will be sought or collected or if voluntary contributions will be sought or collected, the applicant shall comply with the provisions of section 12-94. Regardless of whether or not a fee will be sought or collected, the applicant shall furnish a statement detailing the persons by name or specific class of persons authorized to sell or distribute intoxicating beverages, beer, or other intoxicating chemicals. 
(5)  Unless waived or modified by the city council for good cause, a written statement demonstrating that the applicant has adequate measures to protect the health and safety of participants, including, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  The means by which the field party will be illuminated. 
b.  The means by which emergency vehicles may be summoned, the means of access of emergency vehicles to the field party site, and the provisions for on-site first aid to be present at the field party site. 
c.  Adequate space for the number of expected guests and provision for both space and, if the city council finds that significant aesthetic or environmental damage may occur if parking is allowed off paved surfaces, sufficient paved surface to park the vehicles of expected guests. Sufficient paved surface shall be deemed to exist if there is one parking space for every four persons, calculated using the maximum expected attendees. 
d.  Proof that the applicant possesses a certificate of liability insurance coverage in at least the sum of $100,000.00 for injury to any one person, $300,000.00 for injury to more than one person, and $25,000.00 for property damage, naming the city as an additional insured party during the license period. 
e.  The means by which potable water, meeting all federal and state requirements for sanitary quality and at the rate of at least one gallon per person per day, will be made available for expected attendees. 
f.  The means by which enclosed toilets, separate for men and women, conveniently located throughout the site and sufficient to provide facilities, in accord with state board of health regulations, for the maximum number of attendees expected will be made available, including plans for keeping the toilets clean, operable, and free of refuse. 
g.  The means by which state-licensed private security officers and/or public police service will be provided for the maximum numbers of attendees on and near the site to adequately control the attendees as well as traffic, property damage, and other disruptions to public health and safety. 
h.  A statement of the last ten events, or events in the last three years held, put on, or promoted by the applicant, including copies of the applicable license or permit under which the events were conducted, and the mailing address and telephone number of the city, municipality, county, town, or other government unit having jurisdiction over the event site. 
i.  The means by which solid waste will be collected and disposed of from the site, sufficient to dispose of at least 2.5 pounds of solid waste per person per day. 
j.  The means by which the site will be enclosed to prevent people in excess of the maximum number of attendees from gaining access to the grounds, such as a wall or fence of sufficient size and strength. 
k.  A statement that all public accommodations on the site, including food, drinking water, and restroom facilities, are accessible, to the extent required by state and federal law for such accommodations, to persons with disabilities. 
(b)  Fees. All applications for field party licenses shall be accompanied by a fee that shall be determined by the city council. In addition to the license fee, the council may fix an investigation fee commensurate with the costs of an investigation sufficient to ensure the validity of the application statements and the adequacy of measures to protect public health and safety. 
(Prior Code, ch. 404, subd. 3; Ord. No. 98-05) 
Sec. 12-191. - Issuance. 
(a)  Issuance criteria. The city clerk shall have the authority to issue or deny licenses for field parties projected to have less than 500 attendees, but may refer the decision directly to the city council. The city clerk shall issue the license if all of the provisions of this section have been satisfied. The council shall issue all licenses for field parties projected to have 500 or more attendees, provided that, for all field parties regardless of size, with regard to section 12-190(a)(5), the measures below shall be deemed insufficient measures to protect the safety of participants: 
(1)  Illumination primarily from motor vehicle headlights, ground fires, or other light sources located less than ten feet above ground; 
(2)  The lack of a reliable communication device located within 1,000 feet of the proposed site. A stationary conventional (using wires) telephone is deemed a reliable communication device. A common citizen's band radio shall not be deemed a reliable communication device. A cellular or other wireless telephone, including a car phone, shall not be deemed a reliable communication device. Other means of communication will be deemed reliable communication devices by decision, after consideration, of the council. 
(3)  The lack of an inclement weather monitoring and storm signaling system capable of alerting attendees of weather hazards in sufficient time for attendees to disperse or seek shelter, and sufficient for the applicant to render safe equipment which may constitute a hazard in inclement weather. 
(4)  The existence of the site at a location greater than 1,000 feet from any traveled public road, or the existence of access to a traveled public road where the access is not marked by reflectorized markings, or not passable by a four-wheeled, two-wheel drive emergency motor vehicle, or not of sufficient width to accommodate the passage of emergency vehicles. 
And further provided that, for all field parties regardless of size, reasonable investigation into the prior events held, put on, or promoted by the applicant provide a basis for believing that the applicant's facility and security measures will be reasonably adequate to provide access to persons with disabilities, and to prevent personal injury, property or environmental damage, breaches of the peace, and event-related crime. 
(b)  Review by city council. If the clerk denies a license, or, for field parties projected to have 500 or more attendees, refers the decision directly to the city council, the applicant shall have the right to have the application reviewed by the city council by placement on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting. 
(c)  Report to sheriff. If a license is issued, a copy thereof shall be forwarded to the office of the county sheriff by the city. 
(d)  Conditions of license. All licenses issued pursuant to this article shall clearly state the dates and times during which the license is valid, and any peace officer shall have the right to order the participants to disperse should the activity extend beyond the time limitation set out on the face of the license. Any license issued shall be subject to the following conditions, which shall be printed on the face of the license, and shall read as follows: 
This license shall be rendered void if any of the following conditions are found to exist at the field party site: a. The commission of the crime of assault, disorderly conduct, or breach of the peace by any participant on or near the field party site. b. The consumption or possession, on or near the field party site, of any intoxicating beverage or beer by any person prohibited from engaging in said consumption or possession by Minn. Stats. ch. 340A. c. The sale or distribution of intoxicating beverages or beer by any person or in any manner inconsistent with the applicant's application for a field party license statement pursuant to section 12-190(a)(4). d. The failure of an applicant to be physically present within the boundaries of the field party site during the entire duration of the field party. e. The maintenance of any nuisance or other violation under any city ordinance. f. The consumption or possession, on or near the field party site, by a field party attendee, of any intoxicant, including, but not limited to, prescription or non-prescription medications used in a manner inconsistent with their labeling, inhalants, hallucinogens, or narcotics, in violation of Minnesota or federal law. Upon observing the violation of any of the conditions of a license, a peace officer shall declare the license to be void, and shall order the participants to disperse.  
(Prior Code, ch. 404, subd. 4; Ord. No. 98-05) 
Secs. 12-192-12-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FIREWORKS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Fireworks, Minn. Stats. § 624.40 et seq. 

Sec. 12-221. - Definition. 
    The term "fireworks" is defined by Minn. Stats. § 624.20, a copy of which is available at city hall. 
(Prior Code, ch. 407, subd. 3; Ord. No. 06-04) 
Sec. 12-222. - State regulations adopted. 
    Minn. Stats. §§ 624.20-624.25, which regulate the sale, possession and use of fireworks in Minnesota, are hereby adopted. 
(Prior Code, ch. 407, subd. 2; Ord. No. 06-04) 
Sec. 12-223. - License required for sale. 
(a)  No person shall sell any fireworks without first obtaining a license. All licenses shall be obtained from the city clerk only after approval from the fire chief or his designee with final approval by city council. Final approval or denial shall be given within 30 days upon finding the application is complete. The fee for the license shall be annually established by the city council, which is limited by Minn. Stats. § 624.20. 
(b)  Prior to issuing the fireworks sale license, the fire chief and/or his designee will inspect the proposed location for selling fireworks. An application for a fireworks sale license must include: 
(1)  A letter from the property owner granting permission to the applicant to sell and/or store fireworks on the property; 
(2)  A floor plan designating the area where the fireworks will be sold and/or stored; 
(3)  A list of the fireworks that will be sold. (The list must include the name, weight, quantity and material safety data sheets); 
(4)  A certificate of liability insurance coverage; 
(5)  Verification that the display of fireworks for permanent or temporary retail sale complies with National Fire Protection Association Standard 1124 as referenced in Minn. Stats. § 624.20, a copy of which is available at city hall; and 
(6)  Evidence of compliance with any other necessary license or permit regulations, including statutory requirements under Minn. Stats. §§ 624.20-624.25. 
(Prior Code, ch. 407, subd. 4; Ord. No. 06-01; Ord. No. 06-04) 
Sec. 12-224. - Permit expiration. 
    All licenses shall expire on December 31 following the date of issuance, unless sooner revoked or suspended for violation of the terms of this article. 
(Prior Code, ch. 407, subds. 4, 7; Ord. No. 06-01; Ord. No. 06-04) 
Sec. 12-225. - Requirements for fireworks display license. 
    An application for a fireworks display permit must include: 
(1)  A letter from the property owner granting permission to the applicant to display fireworks on the property; 
(2)  A certificate of liability insurance coverage meeting the requirements of section 2-110; 
(3)  An application narrative verifying and illustrating compliance with Minn. Stats. § 624.22, a copy of which is available at city hall; and 
(4)  Compliance with any other necessary license or permit regulations, including statutory requirements under Minn. Stats. §§ 624.20-624.25. 
(Prior Code, ch. 407, subd. 6; Ord. No. 06-04) 
Secs. 12-226-12-243. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SOLID WASTE COLLECTORS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Local licensing of solid waste collectors, Minn. Stats. § 115A.93; solid waste collection required, Minn. Stats. § 115.941. 

Sec. 12-244. - Garbage, recyclables and refuse; definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Compost means yard waste and other biodegradable matter that, under proper conditions, will be converted to a soil-like substance used as a soil. 
    Enforcement officials means the city administrator, or his authorized representatives, responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
    Garbage means animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food. 
    Recyclable includes newsprint, corrugated cardboard and office paper, plastics, tin cans, aluminum, used motor oil, glass and other metal goods and other items identified as reusable or re-processable materials. 
    Refuse includes garbage and rubbish. 
    Rubbish means all inorganic solid wastes, such as ashes and other non-reusable waste. 
    Yard waste means the garden waste, leaves, lawn cuttings, weeds, and prunings generated at residential, commercial and industrial properties. 
(Prior Code, ch. 607, subd. 2) 
Sec. 12-245. - Refuse collectors. 
(a)  License required. It is unlawful to collect, haul or convey refuse from any premises in the city, other than from one's own residence, without a valid license therefor. Each such vehicle so used, except for personal disposal, must also be licensed for such activity. 
(b)  Application for license. The applicant for a collector's license or renewal of such license shall provide the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner of the collection service who is to be the licensee; 
(2)  A schedule of services to be made to the customer, including, but not limited to, proposed days of collection and the areas of the city within which those days of collection shall occur; 
(3)  A schedule of varying rates based on the volume or weight of the refuse collected that shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk, indicating the charge for each size container; or other schedule of charges to be applied by the licensee (The city may designate the number of categories in regard to the size of the containers); 
(4)  The frequency of service to be rendered; 
(5)  The place to which the refuse is to be hauled; 
(6)  Proof of insurance as required in subsection (d) of this section; 
(7)  Any other information the city deems necessary; and 
(8)  License fee according to the fee schedule adopted by the city council. 
(c)  Processing application. Applications for a license hereunder shall be submitted to the city for review and consideration. If the council is satisfied that the public need, convenience and good order will be served thereby, it may grant a license to such applicant. 
(d)  Insurance requirements. No license shall be issued until the applicant files with the city a current copy of the policy of public liability insurance that complies with the provisions of section 2-110. 
(e)  Term of license; license fee. Licenses shall be issued for a period of one year, expiring on December 31 of each year. The license fee shall be as established by ordinance and may be adjusted. 
(f)  Suspension or revocation of license. Any license issued hereunder may be revoked or suspended by the city council if false statements have been made in the application therefor or upon failure of a licensee to comply with any state law or local ordinance. 
(Prior Code, ch. 607, subd. 6) 
Sec. 12-246. - Refuse and recyclable collection requirements. 
(a)  Refuse collection required. Each licensee shall provide weekly collection and removal of refuse from its customers' premises in the city which normally results from day to day use of the property, except furnishings, appliances, construction waste and similar bulky waste, for which individuals shall make special collection arrangements. 
(b)  Curbside recycling. Each licensee shall provide curbside recycling to each of its customers within the city at least once every two weeks. Recyclables to be collected shall consist of at least four broad types (plastic bottles, glass bottles, metal cans and newspaper). The licensee shall also provide to the city, by July 10 and January 10 of each year, a report on the tonnage of recyclable materials collected. 
(c)  Neat and orderly collections. 
(1)  The licensee shall ensure that reasonable care in transferring the contents of the containers to his vehicle is used to avoid spillage. If any spillage occurs, the licensee, or his employee then performing the collection services, shall clean it immediately and completely. 
(2)  Vehicles shall be equipped with brooms and shovels for cleaning any spills associated with collecting or hauling garbage, recyclables or refuse. 
(3)  Collection shall be conducted in such a manner as to not create a nuisance. 
(4)  Upon each collection, the containers shall be completely emptied and replaced with lids in place. 
(d)  Tonnage reports. All haulers should report to the city on a quarterly basis the total tonnage of recyclables collected in the city. 
(e)  Collection vehicles. Vehicles used by the licensee to collect or transport garbage, refuse, or recyclables over any city street shall be properly maintained and operated and have a fully enclosed metal body capable of completely containing the contents so as to prevent offensive odors escaping therefrom and solids or liquids from leaking, spilling, dropping, or blowing from the vehicle. 
(Prior Code, ch. 607, subd. 7) 
State Law reference- Vehicle loads, Minn. Stats. § 169.81, subd. 5. 
Secs. 12-247-12-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TOBACCO DEALERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-271. - Definitions and interpretations. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Compliance checks means the system the city uses to investigate and ensure that those authorized to sell tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco-related devices are following and complying with the requirements of this article. Compliance checks shall involve the use of minors as authorized by this article. Compliance checks shall also mean the use of minors who attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices for educational, research and training purposes as authorized by state and federal laws. Compliance checks may also be conducted by other units of government for the purpose of enforcing appropriate federal, state, or local laws and regulations relating to tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco-related devices. 
    Individually packaged means the practice of selling any tobacco or tobacco product wrapped individually for sale. Individually wrapped tobacco and tobacco products shall include, but not be limited to, single cigarette packs, single bags or cans of loose tobacco in any form, and single cans or other packaging of snuff or chewing tobacco. Cartons or other packaging containing more than a single pack or other container as described in this article shall not be considered individually packaged. 
    Loosie is the common term used to refer to a single or individually packaged cigarette. 
    Minor means any natural person who has not yet reached the age of 18 years. 
    Moveable place of business means any form of business operated out of a truck, van, automobile, or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and not a fixed address store front or other permanent type of structure authorized for sales transactions. 
    Retail establishment means any place of business where tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices are available for sale to the general public. Retail establishments shall include, but not be limited to, grocery stores, convenience stores, and restaurants. 
    Sale means any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter, or other consideration. 
    Self-service merchandising means open displays of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices in any manner where any person shall have access to the tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices without the assistance or intervention of the licensee or the licensee's employee. The assistance or intervention shall entail the actual physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco-related device between the customer and the licensee or employee. Self-service merchandising shall not include vending machines. 
    Tobacco or tobacco products means cigarettes and any product containing, made, or derived from tobacco that is intended for human consumption, whether chewed, smoked, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means, or any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product; cigars; cheroots; stogies; perique; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and other smoking tobacco; snuff; snuff flour; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine cut and other chewing tobaccos; shorts; refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco. The term "tobacco" excludes any tobacco product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose. 
    Tobacco-related devices means cigarette papers or pipes for smoking. 
    Vending machine means any mechanical, electric, electronic, or other type of device that dispenses tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices upon the insertion of money, tokens, or other forms of payment directly into the machine by the person seeking to purchase the tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco-related device. 
(Prior Code, ch. 406, subd. 2; Ord. No. 97-06) 
Sec. 12-272. - Penalties. 
(a)  Licensees. Any licensee found to have violated this article, or whose employee shall have violated this article, shall be charged an administrative fine of $75.00 for a first violation of this article; $200.00 for a second offense at the same licensed premises within a 24-month period; and $250.00 for a third or subsequent offense at the same location within a 24-month period. In addition, after the third offense, the license shall be suspended for not less than seven days. 
(b)  Other individuals. Other individuals, other than minors, found to be in violation of this article shall be charged an administrative fine of $100.00. 
(c)  Misdemeanor. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any violation of this article. 
(Prior Code, ch. 406, subd. 13; Ord. No. 97-06) 
State Law reference- Authorized penalties, Minn. Stats. § 461.13, subds. 2, 3. 
Sec. 12-273. - Violations. 
(a)  Notice. Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the alleged violator shall be issued, either personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the alleged violation and which shall inform the alleged violator of his right to be heard on the accusation. 
(b)  Hearings. If a person accused of violating this article so requests, a hearing shall be scheduled, the time and place of which shall be published and provided to the accused violator. 
(c)  Decision. If the city determines that a violation of this article did occur, that decision, along with the hearing officer's reasons for finding a violation and the penalty to be imposed under section 12-272, shall be recorded in writing, a copy of which shall be provided to the accused violator. Likewise, if the hearing officer finds that no violation occurred or finds grounds for not imposing any penalty, such findings shall be recorded and a copy provided to the acquitted accused violator. 
(d)  Appeals. Appeals of any decision made by the hearing officer shall be filed in the district court for the city in which the alleged violation occurred. 
(e)  Misdemeanor prosecution. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any alleged violation of this article. If the city elects to seek misdemeanor prosecution, no administrative penalty shall be imposed. 
(f)  Continued violation. Each violation, and every day in which a violation occurs or continues, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Prior Code, ch. 406, subd. 12; Ord. No. 97-06) 
Sec. 12-274. - Responsibility. 
    All licensees under this article shall be responsible for the actions of their employees in regard to the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices on the licensed premises, and the sale of such an item by an employee shall be considered a sale by the license holder. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the city from also subjecting the employee to whatever penalties are appropriate under this article, state or federal law, or other applicable law or regulation. 
(Prior Code, ch. 406, subd. 9; Ord. No. 97-06) 
Sec. 12-275. - Compliance checks and inspections. 
    All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by the city police or other authorized city official during regular business hours. From time to time, but at least once per year, the city shall conduct compliance checks by engaging, with the written consent of their parents or guardians, minors over the age of 15 years but less than 18 years, to enter the licensed premises to attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices. Minors used for the purpose of compliance checks shall be supervised by city-designated law enforcement officers or other designated city personnel. Minors used for compliance checks shall not be guilty of unlawful possession of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices when such items are obtained as a part of the compliance check. No minor used in compliance checks shall attempt to use a false identification misrepresenting the minor's age, and all minors lawfully engaged in a compliance check shall answer all questions about the minor's age asked by the licensee or his employee and shall produce any identification, if any exists, for which he is asked. Nothing in this section shall prohibit compliance checks authorized by state or federal laws for educational, research, or training purposes, or required for the enforcement of a particular state or federal law. 
(Prior Code, ch. 406, subd. 10; Ord. No. 97-06) 
Sec. 12-276. - Prohibited sales. 
    It shall be a violation of this article for any person to sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco-related device: 
(1)  To any person under the age of 18 years. 
(2)  By means of any type of vending machine, except as may otherwise be provided in this article. 
(3)  By means of self-service methods whereby the customer does not need to make a verbal or written request to an employee of the licensed premise in order to receive the tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco-related device and whereby there is not a physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco-related device between the licensee, or the licensee's employee, and the customer. 
(4)  By means of loosies. 
(5)  Containing opium, morphine, jimsonweed, belladonna, strychnos, cocaine, marijuana, or other deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic, or controlled substances except nicotine and other substances found naturally in tobacco or added as part of an otherwise lawful manufacturing process. 
(6)  By any other means, to any other person, or in any other manner or form prohibited by federal, state, or other local law, ordinance, provision, or other regulation. 
(Prior Code, ch. 406, subds. 6, 11(A); Ord. No. 97-06) 
State Law reference- Sale of tobacco or other nicotine delivery products to children, Minn. Stats. §§ 609.685, 609.6855. 
Sec. 12-277. - Vending machines. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under this article to allow the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices by the means of a vending machine unless minors are at all times prohibited from entering the licensed establishment. Any retailer selling tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices at the time the ordinance from which this article is derived is adopted shall comply with this section within 90 days. 
(Prior Code, ch. 406, subd. 7; Ord. No. 97-06) 
Sec. 12-278. - Self-service merchandising. 
    It shall be unlawful for a licensee under this article to allow the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices by any means whereby the customer may have access to such items without having to request the item from the licensee or the licensee's employee and whereby there is not a physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, or the tobacco-related device between the licensee or his employee and the customer. All tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco-related devices shall either be stored behind a counter or other area not freely accessible to customers, or in a case or other storage unit not left open and accessible to the general public. Any retailer selling tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices at the time the ordinance from which is article is derived is adopted shall comply with this section within 90 days. This section shall not apply to retail stores which derive at least 90 percent of their revenue from tobacco and tobacco-related products and which cannot be entered at any time by persons younger than 18 years of age. 
(Prior Code, ch. 406, subd. 8; Ord. No. 97-06) 
State Law reference- Ban on sale of self-service packs of tobacco, Minn. Stats. § 461.18. 
Sec. 12-279. - Illegal sales. 
    It shall be a violation of this article for any person to sell or otherwise provide any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco-related device to any minor. 
(Prior Code, ch. 406, subd. 11(A); Ord. No. 97-06) 
Secs. 12-280-12-306. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal tobacco licenses, Minn. Stats. § 461.12, subd. 1. 

Sec. 12-307. - Required. 
    No person shall sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related device without first having obtained a license to do so from the city. 
(Prior Code, ch. 406, subd. 3; Ord. No. 97-06) 
Sec. 12-308. - Application and issuance. 
(a)  Application. An application for a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices shall be made on a form provided by the city. The application shall contain the full name of the applicant, the applicant's residential and business addresses and telephone numbers, the name of the business for which the license is sought, and any additional information the city deems necessary. Upon receipt of a completed application, the city administrator shall forward the application to the city council for action at its next regularly scheduled council meeting. If the administrator shall determine that an application is incomplete, he shall return the application to the applicant with notice of the information necessary to make the application complete. 
(b)  Action. The city council may either approve or deny the license, or it may delay action for such reasonable period of time as necessary to complete any investigation of the application or the applicant it deems necessary. If the city council approves the license, the administrator shall issue the license to the applicant. If the council denies the license, notice of the denial shall be given to the applicant along with notice of the applicant's right to appeal the council's decision. 
(Prior Code, ch. 406, subd. 3(A), (B); Ord. No. 97-06) 
Sec. 12-309. - Moveable place of business. 
    No license shall be issued to a moveable place of business. Only fixed location businesses shall be eligible to be licensed under this division. 
(Prior Code, ch. 406, subd. 3(F); Ord. No. 97-06) 
Sec. 12-310. - Basis for denial of license. 
    The following shall be grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a license under this division; however, except as may otherwise be provided by law, the existence of any particular ground for denial does not mean that the city must deny the license. If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a person, it shall be revoked upon the discovery that the person was ineligible for the license under this section: 
(1)  The applicant is under the age of 18 years. 
(2)  The applicant has been convicted within the past five years of any violation of a federal, state, or local law, ordinance, provision, or other regulation relating to tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices. 
(3)  The applicant has had a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices revoked within the preceding 12 months of the date of application. 
(4)  The applicant fails to provide any information required on the application, or provides false or misleading information. 
(5)  The applicant is prohibited by federal, state, or local law, ordinance, or other regulation from holding such a license. 
(Prior Code, ch. 406, subd. 5; Ord. No. 97-06) 
Sec. 12-311. - Fees. 
    No license shall be issued under this division until the appropriate license fee shall be paid in full. The fee schedule for a license under this division shall be on file at city hall. Initial license applications for a period of less than one year shall be charged a fee on a pro rata basis. 
(Prior Code, ch. 406, subd. 4; Ord. No. 97-06) 
Sec. 12-312. - Term. 
    All licenses issued under this division shall expire on February 1 of each year. 
(Prior Code, ch. 406, subd. 3(C); Ord. No. 97-06) 
Sec. 12-313. - Renewals. 
    The renewal of a license issued under this division shall be handled in the same manner as the original application. The request for a renewal shall be made at least 30 days but no more than 60 days before the expiration of the current license. The issuance of a license issued under this division shall be considered a privilege and not an absolute right of the applicant and shall not entitle the holder to an automatic renewal of the license. 
(Prior Code, ch. 406, subd. 3(H); Ord. No. 97-06) 
Sec. 12-314. - Transfers. 
    All licenses issued under this division shall be valid only on the premises for which the license was issued and only for the person to whom the license was issued. No transfer of any license to another location or person shall be valid without the prior approval of the city council. 
(Prior Code, ch. 406, subd. 3(E); Ord. No. 97-06) 
Sec. 12-315. - Display. 
    All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain view of the general public on the licensed premises. 
(Prior Code, ch. 406, subd. 3(G); Ord. No. 97-06) 
Sec. 12-316. - Revocation or suspension. 
    Any license issued under this division may be revoked or suspended as provided in sections 12-272 and 12-273. 
(Prior Code, ch. 406, subd. 3(D); Ord. No. 97-06) 
Chapter 14 - NUISANCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to define, prevent and abate nuisances, Minn. Stats. § 412.221, subd. 23. 

Sec. 14-1. - Abatement procedures. 
(a)  Applicable nuisances. This section shall apply to the abatement of public nuisances maintained exterior to the principal structure, including reported or observed junk as defined in section 101-3, outside storage of materials and equipment, including, but not limited to, tall grass and weeds as provided in chapter 8, article III, unused machinery, household appliances and furnishings, tires, excess vehicles, automotive parts, scrap metal, lumber, and the maintenance of any other materials, equipment or animals deemed to unreasonably annoy, injure, or endanger the safety, morals, comfort, or repose of any considerable number of people. 
(b)  Inspections. The city shall cause to be inspected all public and private properties within the city which may contain an exterior public nuisance. Such inspections shall take place as often as practicable to determine whether any such conditions exist. The city shall also investigate all reports of exterior public nuisances located within the city. 
(c)  Presence of nuisance; order for abatement. Whenever the city finds that an exterior public nuisance exists on any public or private property in the city, the city shall notify the affected property owner by first class mail that the nuisance must be abated within a reasonable period of time. Service by mail shall be deemed complete upon mailing. The order for abatement shall set forth the following: 
(1)  The specific nature of the violations and requirements for compliance. 
(2)  The date of the meeting and that the owner may appear. 
(3)  That failure to abate the nuisance within the applicable time period may result in summary abatement procedures. 
(d)  Disposal of property. The city maintains the right to dispose of all property that it removes from public and private properties through abatement procedures as outlined in this section. Disposal of property deemed to have value shall occur 30 days after the property is secured, unless the property owner obtains a court order to the contrary and/or pays all costs associated with the removal and storage of said property within the 30-day time period. The city maintains the right to immediately dispose of refuse and/or junk materials deemed to be without value. 
(e)  Cost of abatement. The city shall determine the abatement procedure for each nuisance and prepare a report outlining the costs thereof, which shall include an additional administrative charge of 25 percent of the cost to abate or $150.00, whichever is greater, to cover any administrative costs associated with the abatements. On or before September 1 of each year, the enforcement officer shall list the total unpaid charges for each abatement against each separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this section, based on the charges accumulated by the city administrator or designee. 
(f)  Reclamation procedure. To reclaim those materials that have been removed as a part of the abatement process, the owner or lien holder must pay any costs and administration fees incurred by the city. The owner or lien holder reclaiming the materials shall sign a release of property and shall agree not to return the items to their original location in violation of this Code. If additional removal of the same or similar items is deemed necessary by the city, an abbreviated but reasonable notice period will be provided before the removal takes place. All other provisions of this section, including the right to a hearing, shall continue to apply. 
(g)  Non-exclusiveness. Nothing in this section shall be deemed a waiver or limitation of any statutory right and/or power of the city as to hazardous buildings, properties or materials, nor shall this section be deemed to otherwise limit the right and/or power of the city to conduct other administrative and/or regulatory searches and inspections, including, but not limited to, health inspections, fire scene and arson inspections and regulated business and industries inspections, nor shall this article be deemed to be an exclusive remedy of the city regarding the abatement of exterior public nuisances. 
(Prior Code, ch. 611, subd. 1) 
Sec. 14-2. - Public nuisances. 
    Whoever, by his act or failure to perform a legal duty, intentionally does any of the following, is guilty of maintaining a public nuisance and may be ordered to abate the nuisance as provided herein, charged with a misdemeanor, or both: 
(1)  Maintaining offensive conditions. Maintains or permits a condition that unreasonably annoys, injures, or endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort or repose of any considerable number of people, including, but not limited to, the maintenance of junk, materials, equipment or animals exterior to a principal structure in violation of this Code. 
(2)  Obstructing public ways and waterways. Interferes with, obstructs, or renders dangerous for passage any public highway or right-of-way or waters used by the public. 
(3)  Interfering with health officials. Willfully opposes or obstructs a health officer or physician charged with the enforcement of health laws in performing any legal duties. 
(4)  Depositing used tires. Deposits or allows depositing of used or waste tires upon public or private property that is not a tire recycling, processing or receiving site approved by the city. 
(5)  Permitting accumulation of debris. Maintains or permits the accumulation of discarded or unused machinery, household appliances, automobile bodies, lumber, wood, trash, debris, or other material, or the rank growth of vegetation among the items so accumulated. 
(6)  Maintaining junk motor vehicles. Parks, keeps, stores or accumulates junk motor vehicles upon any private land or premises owned, occupied or controlled by any person or legal entity unless authorized by this Code or other ordinance. No person shall park, keep or place any such junk vehicle upon land not owned by such person. For the purposes of this section, a junk vehicle means a motor vehicle, as defined in Minn. Stats. § 169.011, that: 
a.  Is extensively damaged, with the damage including such things as broken or missing wheels, motor, drive train, or transmission; or 
b.  Is apparently inoperable; or 
c.  Does not have a valid, current registration plate. 
(7)  Maintaining dilapidated structures. Maintains or permits the existence of any structure or part of any structure which, due to fire, wind, other natural disaster, physical deterioration, or any other cause, is no longer habitable as a dwelling or is no longer useful for any other purpose for which it may have been intended. 
(8)  Failing to maintain integrity of dwelling unit. Fails to keep all exterior elements of residential dwelling units in the city in a clean, sanitary and structurally safe condition and in sound repair, including: 
a.  Stairways, porches, balconies, or decks; 
b.  Windows and doors; 
c.  Soffit and fascia; 
d.  Roofs; 
e.  Siding, bricks, stone or stucco; and 
f.  All other exterior elements not specifically listed. 
(9)  Failing to conceal remodeling materials. Fails to keep all materials being used in remodeling projects in a neat and orderly appearance and out of view from adjoining property for the duration of the project. 
(10)  Failing to properly store refuse. Fails to keep garbage and refuse in proper storage containers (bins or dumpsters) and regularly disposed of, as set forth in section 14-3. 
(11)  Dumping in streets or rights-of-way. 
a.  Throws or deposits in a street or right-of-way nails, dirt, glass or glassware, cans, discarded cloth or clothing, metal scraps, garbage, leaves, grass or tree limbs, paper or paper products, shreds or rubbish, oil, grease or other petroleum products, or to empty water containing salt or other injurious chemicals thereon. City, county, and state road maintenance, snow plowing, and related activities are exempt from this subsection. 
b.  Hauls any such material as described in subsection (11)a of this section inadequately enclosed or covered, thereby permitting the same to fall upon streets. It is unlawful to place or store building materials or waste resulting from building construction or demolition on a street. 
(12)  Other conditions. Performs any other act or omission declared by state law or city ordinance to be a public nuisance. 
(Prior Code, ch. 601, subd. 2; Ord. No. 10-01; Ord. No. 10-04) 
Sec. 14-3. - Solid waste. 
(a)  Definitions. The definitions in section 12-244 apply to this section. 
(b)  Accumulation prohibited; disposal required. Every household, occupant, or owner of any residence, commercial or industrial establishment shall, in a sanitary manner, dispose of refuse and recyclables that may accumulate upon the owner's or occupant's property on a weekly basis through a collection service licensed by the city or by other methods approved by the city. Recyclables shall be collected, at a minimum, every two weeks. 
(c)  Refuse, recyclables and yard waste. 
(1)  Prohibited deposits. No person shall place any refuse, recyclables or yard waste in any street or public place, or upon any private property, except in proper containers for collection. No person shall throw or deposit refuse, recyclables or yard waste in any body of water or in such manner as to cause litter or contamination of the environment. 
(2)  Burying refuse. No person shall bury any refuse in the city except in an approved sanitary landfill. 
(d)  Composting. Composting shall be allowed only on properties where there is a single-family detached dwelling or property operated by the city as an essential service. Composting is permitted on private property if all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Permitted material. Only organic materials, yard waste and easily biodegradable, nonpoisonous garbage may be composted. 
(2)  Dimensions of compost area. Composting shall be placed in a container or pile not to exceed 50 square feet in area or three feet in height. 
(3)  Location. The compost piles or containers shall be located in the rear yard at least five feet from any property line or 20 feet from a side lot line, if adjacent to any public street right-of-way. If a rear yard location is unavailable or impractical, the compost materials may be placed in another location approved by the city administrator or his authorized designee. 
(4)  Screening required. All compost piles and containers shall be fully screened so as not to be visible from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way as viewed from ground level. 
(5)  Maintenance required. Compost containers and compost materials shall be maintained so as not to create odors, rodent harborage, fire hazards or other nuisances. 
(Prior Code, ch. 607, subds. 3-5) 
State Law reference- Unlawful deposit of garbage, litter, etc., Minn. Stats. § 609.08. 
Sec. 14-4. - Hazardous buildings or hazardous property; definition. 
    The provisions of this section apply to a hazardous building or hazardous property as defined in Minn. Stats. § 463.15 and such definition is hereby adopted by reference. 
(Prior Code, ch. 914, subd. 1; Ord. No. 08-07) 
Sec. 14-5. - Notice to owner. 
    The building official shall examine or cause to be examined every property, building or structure or portion thereof which is dangerous or damaged and, if such is found to be a hazardous building or hazardous property, the building official shall give to the owner thereof written notice stating the defects therein, and shall indicate the improvements or repairs to be made, and may state that if repairs and improvements are impractical and not feasible to ultimately provide for the public safety and health, that such building or structure shall be removed. All such work shall be started and completed within a reasonable period of time as so stipulated in the notice by the building official. Such notice may require the property, building, structure, or portion thereof to be vacated forthwith and not reoccupied until the required repairs and improvements are completed, inspected, and approved by the building official. Proper service of such notice shall be by personal service upon the owner and lien holders of record or by publication for four weeks in the legal newspaper and concurrent posting on the property. If, in the event of an emergency situation, the building official determines that, to protect the public interests of health and safety, precautions and/or repairs or removal must be conducted immediately, the building official shall order the immediate cordoning off of any or all areas surrounding such property, building or structure causing the emergency conditions, and the building official shall notify the owner of record forthwith and order repairs to be commenced immediately. In the event notice cannot be made effective in sufficient time for the owner to abate the condition or properly cordon off the area, the city shall order necessary precautions to protect the public, and notice of such actions shall be made to the owner of record forthwith. 
(Prior Code, ch. 914, subd. 2; Ord. No. 08-07) 
Sec. 14-6. - Posting of signs. 
(a)  The building official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such property or building a notice to read: 
DO NOT ENTER 
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY 
PUBLIC WORKS/BUILDING DEPARTMENT 
CITY OF OAK GROVE  
(b)  Such notice shall remain posted until the required repairs, demolition, or removal is completed. Such notice shall not be removed without written permission of the building official and no person shall enter the building except for the purpose of making the required repairs or for demolishing the building. 
(Prior Code, ch. 914, subd. 4; Ord. No. 08-07) 
Sec. 14-7. - Right to demolish. 
    In case the owner shall fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with the notice to repair, rehabilitate, or to demolish and remove said property, building or structure or portion thereof, the city may order the owner thereof prosecuted as a violator of the provisions of this article and may order the building official to proceed with the work specified in such notice. A statement of the cost of such work shall be transmitted to the council, who shall cause the same to be paid and levied as a special assessment against the property. 
(Prior Code, ch. 914, subd. 5; Ord. No. 08-07) 
Sec. 14-8. - Costs. 
    Costs incurred under provisions of this article shall be paid out of the city general fund. The city administrator or designee shall keep an accurate account of the expenses incurred in carrying out the order and of all other expenses theretofore incurred in connection with its enforcement. Such costs shall be charged to the owner of the premises involved as a special assessment on the land on which the building or structure is located, and shall be collected in the manner provided for special assessments, but the assessment shall be certified for collection as other special assessments. 
(Prior Code, ch. 914, subd. 6; Ord. No. 08-07) 
Sec. 14-9. - Prohibition. 
    It is unlawful for the owner of any property to suffer or permit a hazardous building or hazardous property to exist. 
(Prior Code, ch. 914, subd. 7; Ord. No. 08-07) 
State Law reference- Hazardous and substandard buildings, Minn. Stats. § 463.15 et seq. 
Chapter 16 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 16-1. - Interference with city officers and employees. 
    No person shall prevent, delay or interfere with any city officer or employee engaged in the performance of his official duties. 
(Prior Code, ch. 601, subd. 4; Ord. No. 10-01) 
Sec. 16-2. - Noise. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Noise means any sound that is unwanted, does not occur in the natural environment, or has an erratic, intermittent, or statistically random oscillation. 
(b)  Loud, disturbing or excessive noise unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, permit, or cause to be made or continued within the city any loud, disturbing or excessive noise which would be likely to cause significant discomfort or annoyance to a reasonable person of normal sensitivities present in the area. 
(c)  Characteristics; conditions. The characteristics and conditions which shall be considered in determining whether a noise is loud, disturbing or excessive for the purposes of subsection (b) of this section shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The land use, nature, and zoning of the area from which the noise emanates and the area where it is received. 
(2)  The time of day or night when the noise occurs. 
(3)  The duration of the noise. 
(4)  Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant. 
(5)  Whether or not noise abatement measures are possible and whether or not they are used to reduce the sound level. 
(6)  The number of people and their activities that are affected by the noise. 
(7)  The volume and intensity of the noise. 
(Prior Code, ch. 603, subds. 2, 3) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate and prevention noise, Minn. Stats. § 412.221, subd. 24. 
Sec. 16-3. - On-street parking. 
(a)  Manner of parking. Every vehicle parked upon any street with a curb shall be parked parallel thereto and with the right hand wheels within 12 inches of the curb. On streets without curbs, motor vehicles shall be parked only to the right of the traveled portion of the roadway and parallel thereto and in such a manner so as not to interfere with the flow of traffic. 
(b)  No-parking areas. No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or other traffic control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk. 
(2)  So as to block a public or private driveway. 
(3)  Within an intersection. 
(4)  Within ten feet of a fire hydrant. 
(5)  So as to block a crosswalk. 
(6)  At any place where official signs prohibit parking. 
(7)  Upon the shoulders of any trunk highway within the city. 
(8)  Upon any city road or street for a period of 24 continuous hours or more. 
(9)  Upon any city road or street after there has been an accumulation of one inch or more of snowfall until such time as the snow has been plowed from the road or street. 
(10)  Upon any city road or street in residential areas when such vehicle is a semi-truck, trailer, recreational vehicle or commercial vehicle, except when such vehicle is parked for the purposes of contracted work, and only then from dawn to dusk. 
(c)  Additional parking restrictions. Notwithstanding the foregoing restrictions, the city council may impose additional parking restrictions on roads and streets within the city if, in its opinion, such restrictions are necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of persons or property. Roads and streets subject to such additional restrictions shall be designated by city council resolution, and such restrictions shall not be enforced until posted notice thereof on such roads or streets has taken place. 
(Prior Code, ch. 906, subd. 1; Ord. No. 08-14; Ord. No. 09-07; Ord. No. 12-02, 4-30-2012) 
Sec. 16-4. - Vehicle towing; violations. 
(a)  Removal, towing of vehicles. 
(1)  The designated law enforcement official is hereby authorized and empowered to remove or cause to be removed any vehicle parked, stored, stalled, or standing on city roads or streets in violation of any of the provisions of this section. 
(2)  Such vehicle may be removed by towing or otherwise and stored for safekeeping. Said vehicles shall not be removed from the places where they are stored until the owners or authorized agents shall have fully paid the costs incurred for towing and storage to the person or firm who has furnished such service. 
(3)  In the event that any vehicle held or stored is not claimed or recovered by the owner thereof, there is deemed to be imposed upon such vehicle a possessory lien for the amount of the costs incurred for towing and storage. Such lien shall be foreclosed in the manner provided by law for the foreclosure of possessory liens. 
(b)  Violations. 
(1)  Upon proof that a certain vehicle was parked, stored, or allowed to stand in violation of this section and that a certain person is the registered owner of said vehicle, this shall be prima facie evidence that such person committed or authorized the commission of such violation. 
(2)  At the direction of the designated law enforcement official, a citation may be issued in connection with any motor vehicle parked in violation of this section. 
(3)  Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Prior Code, ch. 906, subds. 1, 2; Ord. No. 12-02, 4-30-2012) 
State Law reference- Stopping, standing and parking, Minn. Stats. § 169.32; authority to regulate standing or parking of vehicles, Minn. Stats. § 169.04(a)(1). 
Sec. 16-5. - Firearms. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Firearm means a gun that discharges shot or a projectile by means of an explosive or a gas. For the purposes of this section, a gun that discharges a shot or projectile by compressed air is not considered a firearm. 
    Owner means a person having a right or interest in the subject property, evidence of which is filed and recorded in the office of the county recorder or registrar of titles. 
(b)  Prohibited use. Near buildings. No person shall use, fire or discharge a firearm in the city within 300 feet of any dwelling, house, or commercial or industrial building. A person, however, may use, fire or discharge a firearm within such distance of a dwelling, house, or commercial or industrial building which is owned by that person or if the person has the written consent of the owner of the property to so use, fire, or discharge a firearm. 
(c)  Permitted discharges; restrictions. 
(1)  When discharging a firearm, the projectile shall not carry beyond the property line. 
(2)  All state game and fish and hunting laws or regulations must be complied with, but if there is any conflict between this article and state laws or regulations, the more restrictive shall apply, with the exception of hunting hours. 
(3)  Firearm discharges which are not prohibited herein and are not associated with legal hunting activities, are only permitted from one hour after sunrise to one hour prior to sunset. 
(d)  Exemptions. 
(1)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the discharge of firearms, rifles or handguns when done in lawful defense of persons or property. No part of this section is intended to abridge the constitutional right to keep and bear arms. 
(2)  The city council may approve an exemption to this section, with reasonable conditions to protect public health, safety and welfare, to allow the discharge of firearms and bows for the following: 
a.  For the purpose of managing and controlling wildlife populations, provided the hunt has received support from the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources. 
b.  For target shooting as an accessory use to a retail business or as a special event or competition. 
c.  For law enforcement training purposes. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 10-12-2015) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, adopted October 12, 2015, set out provisions intended for use as § 16-4. For purposes of clarity, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 16-5. 
Chapter 18 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- General authority relative to parks, Minn. Stats. § 412.221, subd. 6; parks generally, Minn. Stats. ch. 448. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC CONDUCT IN PARKS AND RECREATIONAL AREAS 

Sec. 18-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Motor vehicle means any vehicle containing a unit for propelling it by means of converted, stored energy. 
    Park means any area owned by the city and designated by the city as a park area. 
(Prior Code, ch. 904, subd. 1) 
Sec. 18-20. - Fireworks and explosives. 
    No fireworks or explosives shall be carried into or discharged in city parks except when approved by the city. 
(Prior Code, ch. 904, subd. 2(A); Ord. No. 10-03) 
State Law reference- Fireworks, Minn. Stats. § 624.40 et seq. 
Sec. 18-21. - Disturbing the peace. 
    No person shall disturb the peace in a city park. 
(Prior Code, ch. 904, subd. 2(D); Ord. No. 10-03) 
State Law reference- Disorderly conduct, Minn. Stats. § 609.32. 
Sec. 18-22. - Commercial activities. 
    No person shall engage in commercial activity of any kind within a city park except when expressly authorized by the city. 
(Prior Code, ch. 904, subd. 2(E); Ord. No. 10-03) 
Sec. 18-23. - Animals. 
(a)  No person shall bring a dog or other domestic animal into a park unless the animal is kept leashed or under the direct control of its owner. The owner must pick up all feces of his dog or domestic animal. 
(b)  No person shall hunt, harm or remove any animal, reptile or bird within a city park without permission of the city. 
(Prior Code, ch. 904, subd. 2(F), (H); Ord. No. 10-03) 
Sec. 18-24. - Vegetation. 
    No person shall cut or otherwise injure any flowers, shrubs, or trees in a city park. 
(Prior Code, ch. 904, subd. 2(G); Ord. No. 10-03) 
State Law reference- Damage to property, Minn. Stats. § 609.595. 
Sec. 18-25. - Motor vehicles. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle within a city park except upon a designated roadway, and no person shall operate a motor vehicle within a city park at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour. 
(Prior Code, ch. 904, subd. 2(I); Ord. No. 10-03) 
Sec. 18-26. - Hours of operation. 
    No person shall occupy a city park between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless authorized by the city. Any exceptions to these hours will be posted at the applicable park. 
(Prior Code, ch. 904, subd. 2(J); Ord. No. 08-03; Ord. No. 10-03) 
Sec. 18-27. - Fires. 
    No person shall ignite a fire in a city park except in containers or in places where signs clearly designate that fires are permitted. 
(Prior Code, ch. 904, subd. 2(K); Ord. No. 10-03) 
Sec. 18-28. - Posting signs or advertisements. 
    No person shall post any sign or advertisement in a city park unless authorized by the city. 
(Prior Code, ch. 904, subd. 2(L); Ord. No. 10-03) 
Sec. 18-29. - Group permits. 
    Whenever any group, association or organization desires to use park facilities for a particular purpose, such as group picnics, group sporting activities, parties or theatrical, musical or other entertainment events, a representative of the group shall first obtain a group park permit from the city clerk for such use. The clerk shall require that the applicant pay for extra police protection or any special services if it appears that such protection is necessary. The clerk's decision to grant or deny an application for group park use may be appealed to the city council by the applicant or by any city resident by such person requesting placement of the issue on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting. 
(Prior Code, ch. 904, subd. 2(M); Ord. No. 10-03) 
Chapter 20 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS AND SPECIAL CHARGES 

Sec. 20-1. - Personal liability for city services; billing and collection. 
(a)  In this section, the term "city service" means any or all of the following when furnished by the city or its agents: 
(1)  Utility service. 
(2)  Nuisance abatement. 
(3)  Services enumerated in Minn. Stats. § 429.101. 
(4)  Charges due to the city for false alarms for fire or other emergency services. 
(5)  Any governmental service for which the city is authorized to impose a service charge. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by law, the owner of property on which any city service has been performed is personally liable for the cost of the service; provided, however, that if a service is performed at the request of a tenant of the property or if a nuisance is abated that was created by the tenant of the property, the tenant shall also be liable for the cost of the city service. Upon completion or delivery of a service under this section, the city administrator or other designated official shall prepare and mail an invoice to the owner and thereupon such amount will be due and payable to the city. 
(c)  The city administrator or designee shall maintain records of city services performed. 
(d)  The city administrator shall cause a bill to be sent to the appropriate party and/or insurance carrier (if applicable), and therefore shall take such reasonable steps as may be necessary for the collection of all charges for a city service. 
(e)  If a charge for a city service remains unpaid 30 days after a notice of delinquency is sent to the recipient of the service, the city may collect the debt through any lawful means that a private party may use to collect an unsecured delinquent debt. Accordingly, a party shall be given 30 days from the date that an invoice for charges is sent to make payment with the city. Should the party fail to make payment within the time allowed, a notice of delinquency shall be sent to the party. Should the party fail to make payment within 30 days of sending a delinquency notice, the city shall employ whatever means available to it to collect the debt. The system for collection of any delinquent charges shall be based upon the principal place of residence or other property ownership of the party for whom the services of the fire department are rendered. 
(f)  The city is authorized to certify unpaid charges for a city service to the property taxes of delinquent recipients who own taxable real property. At the end of each year, the city administrator shall be charged with processing delinquent charges for collection with the property taxes if the party is a resident of the city. 
(g)  In recognition of the fact that other local units of government under contract with the fire department have the authority to collect debts through certification to property taxes for their residents, the city administrator shall make reasonable effort to ensure that other local units are using such authority to collect delinquent charges on the fire department's behalf. Delinquent bills for residents outside of the immediate service territory of the fire department shall be referred to a private collection firm once it has been determined that the city is not likely to collect the debt using its own devices. 
(h)  The charges imposed may be appealed to the city council by submitting the grounds for the appeal in writing to the city administrator, provided that the written request for appeal is received by the city administrator within 30 days after the initial invoice was sent by the city. The party may address the city council to discuss the appeal only upon consent of the council. The city council's findings shall be final. 
(Prior Code, ch. 122, subds. 4, 6; Prior Code, ch. 124, subds. 2, 4; Ord. No. 08-15) 
State Law reference- Collection of unpaid charges, Minn. Stats. §§ 366.011, 366.012, 415.01, 429.101 
Sec. 20-2. - Deferral of special assessments based upon hardship. 
(a)  The city council is authorized to approve the deferral of the payment of a special assessment against a homestead property in accordance with Minn. Stats. §§ 435.193-435.195. 
(b)  In order to be eligible for the deferral, the additional following conditions shall also be met: 
(1)  The annual adjusted gross income of the owner of the property shall not exceed the extremely low (30 percent) income limits guidelines as provided for the Anoka County Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA); 
(2)  This deferral will not be granted in the event there is any other deferment on the property. 
(c)  The deferral shall exist only as long as the property owner qualifies for the deferral. 
(d)  Interest on the deferred special assessment may accrue during the deferral at the net interest rate of the improvement bond issue, as stated in the official bond document, per annum. The city council may require current payment of interest as a condition of deferral. The city council may defer interest for the same period as deferral of the special assessment upon adoption of a resolution finding the necessity for such deferral of interest. Accumulated interest and the deferred payments may be due and payable upon the occurrence of any of the following events: 
(1)  The death of the owner, provided that the spouse is not eligible for the benefits hereunder; 
(2)  The sale, transfer or subdivision of the property or any part thereof; 
(3)  If the property should for any reason lose its homestead status; or 
(4)  If for any reason, upon completion of due process, the city council determines that there would be no hardship to require immediate or partial payment. 
(e)  The deferral of payment of special assessments may be ordered by resolution of the city council at the request of the property owner at any time following adoption of the assessment role. The city administrator shall be responsible for preparing application forms to be completed by the property owner. The property owner shall immediately notify the city clerk's office of the existence of any change in status which may affect eligibility for deferral. 
(Prior Code, ch. 908, subd. 2; Ord. No. 09-09) 
Chapter 22 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- General authority relative to streets, Minn. Stats. § 412.221, subd. 6; acquisition of property for streets, Minn. Stats. ch. 440. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Construction of streets and roads. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City engineer means the duly appointed engineering representative of the city. 
    Subdivider means any person commencing proceedings under chapter 107 to effect a subdivision of land owned by such subdivider or owned by another, as defined in said chapter, or splitting land through any other means. 
(b)  Scope. 
(1)  The rules and regulations governing the construction of streets and roads contained herein shall apply within the city and other land as permitted by state statutes. In the event of overlapping jurisdiction within the prescribed area, the extent of jurisdiction shall be determined and agreed upon between this city and the other municipality or municipalities concerned. 
(2)  It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with private agreements which are equal to or more restrictive, or with restrictive covenants running with land to which the city is a party, except that the most restrictive shall apply. 
(c)  Compliance. 
(1)  The development of new streets or upgrading of existing roads shall be either a public improvement or a private development. 
(2)  Public improvements shall follow the procedural requirements of Minn. Stats. ch. 429. These projects shall comply with the technical requirements of this chapter. 
(3)  Private developments shall follow the procedural requirements and technical requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  Preliminary plan. 
(1)  On-site ponding. Soil Conservation Service Technical Report #20 or equal shall be used as a basis of design for all on-site pond sizing. Refer to section 107-177. 
(2)  Soil tests. Soil testing shall only be required at city engineer's request. 
(3)  Pavement design calculations. A soils report shall be submitted by a registered professional soils engineer outlining the recommendations for the pavement design which in no event shall be less than the standards set forth in section 107-176 upon the city engineer's request. 
(4)  Horizontal and vertical alignment and grade calculations. The city shall forward the subdivider's submittals to its engineer for review. These documents shall be submitted to the city by the developer. 
(5)  Road design plan. Road design plan submittals shall include a typical pavement section, plan and profile sheets, and grading cross sections for every 100 feet of road. 
(6)  Proposed signs. Proposed signs shall be shown on the road design plans for review and approval by the engineer and public works supervisor or his designee. 
(e)  Approval of the preliminary plan, project plans and specifications of new streets or upgrade of existing roads. Prior to initiating any construction activities identified in the plans and specifications for construction, the subdivider shall accompany the public works supervisor or his designee and engineer on a site visit to review the proposed construction. Special consideration shall be given when roads are stubbed for future connection as required by section 107-148. 
(Prior Code, ch. 902, subds. 2-4) 
Sec. 22-2. - Boulevard encroachments. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Boulevard means the portion of the street right-of-way between the outside edge of the roadway and the property line. 
    Encroachment means any object, live or inanimate, situated within a public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, posts, trees, bushes, rocks, utility poles and boxes, retaining walls, etc. 
    Imminent danger means the likelihood of damage to a vehicle or injury to a pedestrian upon contact with the encroachment. 
    Impede means interference with pedestrian traffic to an unreasonable degree. 
(b)  Permit. Any person who intends to place an encroachment as defined herein within the public right-of-way shall obtain a permit prior thereto from the city engineer unless such encroachment is excepted pursuant to subsection (c) of this section. No permit shall be granted for encroachments which would be considered nuisances as defined in subsection (d) of this section. 
(c)  Exceptions. The terms and provisions of this section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Mailbox or newspaper delivery box stands meeting city standards. 
(2)  Traffic and directional signs. 
(3)  Utility poles and utility structures. 
(4)  Fire hydrants. 
(5)  Bus shelters or public benches. 
(d)  Nuisances. Any encroachment located within a public right-of-way that impedes pedestrian traffic or constitutes imminent danger to vehicular or pedestrian traffic on any boulevard constitutes a public nuisance. 
(e)  Maintenance of boulevard. Except as may be prohibited by this section or other provisions of this Code, the owner or occupant of property abutting a public right-of-way shall be responsible for the maintenance of the boulevard area adjacent to his property. The owner or occupant shall, at a minimum, maintain the lawn and trees in the boulevard. The city shall not be responsible for the maintenance of or liable for injury to or from such improvements, and the property owner or occupant agrees to hold the city harmless from any claims arising out of any injury or damage to or from such improvements. 
(Prior Code, ch. 910, subds. 2-5, 7) 
Secs. 22-3-22-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Right-of-way management, Minn. Stats. §§ 237.162, 237.163. 

Sec. 22-23. - Definitions. 
    The definitions in Minn. Rules 7819.0100, subpts. 1-23 are hereby adopted by reference and are incorporated in this article as if set out in full. 
Sec. 22-24. - Election to manage the public right-of-way. 
    In accordance with Minn. Stats. § 237.163 subd. 2(b), the city hereby elects to manage rights-of-way within its jurisdiction. 
Sec. 22-25. - Permit requirement. 
(a)  Permit required. Except as otherwise provided herein, no person may obstruct or perform work in any right-of-way without first having obtained a permit from the city. The permit shall specify the location of the affected right-of-way, describe the work to be performed and facilities to be installed, and the duration of the permit. 
(b)  Permit extensions. No person may obstruct or perform work in the right-of-way beyond the date specified in a permit unless a new permit or permit extension is granted. 
(c)  Delay penalty. In accordance with Minn. Rules 7819.1000, subpt. 3, the city may impose a delay penalty for unreasonable delays in work conducted in the right-of-way. The city council may establish the amount of the delay penalty from time to time by resolution. 
(d)  Permit display. Permits issued under this article shall be conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated work site for inspection. 
Sec. 22-26. - Permit applications. 
    A permit application shall contain the following: 
(1)  A completed application form, including all required plans or drawings showing the location and area of the proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed facilities, and the following: 
a.  The applicant's name, gopher one-call registration certificate number, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers. 
b.  A certificate of insurance naming the city as an additional insured, verifying that the applicant is insured against claims for personal injury, death, or property damages associated with work in the right-of-way, and requiring 30 days' notice to the city of cancellation or material modification of the policy. 
c.  If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of the certificate required to be filed under Minn. Stats. § 300.06 as recorded and certified to by the secretary of state. 
d.  A copy of the applicant's certificate of authority from the state public utilities commission, or other applicable state or federal agency, to the extent such authority is required by law. 
(2)  Payment of a permit fee covering the city's administrative and management costs and any associated costs, such as the cost of any right-of-way restoration that the city will complete. 
State Law reference- Gopher one-call registration, Minn. Stats. ch. 216D. 
Sec. 22-27. - Permit denial and conditions. 
(a)  The city may deny a permit if a completed application is not filed, if the requirements and conditions of this article are not met, or if the city determines that the denial is necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare or to protect the right-of-way and its current use. 
(b)  The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of the permit to protect the health, safety and welfare or to protect the right-of-way and its current use. 
Sec. 22-28. - Permit fees. 
    The city shall establish an appropriate permit fee schedule which will be available to the public. Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise, right-of-way permit fees are separate from and in addition to franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user. Permit fees shall be set in an amount intended to recover the city's right-of-way management costs, including, but not limited to, costs of issuing, processing, and verifying permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration projects; maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving user facilities during right-of-way work, determining the adequacy of restoration work or restoring right-of-way to its original condition; and enforcing permits. Such costs do not include payment by a telecommunications right-of-way user for the use of the public right-of-way. 
Sec. 22-29. - Work standards. 
    All work performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with Minn. Rules, pt. 7819.1100, or applicable local requirements. 
Sec. 22-30. - Right-of-way restoration by permittee. 
    Unless otherwise provided in a permit, the permittee shall promptly patch and restore the right-of-way to a condition equivalent to that prior to its work. The permittee shall complete restoration according to Minn. Rules, pt. 7819.1100, or such other standards as may be specified by the city. If the pavement settles, the permittee shall pay to the city all costs associated with correcting the problem within 30 days of billing. Upon the city's request, the permittee shall post a construction performance bond in accordance with the provisions of Minn. Rules, pt. 7819.3000. If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way as required, the city may exercise its rights under the construction performance bond. 
Sec. 22-31. - Right-of-way restoration by city. 
    The city may choose to restore the right-of-way itself. If the city restores the right-of-way, the permittee shall pay the estimated costs thereof as part of the permit application fee. 
Sec. 22-32. - Inspection. 
(a)  Notice of completion. The permittee shall notify the city in writing when the work under a permit is completed. 
(b)  Site inspection. City personnel and others authorized by law may inspect the work site at any time during or upon completion of the work. At any time, the city may order cessation of work that poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety or well-being of the public. 
Sec. 22-33. - Work done without a permit. 
(a)  Non-emergencies. Except in an emergency, any person who obstructs or performs work in a right-of-way without the necessary permit must immediately obtain a permit and pay double the normal permit fee as a penalty. 
(b)  Emergency situations. Any person with facilities in the right-of-way shall immediately notify the city of any emergency in relation to its facilities. Such person may take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency. Such person shall apply for the necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith and fulfill the rest of the requirements of this article as soon as is feasible. 
Sec. 22-34. - Revocation of permit. 
    The city may revoke any right-of-way permit, without a fee refund, if there is a breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. Prior to revocation, the city shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. Within 24 hours of receipt, the permittee shall provide a plan acceptable to the city to cure the violation or breach. The permittee's failure to timely respond or implement the approved plan shall be cause for immediate revocation of the permit. If a permit is revoked, the city may make a demand in writing that the permittee remove his facilities from the right-of-way. If the permittee fails to complete removal within ten days of such demand, the city may remove the facilities and demand reimbursement from the permittee for such removal costs. In addition to any removal or restoration costs, the permittee shall reimburse the city for all other costs incurred by him in connection with the permit revocation, including, but not limited to, attorneys' fees. 
Sec. 22-35. - Mapping data. 
    Each permittee shall provide mapping information required by the city in accordance with Minn. Rules, pts. 7819.4000 and 7819.4100. 
Sec. 22-36. - Location of facilities. 
(a)  Undergrounding. Unless otherwise expressly permitted by law, new construction, installation of facilities, or the replacement of old facilities shall be done underground or contained within buildings or other structures in conformity with applicable law. Existing above-ground facilities may be repaired in place. 
(b)  Additional requirements. The city may impose restrictions on the location, size, design and appearance of any equipment or facilities to be located in the right-of-way. The city may assign specific corridors or locations within the right-of-way for each type of facility. Permits issued by the city may designate the proper corridor or location for the facilities at issue. The city may prohibit the placement of additional facilities within the right-of-way if necessary to protect health, safety, and welfare, or protect the right-of-way and its current use. 
Sec. 22-37. - Relocation of facilities. 
    Upon the city's written request, a person with facilities in the right-of-way shall promptly and at his own expense permanently remove and relocate his facilities as necessary to prevent interference in connection with a public project such as ditching or road improvements, or as the city may deem necessary to further public health or safety. 
Sec. 22-38. - Right-of-way vacation. 
    If the city vacates a right-of-way that contains the facilities of a permittee, the permittee's rights in the vacated right-of-way are governed by Minn. Rules, pt. 7819.3200. 
Sec. 22-39. - Indemnification and liability. 
    By applying for and accepting a permit, a permittee agrees to defend and indemnify the city in accordance with the provisions of Minn. Rules, pt. 7819.1250. 
Sec. 22-40. - Abandoned facilities. 
    Any person who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-way shall remove them from that right-of-way if necessary to accommodate other right-of-way repair, excavation, or construction. 
Sec. 22-41. - Appeal. 
    A right-of-way user that has been denied a permit, has had permit revoked, or believes that the fees imposed are invalid may have the denial, revocation, or fee imposition reviewed upon written request by the city council at its next regular meeting. A decision affirming the denial, revocation, or fee imposition will be in writing and supported by written findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision. 
Sec. 22-42. - Reservation of regulatory and police powers. 
    A permittee's rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
Secs. 22-43-22-62. - Reserved. 
Sec. 22-63. - All terrain vehicles. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    All terrain vehicle or vehicle means a motorized flotation-tired vehicle of not less than three low pressure tires, but not more than six tires, that is limited in engine displacement of less than 1,000 cubic centimeters and total dry weight less than 1,000 pounds. 
    Golf cart means a passenger conveyance, electric or gasoline motor powered vehicle, with three or four low pressure tires and engine displacement not exceeding 800 cubic centimeters and a total dry weight not exceeding 800 pounds. 
(b)  Jurisdiction. This ordinance shall regulate the operation of all-terrain vehicles and golf carts on public roads under the jurisdiction of the city and on the streets and highways within the boundaries of the city. 
(c)  Operation; youthful operators. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle or golf cart on public roadways in the city unless such person has in immediate possession a driver's license valid under Minnesota Statutes. 
(d)  State and county highways. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle or golf cart on the roadway, on the shoulder, or on the inside bank or slope of any trunk, county state-aid, or county highway in the city. 
(e)  City streets. All-terrain vehicles and golf carts may be operated within city streets provided that they are operated on the far right-hand side of the roadway surface and in the same direction as the roadway traffic on the nearest lane of the roadway except for turning or crossing movements at intersections. 
(f)  Maximum speed. All-terrain vehicles or golf carts in the city shall not exceed the legal speed limits of the road being traveled. 
(g)  Compliance with traffic laws. All-terrain vehicles and golf carts must be operated in compliance and conformity with all state, county, and local traffic laws, except those provisions which by their nature have no application. 
(h)  Private property. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle or golf cart on private property or upon lands not belonging to the operator of the vehicle without the written or oral permission of the landowner(s), or other person(s) entitled to the use and possession of such property. 
(i)  Operating under influence of alcohol or controlled substance. A person may not operate or be in control of an all-terrain vehicle or golf cart while under the influence of alcohol, as provided in Minn. Stats., § 169.121, subd. 1, or a mood altering drug, hallucinogen, or controlled substance defined in Minn. Stats., § 152.01, subd. 4. 
(j)  Registration number. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle without the registration number, assigned by the commissioner of natural resources, affixed to the vehicle in a plain and visible manner, as prescribed by the commissioner. 
(k)  Registration card. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle without having on his person the registration card provided by the commissioner of natural resources, which shall include the registration number, the date of registration, the make and serial number of the vehicle, the owner's name and address, and such additional information as the commissioner may require. 
(l)  Permit. The city may by resolution, issue a general permit to residents of the city to operate all-terrain vehicles and golf carts on city streets. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 1, 12-9-2013) 
Chapter 24 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal utilities, Minn. Stats. § 412.321 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 24-1-24-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal utilities, Minn. Stats. § 412.321 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administration means those fixed costs attributable to administration of the wastewater treatment works (e.g., billing and associated bookkeeping and accounting costs). 
    Biochemical oxygen demand ( BOD 5 ) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of the building drainage system that receives the discharge from other drainage pipes and which lies within the perimeter of the building. 
    Building sewer means that part of the building drainage system that extends from the building drain to the septic system or the sewer service line at the property line. 
    City inspector means any employee or city consultant as designated by the city administrator. 
    Commercial user means any place of business that discharges sanitary waste as distinct from industrial wastewater. 
    Commercial wastewater means domestic wastewater emanating from a place of business as distinct from industrial wastewater. 
    Community sewage treatment system means a sewage treatment system that collects sewage from two or more residences or other establishments, consisting of collector lines, pumps, sewage tanks, and a soil treatment unit. The term "community sewage treatment system" is also known as a cluster system. 
    Debt service charge means a charge levied on users of wastewater treatment facilities for the cost of repaying money bonded or loans received to construct said facilities. 
    Determination means the computation of sewer access charge and/or water access charge units assigned to a given property. A determination should be performed when modification is made to the use of the property. 
    Equivalent residential unit (ERU) means a unit of water service equal to 300 gallons per day and/or wastewater volume of 300 gallons per day at an average strength not greater than 250 mg/l of BOD 5 and 300 mg/l of total suspended solids. The number of ERUs for a property shall be calculated based on table 1 and 2 in section 24-50. 
    Extra strength waste means wastewater having a BOD and/or TSS greater than domestic waste and not otherwise classified as an incompatible waste. 
    Facilities means and includes waterworks and sanitary sewer systems or any portion or portions thereof. 
    Governmental user means users that are units, agencies or instrumentalities of federal, state or local government discharging normal domestic strength wastewater. 
    Incompatible waste means waste that either singly or by interaction with other wastes interferes with any waste treatment process, constitutes a hazard to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance or creates any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment works. 
    Individual sewage treatment system means a sewage treatment system connected to a single dwelling or other establishment, consisting of a soil treatment unit, sewage tanks, and associated systems. 
    Industrial users or industries means any of the following: 
(1)  Entities that discharge into a publicly owned wastewater treatment works liquid wastes resulting from the processes employed in industrial or manufacturing processes, or from the development of any natural resources. These are identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented under one of the following divisions: 
Division A. Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing Division B. Mining Division D. Manufacturing Division E. Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitary Sewers Division I. Services  
(2)  Any nongovernmental user of a publicly owned treatment works that discharges wastewater to the treatment works containing toxic pollutants or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to contaminate the sludge of any municipal systems, or to injure or to interfere with any sewage treatment process, or which constitutes a hazard to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance, or creates any hazard in or has an adverse effect on the waters receiving any discharge from the treatment works. 
    Industrial wastewater means gaseous, liquid, and solid wastes resulting from industrial, or manufacturing processes, trade or business, or from the development, recovery or processing of natural resources, including, but not limited to, all Standard Industrial Classification Manual Divisions A, B, D, E, and I manufacturers as distinct from domestic wastewater. 
    Institutional users means users other than commercial, governmental, industrial, or residential users involved in a social, charitable, or religious function, discharging primarily normal domestic strength wastewater (e.g., non-profit organizations). 
    Normal domestic strength wastewater means wastewater that is primarily produced by residential users with BOD 5 concentrations not greater than 250 mg/l and suspended solid concentrations not greater than 300 mg/l. 
    Operation and maintenance means activities required to provide for the dependable and economical functioning of the treatment works, throughout the design or useful life, whichever is longer, of the treatment works, and at the level of performance for which the treatment works were constructed. Operation and maintenance includes replacement. 
    Operation and maintenance costs means expenditures for operation and maintenance, including replacement. 
    Public wastewater collection system means a system of sanitary sewers owned, maintained, operated, and controlled by the city. 
    Replacement means the obtaining and installing of equipment, accessories, or appurtenances that are necessary during the design life or useful life, whichever is longer, of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. 
    Replacement costs means expenditures for replacement. 
    Residential property means a property that is used exclusively for permanent human living space, including single-family homes, attached homes, townhomes, apartment units, senior housing, condominiums, and manufactured homes. Residential property does not include motels, hotels, camps, nursing homes, or prisons. 
    Residential user means a user of the treatment facilities whose premises or building is used primarily as a residence for one or more persons, including dwelling units such as detached and semi-detached housing, apartments and mobile homes, and which discharges primarily normal domestic strength sanitary wastes. 
    Sanitary sewer means the sewer facilities intended to carry only liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with minor quantities of groundwater, stormwater, and surface water which are not admitted intentionally. The term "sanitary sewer" also means sanitary sewer systems, including sewage treatment works, disposal systems, and other facilities for disposing of sewage, industrial waste, or other wastes. 
    Sewer service means that piping which connects the sewer main line to a structure served by sewer and extends from such structure to the property line. 
    Sewer service charge means the aggregate of all charges, including charges for operation, maintenance, replacement, debt service, and other sewer-related charges that are billed periodically to users of the city's wastewater treatment facilities. 
    Sewer service fund means one or more funds into which income from sewer service charges is deposited along with other income, including taxes intended to retire debt incurred through capital expenditure for wastewater treatment. Expenditure of the sewer service fund will be for operation, maintenance, and replacement costs and to retire debt incurred through capital expenditure for wastewater treatment. 
    Slug means any discharge of water or wastewater that in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds, for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works. 
    Suspended solids (SS) or total suspended solids (TSS) means the total suspended matter that either floats on the surface or is in suspension in water, wastewater, or other liquids and is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, latest edition, and referred to as non-filterable residue. 
    Toxic pollutant means the concentration of any pollutant or combination of pollutants as defined in standards issued pursuant to Minn. Stats. § 116.07 which upon exposure to or assimilation into any organism will cause adverse effects. 
    User charge means a charge levied on users of a treatment works for the user's proportionate share of the cost of operation and maintenance, including replacement. 
    Users means those residential, commercial, governmental, institutional, and industrial establishments which are connected to the public sewer collection system. 
    Wastewater means the spent water of a community, also referred to as sewage. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present. 
    Wastewater treatment works or treatment works means an arrangement of any devices, facilities, structures, equipment, or processes owned or used by the city for the purpose of the transmission, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic sewage, or industrial wastewater, or structures necessary to recycle or reuse water, including interceptor sewers, outfall sewers, collection sewers, pumping, power, and other equipment and their appurtenances; extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions, and alterations thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled water supply, such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any works, including land, that is an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such treatment. 
    Water service means that piping which connects the water main line to a structure served by water and extends from such structure to the property line. 
    Water service charge means the aggregate of all charges, including charges for operation, maintenance, replacement, debt service, and other water-related charges, that are billed periodically to users of the city's water facilities. 
    Water service fund means one or more funds into which income from water service charges is deposited, along with other income, including taxes intended to retire debt incurred through capital expenditure for water facilities. Expenditure of the water service fund will be for operation, maintenance, and replacement costs and to retire debt incurred through capital expenditure for water facilities. 
    Waterworks means waterworks systems, including mains, valves, hydrants, service connections, wells, pumps, reservoirs, tanks, treatment plants, and other appurtenances of a waterworks system. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1708; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 24-20. - Compliance. 
    The sewer and water system as now constituted, or as shall hereafter be enlarged or extended, shall be operated and maintained under the provisions of this article, subject to the authority of the city council at any time to amend, alter, change or repeal the same. If there are any conflicts between this article and other provisions within this Code, the provisions within this article shall prevail. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1704; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 24-21. - City council management. 
    The city council shall have charge and management of the sewer and water systems, subject to such delegation of authority to the city engineer, public works director, licensed operator and to other city employees as the city council shall provide. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1706; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 24-22. - Sewer service fund. 
    All funds received from the collection of sewer assessments, connection charges, and sewerage use rates shall be used for the payment of costs incurred by the city in connection with the construction, maintenance and operation of the sanitary sewer system within the city. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1736; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 24-23. - Water service fund. 
    All funds received from the collection of water assessments, connection charges, and water use rates, shall be used for the payment of all costs incurred by the city in connection with the construction, maintenance and operation of the waterworks system within the city. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1738; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 24-24. - Responsibility for maintenance. 
(a)  Inspection. The city inspector shall inspect all connections made to the sanitary sewer and waterworks systems, and excavations for the purpose of installing or repairing the same. The city, its agents or assigns, shall have the right to enter in and upon private property, at all reasonable times, for purposes of making inspections or connecting or disconnecting service. 
(b)  City systems. The city shall be responsible for maintaining all publicly owned components of a sanitary sewer improvement that serves two or more residences. The user shall be responsible for maintenance and replacement of the sewer service and the water service, provided, however, that the city shall be responsible for the following sewer service maintenance: inspections, tank pumping, filter maintenance, and operation, maintenance and monitoring of the soil treatment system. All users shall be billed or charged fees, set by ordinance or resolution, for the city's maintenance of sewer service as provided herein. The user shall be solely responsible for all other maintenance, repair and/or replacement of the sewer service, including the connection of a building sewer and all equipment, facilities, and components inside the dwelling or other structure to the public sanitary sewer system. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1710; Ord. No. 06-08; Ord. No. 10-06) 
Sec. 24-25. - Construction requirements. 
    All building sewers, sewer service lines and water service lines shall be constructed in accordance with the city's public works design manual. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1730; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 24-26. - Entry upon private property. 
    The city engineer and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall at reasonable times be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in connection with the operation of the city sanitary sewer and waterworks system. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1752; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 24-27. - City inspector. 
(a)  The city inspector shall examine all applications before construction is begun, and after the construction, enlargement, alteration or repair is complete, the city inspector shall be notified. It shall be unlawful to cover any affected lines until an inspection has been made and such connection and the work incidental thereto has been approved by the city as a proper and suitable connection. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the sewer installer and/or plumber to notify the city inspector by telephone or in writing, not less than eight working hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., before work is to be inspected or tested. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1722; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 24-28. - Restricted hours for sprinkling. 
(a)  Restrictions on water usage. Whenever it is determined by either the mayor or the city council that a shortage of water supply may be imminent, either may act in accordance with the procedures described in subsections (b) and (c) of this section to limit the uses of city water and the times and hours during which water from the city water supply may be used. 
(b)  Action by city council. The city council may act by resolution to limit water usage. The resolution shall state in detail the restrictions imposed on water usage and the charge for instances of noncompliance. The restrictions shall become effective 24 hours after passage of the resolution. The city council shall take such action as is reasonably practicable to inform the general public of the imposition of the restrictions on water usage and of the charges and other penalties which could be imposed for violation of such restrictions and post notice of the water restrictions in public places where other city notices are posted. 
(c)  Action by the mayor. The mayor may act by filing with the city clerk a written certification that there is an imminent shortage of water supply. The certification shall specify in detail the restrictions on water usage and the charge for instances of noncompliance and shall become effective 24 hours after being filed. The city clerk shall endorse on each filing the time and date of filing. The mayor shall take such action as is reasonably practicable to inform the general public of the imposition of restrictions on water usage and of the charges and other penalties for violation of such restrictions and post notice of the water restrictions in public places where other city notices are posted. Restrictions imposed by the mayor may be revoked by written directive from the mayor to the city clerk, who shall endorse on such directive the date and time of receipt, or by action of the city council. 
(d)  Penalties. 
(1)  For each instance of noncompliance with water usage restrictions imposed by this section, a charge set by the city annually in its fee schedule shall be assessed against the property on which the violation occurred and added to the water bill for such premises. The amount of the charge shall be specified by the city council in its resolution and the mayor in mayor's certification to the city clerk. 
(2)  Failure to comply with water usage restrictions after two warnings shall be cause for the discontinuance of water service. 
(3)  Failure to comply with water usage restrictions shall be a petty misdemeanor punishable by the maximum fine allowed by law for such offenses. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1746; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 24-29. - Prohibited discharge into sanitary sewer. 
(a)  Harmful waste. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the sanitary sewer, directly or indirectly, any waste which, by volume, strength or nature, may harm the wastewater treatment facility, cause obstruction to the free flow in sewers, or endanger life or cause a nuisance. This prohibition includes: 
(1)  Any liquids, solids, or gases that by reason of their nature or quantity are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire or explosion, or be injurious in any other way to the wastewater disposal system or to the operation of the system, including, but not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, and sulfides. 
(2)  Solid or viscous substances that will cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities including, but not limited to, grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastic, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes. 
(3)  Any wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 or greater than 9.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the wastewater disposal system. 
(4)  Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to inhibit or disrupt any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the wastewater disposal system, including, but not limited to, any pollutant identified in section 307(a) of the Clean Water Act of 1977. 
(5)  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or substances that, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance or repairs. 
(6)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature in excess of 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius). 
(7)  Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (zero and 65 degrees Celsius). 
(8)  Any garbage that has not been ground or comminuted so that all particles will be carried freely to suspension under flows normally prevailing in the public sewers, with no particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
(9)  Any water or waste containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances that constitute a nuisance or hazard to the structures, equipment, or personnel of the sewage works, or that interfere with the treatment required to meet the requirements of the state or federal government, or any other public agency with proper authority to regulate the discharge from the sewage treatment plant. 
(10)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration that they are not in compliance with regulations issued by the appropriate authority having control over their use or may cause damage or hazards to the treatment works or personnel operating it. 
(11)  Unusual concentrations of suspended solids, including, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues, or of dissolved solids such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride or sodium sulfate. 
(12)  Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of waste constituting a slug. 
(b)  Runoff. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the sanitary sewer, directly or indirectly, any stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, waste from on-site disposal systems, unpolluted cooling or processing water except as permitted by the city. Stormwater and all other unpolluted water shall be discharged to a storm sewer if available or to the ground surface, or other natural outlet approved by the city and other regulatory agencies. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged to a storm sewer or natural outlet on approval and the issuance of a discharge permit by the MPCA. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1732; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 24-30. - Proposal to discharge prohibited waste. 
(a)  Discharge proposal. If any water or wastes prohibited by section 24-29 are proposed to be discharged into the sanitary sewer, directly or indirectly, the party seeking such discharge shall submit an application for such discharge on such form, and containing such information as the city may require. 
(b)  Action on proposal. Upon receipt of an application, the city may take any of the following steps: 
(1)  Deny the application and refuse to accept the proposed discharge. 
(2)  Approve the application and permit discharge of limited quantities and/or rates of discharge. 
(3)  Approve the application and permit discharge upon payments to cover the added cost of handling or treating the wastes. 
(4)  Approve the application and permit discharge based on identified pretreatment conditions. 
(c)  Pretreatment. The design and installation of plant or equipment for pretreatment or equalization of flows shall be subject to the review and approval of the city and subject to the requirements of 40 CFR 403, "Pretreatment Standards," and the state pollution control agency. In establishing the pretreatment measures, the city will consider the following: 
(1)  Grease, oil, and mud interceptors shall be provided when they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients. Interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(2)  Where pretreatment, flow equalization, or interceptors are required, they shall be effectively operated and maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective condition by the owner, at the owner's expense, and shall be open for inspection by the city at all reasonable times. 
(3)  The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control structure together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such structure and equipment shall be constructed at the owner's expense in accordance with plans approved by the city and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(4)  All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics of water and waste shall be determined at the control structure provided or upon suitable samples taken at said control structure and evaluated in accordance with 40 CFR 136, "Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for the Analysis of Pollutant," the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater. In the event that no special structure has been required, the control structure shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer from the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling methods location, times, durations, and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the city. 
(5)  The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall, at the discretion of the city, be required to provide laboratory measurements, tests, and analysis of waters or wastes. The number, type, and frequency of sampling and laboratory analysis to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the city. The industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge to ensure that the federal, state, and local standards are being met. The owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analysis and reporting required by the city. At such times as deemed necessary, the city reserves the right to take measurements and samples for analysis by an outside laboratory. 
(6)  Sufficient flow capacity must be available in downstream facilities in order to permit new connections to the sanitary sewer system. 
(7)  Any permit issued by the city may include special requirements, agreements, or arrangements for pretreatment of industrial waste. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1734; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Secs. 24-31-24-48. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 24-49. - Required connection to city facilities. 
(a)  Facilities connection. To protect the general health and welfare of the city, it is required that any residence, dwelling or other building with access to sewer or water services be connected to city facilities within one year of the time such facilities pass the property where the residence, dwelling or other building is located, provided, however, that connections to the NE Sewer Project must be completed within two years. Residences, dwellings or other buildings receiving sewer or water services that are newly constructed on property adjacent to city facilities shall be connected prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  Deferral of sewer and water connection. A property owner may apply to the city for a deferral of the connection deadline. The applicant must show that the property has properly functioning systems that meet the current state and local standards. The applicant may make such showing by providing a current MPCA compliance inspection report that is satisfactory to the building official every four years. Any inspection of an individual sewage treatment system (septic system) must be completed by a certified MPCA compliance inspector. Septic systems shall be evaluated in accordance with the performance standards in Minn. Rules ch. 7080 and as may be amended from time to time. The building official may permit deferral of the connection deadline for a period not to exceed ten years, or such shorter time as is determined to be appropriate based on the compliance inspection report. During the deferral period, the building official may require completion of additional inspections as conditions warrant, and the deferral may be revoked if such inspection is not completed or demonstrates non-compliance with current state and local standards. In the event a deferral is permitted, the property owner shall pay a one-time utility availability fee of $1,000.00, which shall be in addition to any other fees or charges payable at the time the connection is completed. 
(c)  Appeal to the city council. Upon denial of a deferral, the applicant may appeal to the city council. 
(d)  Work on septic system during deferral period. During a deferral period, an individual sewage treatment system (septic system) may receive normal maintenance, including pumping and clearing of line blockages, but the system shall not be replaced, improved or repaired. In the event a septic system fails during a deferral period, the owner shall promptly complete connection to the city facilities. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1720; Ord. No. 06-08; Ord. No. 09-08; Ord. No. 10-10) 
Sec. 24-50. - Connection to sewer and water systems. 
(a)  Application. No person, firm or corporation shall make any type of connection, repair, enlargement or alteration to the city's facilities except upon making an application therefor on a form provided by the city and receiving a permit issued by the city for such purposes. The application shall include the legal description of the property to be served, the uses for which the connection is requested, and a sketch of the service showing approximate location and the size of the service line to be used. No permit shall be issued until the application fee is paid, the type of connection is determined, and the required access charge is paid, unless such payment is deferred or is to be made in installments by approval of the city council. 
(b)  Installation of service line. For service to property for which a sewer service or water service line has not been previously installed from the main line to the property line, the owner, occupant or user shall contract with a licensed utility installer or plumber for the installation of said line and all payments required shall be assumed by the owner, occupant, or user. Only a utility installer or plumber licensed to operate in the city shall be allowed to install service lines within public rights-of-way. 
(c)  City's authority to impose charges for sewer and water availability. Under Minn. Stats. § 444.075, subd. 3, in order to pay for the construction, reconstruction, repair, enlargement, improvement, or other obtainment, the maintenance, operation and use of the facilities, and for obtaining and complying with permits required by law, the city council may impose just and equitable charges for the use and for the availability of the facilities and for connections with them and make contracts for the charges as provided in Minn. Stats. § 444.075. 
(d)  Sewer access charges. Every lot, parcel of land or building will be charged a specific sum of money for the privilege of making a connection, either directly or indirectly, to facilities for disposal of sewage, industrial waste, water or other liquid from such premises. This charge hereinafter is referred to as the city's sewer access charge (SAC). The city's SAC fee is determined and modified from time to time by ordinance. The total SAC charge for each building or structure shall be equal to its number of ERU units multiplied by the current year SAC rate. The owner of any property desiring to connect such property to an existing sanitary sewer main where such property has not previously been connected to said main may do so on the approval of the city and upon paying a city SAC, provided that capacity exists to serve such property. 
(e)  Water access charges. Every lot, parcel of land or building will be charged a specific sum of money for the privilege of making a connection, either directly or indirectly, to facilities for supply of water for such premises. This charge hereinafter is referred to as the city's water access charge (WAC). The city's WAC fee is determined and modified from time to time by ordinance. The total WAC charge for each building or structure shall be equal to its number of ERU units multiplied by the current year WAC rate. 
(f)  Payment of SAC/WAC. Access charges are payable at the time of building permit issuance. The building official shall not issue a building permit until such charges are paid. 
(g)  Tables of equivalent residential units. The following tables shall be used as a guide for determining the number of ERUs for various user classes: 
TABLE 1. EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNITS (ERUS) 
FOR VARIOUS RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS 
Single-family homes, townhouses, and duplex units 1.0 Unit Condominiums and apartment units 1.0 Unit Mobile homes 1.0 Unit  
TABLE 2. EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNITS (ERUs) 
FOR VARIOUS COMMERCIAL, PUBLIC, AND INSTITUTIONAL FACILITIES 
Facility description Parameter Units Automobile service 2 Service days 1.0 Banquet room 1,000 Square feet 1.0 Barbershop Each 1.0 Bowling alley 3 Alleys 1.0 Car wash (self service) 1 Stall 3.0 Car wash (service station) Each 4.0 Churches 250 Seats 1.0 Fast service restaurant 600 Square feet 1.0 General office building 4,000 Square feet 1.0 Hospitals 1 Bed 1.0 Laundromats 4 Washing machines 1.0 Motels and hotels 2 Rooms 1.0 Nursing home 3 Beds 1.0 Restaurant, drive-in 10 Parking spaces 1.0 Restaurant 600 Square feet 1.0 Retail store 3,000 Square feet 1.0 Roominghouse 7 Beds 1.0 Schools (elementary) 20 Students 1.0 Schools (secondary) 15 Students 1.0 Service station (gas pumping only) Each 1.0 Service station w/service center Each 2.0 Service station w/service center & car wash Each 8.0 Swimming pool Each 1.0 Theatre 50 Seats 1.0 Theatre, drive-in 50 Parking spaces 1.0 Warehouse 15 Employees 1.0  
The areas listed in the parameters include all interior areas utilized by the public and the employees for the conduct of the facility. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1712; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 24-51. - Administration of SAC and WAC. 
(a)  Administration. The building official shall provide the information necessary for the computation of the number of city SAC and WAC units assignable to the building or property in question and shall collect the applicable charge before the issuance of a permit. The building official shall make such information available to the city council upon request. 
(b)  Reports. The city shall maintain a proper system of accounts suitable for determining the operation and maintenance, equipment replacement, and debt retirement costs of the facilities. The city council shall be provided a report of such costs annually. 
(c)  Periodic review of charges. The city shall review and, as necessary, revise SAC and WAC to ensure the proportionality of charges and to ensure the sufficiency of funds to maintain the capacity and performance of the facilities, and to retire the associated debt. 
(d)  Multiple connections. Multiple connections of more than one building to a single building sewer or sewer service line or single water service line shall be permitted only by special application to the city. The applicant shall submit a detailed sketch showing location, grades and special structures to the city engineer for review prior to applying for a permit. All costs involved for the engineering review shall be paid by the applicant along with the other required fees at the time of issuance of the permit. The charge for the cost of the trunk lines, lift station, force mains and disposal facilities shall be levied against each property sought to be connected either through single services or multiple connections. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1714; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 24-52. - Existing drainage and plumbing systems. 
    Prior to connection to the city's facilities, the city inspector shall examine the existing drainage system and the interior plumbing system. All such systems shall conform to the requirements of this article and the requirements of the state plumbing code. In the event that such drainage system or plumbing system is determined to be nonconforming to said requirements, the contractor, owner or occupant shall do whatever corrective work which may be necessary before final hook-up to the city's facilities is made. The decision of the city inspector as to the extent of corrective work to be done in each individual case to conform to said requirements shall be final. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1724; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 24-53. - Installation of connections. 
(a)  Approved installers. All sewer services and waterworks services shall be installed by a utility installer or master plumber licensed in the state. An owner, occupant or licensed plumber may install, repair or make alteration to the building drain or building sewer lines, provided that said construction is conducted under the regulations of this article. Prior to receiving a permit for plumbing work as outlined herein, a satisfactory showing must be made that such plumber, excavator, or utility installer is carrying liability insurance in an accredited company with the city against loss as customarily provided in such policies. 
(b)  Cross-connections. In accordance with Minn. Rules ch. 4715, cross-connections between potable water systems and other systems or equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable safety are prohibited, except when and where, as approved by the city, suitable protective devices such as break tanks, reduced pressure zone backflow preventer, or equal device is installed, tested, and maintained to ensure proper operation on a continuing basis. Cross-connections between an individual water supply and a potable public supply shall not be made. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1726; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 24-54. - Repair of connections. 
    If a water service or sewer service is damaged, leaking, in disrepair, or failing, the user or owner of the property connected by such service line shall promptly repair the service. In the event the city determines that the service is causing or creating a nuisance, the city shall give written notice of the condition by mail or personal service to the user or owner of the property. The user or owner of the property shall repair the service within the time indicated in the notice. If the service is not timely repaired, the city may turn off the service until the service line is repaired or take any other action authorized by law. The city shall include any costs incurred under this article in the user's current water or sewer service charges and, in the event such charges are not timely paid, the city shall specially assess the costs in accordance with chapter 20. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1714; Ord. No. 06-08; Ord. No. 10-06) 
Sec. 24-55. - Excavating work. 
    All installation work or repair of connection to the sanitary sewer, sewer service, or waterworks system, including grades, bends and backfilling, shall be inspected by the city inspector. No work shall be covered or backfilled until directed by said inspector. All work and excavations shall be protected by barricades and warning markers and lights reasonable and suitable for the purpose. The city shall be held harmless of any claim or loss as might otherwise arise for damage, loss or injury caused by or arising by reason of such work being performed. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1728; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Secs. 24-56-24-83. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SERVICE CHARGES AND WATER METERS 

Sec. 24-84. - Sewer service charges. 
    The city may annually review the expenses incurred in providing sanitary sewer service. The sewer rate structure will be adjusted from time to time to provide adequate revenue to cover the annual operation and maintenance expenses. The rate structure will also provide for revenues to create a reserve fund to be used for major repairs, replacement and capital expenditures for improvements. Each user of the sanitary sewer system shall pay a monthly base fee multiplied by the number of ERUs. The city will bill for sewer service on a regular basis. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1716; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 24-85. - Water service charges. 
    The city may annually review the expenses incurred in providing potable water. The water rate structure will be adjusted from time to time to provide adequate revenue to cover the annual operation and maintenance expenses. The rate structure will also provide for revenues to create a reserve fund to be used for major repairs, replacement and capital expenditures for improvements. Each user of the waterworks system shall pay a monthly base fee multiplied by the number of ERUs. Each user of the waterworks system shall also pay a usage fee equal to the metered water usage multiplied by the usage fee set by the city. The city will bill for water service on a regular basis. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1718; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 24-86. - Water metering requirements. 
(a)  Water meter required. Except for extinguishment of fires, no person except authorized city employees shall use water from the water supply system of the city or permit water to be drawn therefrom unless the water is metered, bypassing through a meter supplied or approved by the city. No person shall connect, disconnect, take apart, or in any manner change or cause to be changed, or interfere with any such meter or the action thereof unless authorized by the city council or designated city employees. 
(b)  Water meter charge. A charge shall be made to owners or account holders for water meters, and payment for meters shall be made in advance before delivery for installation. Water meters shall be equipped with remote reading devices. The charge will be the actual cost to the city of supplying the meter. 
(c)  Unserviceable meters. The city shall maintain and repair or replace all meters when rendered unserviceable through ordinary wear and tear. However, when replacement, repair or adjustment of any meter is rendered necessary by the act, neglect or carelessness of the owner or occupant of any premises, any expense caused the city thereby shall be charged against and collected from the owner or occupant of the premises. Water service may be discontinued until the cause is corrected and the charge collected. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1742; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 24-87. - Water meter setting. 
    All water meters hereafter installed shall be in accordance with the connection regulations of the city and the following rules: 
(1)  Service pipe. The service pipe from the water main to the meter, when entering the building, shall be brought through the floor in a vertical position. The building valve shall be installed about 12 inches above the floor. 
(2)  Meter location. The meter shall be located so that the bottom is from six inches to 12 inches above the finished floor line. The meter shall be set in an area adjacent to a floor drain, unless an alternate method is approved by the city inspector. A suitable bracket to support the meter in a proper vertical position and to prevent noise from vibration shall be provided. 
(3)  Full way valve. All meter installations shall have a full way valve on the street side of the meter. In no case shall there be more than 12 inches of pipe exposed between the point of entrance through the basement floor and the building valve. A full way valve shall also be installed on the house side of and adjacent to the meter. 
(4)  Copper piping. Meter setting devices for five-eighths inch, three-fourths inch and one inch meters shall be of copper pipe or tubing from the terminus of the service pipe up to and including the house side full way valve. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1744; Ord. No. 06-08) 
Sec. 24-88. - Delinquent utility accounts. 
    Accounts shall be considered delinquent when no payments have been received after 90 days following the due date and no arrangement for payment has been agreed to by the owner or other account holder. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1740; Ord. No. 06-08) 
PART II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Official controls, Minn. Stats. § 462.357 et seq. 

Chapter 101 - GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 101-1. - Applicability of chapter 1. 
    The provisions of chapter 1 of this Code apply to this part. 
Sec. 101-2. - Status. 
    While this part is a codification of the ordinances pertaining to land development, provisions in part I of this Code may also pertain to land development. The failure to include provisions in this part does not excuse failure to comply with such provisions. The inclusion of provisions in this part that do not apply to land development does not excuse failure to comply with such provisions. 
Sec. 101-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abutting means making contact with or separated only by public thoroughfare, railroad, or public utility right-of-way. 
    Accessory building means a subordinate building or a portion of the main building that is located on the same lot or parcel as the main building and the use of which is clearly incidental to that of the main building or to the use of the premises. 
    Accessory use means a use subordinate to and serving the principal use on the same lot and customarily incidental thereto. 
    Advertising means a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, activity, or entertainment not conducted, sold, or offered upon the premises where such sign is located. 
    Agricultural use means a parcel of land which is used for the production of farm crops such as vegetables, fruit trees, grain, and other crops and their storage on the area, as well as for the raising thereon of domestic and non-domestic animals. 
    Airport or heliport means any land or structure which is used or intended for use for the landing and take-off of aircraft, and any appurtenant land or structure used or intended for use for port buildings or other port structures or rights-of-way. 
    Animal unit. The following animals constitute one animal unit equivalency: one cow or steer, one horse, donkey, or burro, three sheep or ten fowl, or an equivalent thereof. 
    Animals, domestic, means animals commonly kept for house pets, such as dogs, cats and similar animals. 
    Animals, exotic, means animals, reptiles or fowl that are not naturally tame or gentle but are of a wild nature or disposition or which, because of their vicious nature or other characteristics, would constitute a danger to human life or property. 
    Animals, non-domestic, means livestock and poultry commonly kept for productive purposes on a farm such as cattle, swine, horses, sheep, goats, chickens, and other similar animals. 
    Antenna means any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting or transmitting electromagnetic waves, including, but not limited to, directional antennas such as panels, microwave dishes and satellite dishes and omni-directional antennas such as whip antennas. 
    Applicant means any person who wishes to obtain a building permit, zoning or subdivision approval. 
    Attorney means the attorney employed by the city, unless otherwise stated. 
    Auto reduction yard means a lot or yard where four or more unlicensed motor vehicles or the remains thereof are kept for the purpose of dismantling, sales of parts, sale as scrap, storage of parts from dismantled cars, or abandonment. 
    Automobile repair and reconditioning means general repair, rebuilding, or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles or trailers, including body work, framework, welding, painting service, and upholstering service. 
    Automobile service means the service or replacement or repair of any part of the automobile which does not include or require body or fender work or repair, painting or upholstering service. The term "automobile service" may include motor fuel sales. 
    Basement means a portion of a building located partly underground but having more than half its floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
    Block means the enclosed area within the perimeter of roads, property lines or boundaries of a subdivision. 
    Boulevard means the portion of the street right-of-way between the outside edge of the roadway and the property line. 
    Buildable land means contiguous land area occurring within the property lines of a parcel or lot, excluding wetlands, watercourses, ponds, floodplains and public waters below the ordinary high water mark. 
    Buildable lot means a legal lot of record that meets all of the applicable zoning and subdivision requirements of this Code. 
    Building means any structure having a roof which may provide shelter, support, protection, or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind. For carports, temporary hoop structures and bus/weather shelters that do not require a building permit, the building square footage shall be included in the total building square footage allowed per lot, but not in the total building count, provided that there shall not be more than two such structures. 
    Building height means a distance measured from the mean curb level along the front lot line or from the mean ground level for all of that portion of the structure having frontage on a public right-of-way, whichever is higher, to the top of the cornice of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, to a point on the roof directly above the highest wall of a shed roof, to the uppermost point on a round or other arch type roof, or to the mean distance of the highest gable on a pitched or hip roof. 
    Building line means a line delineating the buildable area and the required yards as defined in this section. 
    Building setback means the minimum horizontal distance between any building, house, garage or other permanent structure and lot line or the ordinary high water mark of a lake, river, wetland or public waters. 
    Business means any occupation, employment or enterprise wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold, or which occupies time, attention, labor and materials, or where services are offered for compensation. 
    Butt lot means a lot at the end of a block and located between two corner lots. 
    Call center means a central office where agents or operators man banks of telephones to either make outgoing or field incoming telephone calls for a company or organization. 
    Carport means an automobile shelter having one or more sides open. 
    Cemetery means a site set aside for the burial or interment of the human dead. 
    Church means a building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship. 
    Clear cutting means the removal of an entire stand of vegetation. 
    Club or lodge means a nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members paying annual dues. Their club structure, meeting place or lodge is a premises restricted to club members and their guests where food and drink may be served, provided that adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities are available in compliance with the applicable federal, state, and municipal laws. 
    Commercial greenhouse or nursery means a retail or wholesale business whose principal activity is the selling of plants grown on the site and having outside storage, growing, or display. 
    Commercial recreation, major, means a building, structure or open space designed, constructed and operated by private enterprise for recreational purposes and open to the general public. The minimum area shall be 80 acres of either one lot of record or contiguous parcels under one ownership in which 50 percent of the lot or parcels are permanently developed. The facility shall abut a street designated in the comprehensive plan as a principal, intermediate, or minor arterial or collector street. Such facilities may include amusement parks and similar enterprises. 
    Commercial recreation, minor, means a building, structure or open space designed, constructed and operated by private enterprise for recreational purposes and open to the general public. The facility must meet the minimum lot size of the zoning district. Minor commercial recreation facilities shall be all commercial recreation facilities that do not meet the standards of a major commercial recreation facility. Such facilities may include bowling alleys, tennis courts and similar uses. 
    Commercial wireless telecommunication services means licensed commercial wireless telecommunication services, including cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging, wireless internet and instant messaging services and similar services. 
    Common open space means land, water or a combination of land and water within a planned unit development that is designed and intended for the use and enjoyment of residents of the development. The term "common open space" includes all land within the development except for individual building lots and land accepted for public dedication. 
    Comprehensive development plan means the strategic plan or any part thereof, including a compilation of policy statements, goals, standards and maps indicating the general locations recommended for various functional classes of land use, prepared by the city for the general physical development of the city. 
    Comprehensive plan means the city's comprehensive plan, together with all maps and charts setting forth the general plan for land use, transportation, and community facilities as adopted by the city council. 
    Compatible means the exterior architectural appearance, lot layout and design of a proposed structure or subdivision shall be in character with adjacent uses and structures and shall not cause: 
(1)  A depreciation of adjacent property values; 
(2)  A nuisance, compared to existing or other proposed structures or uses. Types of nuisance characteristics include, but are not limited to, noise, dust, odors, glare, unsightly building exterior, unsightly exterior storage, traffic generation, signs, refuse, or lack of landscaping. 
    Conditional use means a use of land classified by the regulations of a primary zoning district as a conditional use. 
    Conference center means a facility operated to conduct or provide facilities for short-term meetings, conferences, seminars and retreats to serve the needs of for-profit and nonprofit patrons, religious or spiritual institutions and general group meeting engagements. The term "conference centers" may include lodging, food service and recreational facilities. 
    Contour map means a map on which irregularities of land surface are shown by lines connecting points of equal elevation. Contour interval is the vertical height between contour lines. 
    Contractor's shop means an enclosed space used for the housing and/or operating of machinery, the provision of services, the fabrication of building-related products, and associated interior storage. 
    Control measure means a practice or combination of practices to control erosion and attendant pollution. 
    Convenience store means a retail store that offers for sale a limited amount of food and household products and may also include motor fuel sales. 
    Corner lot means a lot bordered on at least two sides by adjoining streets. 
    Corporate headquarters means the central office operations for a corporation. 
    County means Anoka County. 
    Covenant means a contract between two or more individuals which constitutes a restriction of a particular parcel of land. 
    Crematorium means a state-licensed facility or establishment for the cremation of human corpses. A crematorium may only operate as a conditional use accessory to a cemetery or mortuary. 
    Day care means a facility or home where children under 12 years of age who are not members of the family of the supervisor or custodian in charge: 
(1)  Meet or are scheduled to meet regularly for more than one day a week, for all or part of the day; 
(2)  Meet either to be watched or cared for while their parents or guardians are otherwise engaged. 
The term "day care" shall not include hospitals, Sunday schools, facilities under the direction of an established and accredited school system, facilities used for club or organization meetings when such club or organization regularly meets no more than once a week, or casual babysitting. 
    Deflection means the angle between a line and the prolongation of the preceding line. 
    Density, gross, means the quotient of the total number of dwelling units divided by the gross site area, expressed in acres. 
    Density, net, means an intensity measure expressed as the number of units per net buildable site area expressed in acres. It is the density of the buildable portion of a site. 
    Developer means the legal or beneficial owner of a lot or parcel of any land proposed for inclusion in a development, including the holder of an option or contract to purchase or duly authorized representative action with the written consent of the fee owner. 
    Development means the construction, installation or alteration of any structure, the extraction, clearing or other alteration of land, terrestrial or aquatic vegetation, or the course current or cross section of any water body or watercourse or the division of land into two or more parcels. In chapter 107, the term "development" means the act of building structures and installing site improvements. 
    Distribution center means a facility where goods are received and/or stored indoors for delivery to the ultimate customer at remote locations. 
    Division and rearrangement means the division of one or two lots for the purpose of combining a portion or portions thereof with other lots, without creating additional lots. 
    Double frontage lots means lots having a front line abutting on one street and a back or rear line abutting on another street. 
    Drainage course means a watercourse or indenture for the drainage of surface water. 
    Drive-in business means any business in which people are provided a service or a sale is made without the passenger being required to leave the vehicle. 
    Dwelling unit means a residential building or portion thereof, including a manufactured home as defined by state statutes intended for permanent occupancy by a family, but not including hotels, motels, boardinghouses or roominghouses, tourist homes or trailers. 
    Easement means authorization by a property owner of the use of the property by another or for a public purpose. In chapter 107, the term "easement" means a grant by an owner of land for a specific use by persons other than the owner. 
    Engineer means the registered engineer employed by the city. 
    Essential services means underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam, telephone or water transmission or distribution systems; collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, traffic signals, hydrants or other similar equipment and accessories in conjunction therewith; but not including buildings, antennas, wind generators, satellite equipment for commercial use, personal communication service (PCS) system towers, microwave equipment and substations. 
    Exterior storage (including open storage) means the storage of goods, materials, equipment, motor vehicles, manufactured products and similar items not fully enclosed by a building. 
    Extraction area means any non-agricultural, artificial excavation of earth exceeding 50 square feet of surface area of two feet in depth, excavated or made by the removal from the natural surface of the earth, sod, soil, sand, gravel, stone or other natural matter, or made by turning, breaking or undermining the surface of the earth. 
    Family means: 
(1)  An individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship, living together as a single housekeeping unit; or 
(2)  A group of not more than four persons, who need not be related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit. 
    Farming means the process of operating a farm for the growing and harvesting of crops, raising common nondomestic animals and containing those necessary accessory buildings related to operating the farm. 
    Feedlot means a lot or building or combination of lots and buildings intended for the confined feeding, breeding, raising, or holding of animals and specifically designed as a confinement area in which manure may accumulate, or where the concentration of animals is such that a vegetative cover cannot be maintained within the enclosure. Open lots used for the feeding and rearing of poultry, including poultry ranges and barns, dairy farms, swine facilities, beef lots and barns, horse stalls, mink ranches and zoos, shall be considered animal feedlots. Pastures shall not be considered animal feedlots. 
    Fence means any partition, structure, wall, or gate erected as a divider marker, barrier or enclosure and located along the boundary, or within the required yard. 
    Final plat means the final map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider's plan of subdivision, which meets the requirements of Minn. Stats. ch. 505, is presented to the city council for approval and which, if approved, will be submitted to the county recorder or registrar of titles. 
    Flood fringe means that portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway. 
    Floodplain means the areas adjoining a watercourse or water basin that have been or may be covered by a regional flood. 
    Floodway means the channel of the watercourse, the bed of water basins, and those portions of the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and discharge floodwater and provide water storage during a regional flood. 
    Floor area means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building or portion thereof devoted to a particular use. The floor area shall not include basement or cellar floor area other than area devoted to retailing activities, the production or processing of goods, or to business or professional offices. 
    Floor area ratio means the ratio of gross building area to gross land area. 
    Floor plan means a graphic representation of the anticipated utilization of the floor area within a building or structure, but not necessarily as detailed as construction plans. 
    Frontage means that boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated public street. In chapter 107, the term "frontage" means the distance between the side lot lines measured along the right-of-way designated by the city council to serve the lot. 
    Garage, attached, means a building that shares at least 50 percent of common walls and footings and is built of similar material, is color coordinated with the principal dwelling, and materials and exterior finish of the walls common to the principal dwelling are the same. 
    Garage, detached, means free standing building with an independent structural system built of similar material and color coordinated with the principal dwelling. 
    Garage, private, means a detached or attached accessory building which is used primarily for storing passenger vehicles or trailers. 
    Garage, public, means a building or portion of a building, except as defined in this section as a private garage or as a repair garage, used for the storage of motor vehicles, or where any such vehicles are kept for remuneration or hire and in which any sale of gasoline, oil and accessories is only incidental to the principal use. 
    Garage, repair, means a building or space utilized for the repair or maintenance of motor vehicles. 
    Garage sale means any display of used goods and/or samples for sale of said goods on a property customarily used as a residence. The persons conducting the sale shall be residents of the immediate neighborhood. 
    Grocery store means a retail establishment primarily selling prepackaged and perishable food as well as other convenience and household goods. 
    Group home means a state-licensed residential facility where persons reside for purposes of rehabilitation, treatment, or special care. Such persons may be orphaned, suffer chemical or emotional impairment, or suffer social maladjustment or dependency. 
    Health care facility means a state-certified or licensed facility or institution, whether public or private, principally engaged in providing services for health maintenance, diagnosis or treatment of human disease, pain, injury, deformity or physical condition, including, but not limited to, a general hospital, special hospital, mental hospital, public health center, diagnostic center, treatment center, rehabilitation center, extended care facility, skilled nursing home, nursing home, intermediate care facility, tuberculosis hospital, chronic disease hospital, maternity hospital, outpatient clinic, dispensary, home health care agency, boarding home or other home for sheltered care, and bioanalytical laboratory or central services facility serving one or more such institutions but excluding institutions that provide healing solely by prayer. 
    Home occupation means any gainful occupation or profession conducted on a lot zoned for residential or agricultural use; engaged in only by the occupant of a dwelling that is located on the lot; for which no signs other than those normally utilized in a residential district are present, limited stock in trade is stored on the premises, and over-the-counter retail sales are not involved. 
    Hotel means a building which provides a common entrance, lobby, halls and stairway and in which lodging is offered, with or without meals, to eight or more guests. 
    Hydrophytic vegetation means macrophytic plant life growing in water, soil or on a substrate that is at least periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of excessive water content. 
    Individual sewage treatment system means the sewage treatment system or part thereof serving a dwelling, or other establishment, or group thereof, which utilizes subsurface soil treatment and disbursal. 
    Interim use means temporary use of a property until a particular date, until the occurrence of a particular event, or until zoning regulations no longer permit it. 
    Junk or accumulation of debris means maintaining or permitting the accumulation of discarded or unused machinery, household appliances, automobile bodies, lumber, wood trash, debris, or other material, or the rank growth of vegetation among the items so accumulated, in a manner conducive to the harboring of rats, mice, snakes, mosquitoes or vermin, or in any manner creating fire, health, or safety hazards. 
    Junk motor vehicle means any motor vehicle, as defined in Minn. Stats. § 169.011, that: 
(1)  Is three years old or older; 
(2)  Is extensively damaged, with the damage including such things as broken or missing wheels, motor, drive train, or transmission; 
(3)  Is apparently inoperable; 
(4)  Does not have a valid, current registration plate; and 
(5)  Has an approximate fair market value equal only to the approximate value of the scrap in it. 
    Junk yard means an open area where waste, used or secondhand materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber, tires and bottles. The term "junk yard" includes auto reduction yard. 
    Kennel, dog means any place where four or more dogs over six months of age are owned, boarded, bred, or offered for sale. 
    Key map means a map drawn to comparatively small scale that definitively shows the area proposed to be platted and the area surrounding it to a given distance. 
    Land alteration means depositing and/or excavating material so as to alter 1,000 cubic yards or more of the existing grade, either by hauling and/or regrading the area. 
    Land disturbing or development activities means any change of the land surface, including removing vegetative cover, excavating, filling, grading, and the construction of any structure. 
    Landscaping means alteration of the natural terrain, including the planting of trees, grass, shrubs, and ground cover. 
    Loading space or loading berth means an area not within a building used for the loading or unloading of goods from any type of vehicle. 
    Lodge. See Club. 
    Lot means a parcel or plot of land occupied or capable of being occupied by one or more structures and intended as a unit for purposes of ownership. A lot is not necessarily buildable; provided, however, that in chapter 107 the term "lot" means a parcel or portion of land in a subdivision or plat of land separated from other parcels or portions by description, as on a subdivision or registered land survey map, for the purpose of sale or lease or separate use thereof. 
    Lot area means the area of a lot in a horizontal plane bounded by the lot lines. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot situated at the junction of, and abutting on two or more intersecting streets, or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a continuous street, the interior angle of which does not exceed 135 degrees, and which fronts on the outside of a curve not greater in length than 110 feet with a radius not greater than 70 feet, except that in chapter 107 the term "corner lot" means a lot bordered on at least two sides by adjoining streets. 
    Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot. 
    Lot, double frontage, means a lot that has a front line abutting on one street and a back or rear line abutting on another street. 
    Lot, front, means that boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated public street; in the case of a corner lot it shall be the side of the lot that the house is addressed from; in the case of a lake or river lot it shall be the side of the lot that abuts the lake or river. 
    Lot line means the property line bounding a lot, except that where any portion of a lot extends into the public right-of-way for roadway purposes, the line of such public right-of-way shall be the lot line for purposes of this definition whether such right-of-way is dedicated within a plat, conveyed by easement or established by prescriptive right. 
    Lot of record means any lot that individually or as a part of a subdivision has been recorded in the office of the registrar of deeds or the county recorder. 
    Lot, outside corner, means a lot located on the outside corner of a roadway as depicted in exhibit 7. 
    Lot, rear, means that boundary of a lot which is opposite the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less than ten feet in length, or if the lot forms a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be a line ten feet in length within the lot, parallel to, and at the maximum distance from the front lot line. 
    Lot, side, means any boundary of a lot that is not a front lot line or a rear lot line. 
    Lot, through, means a lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines abutting two substantially parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot, both street lines shall be front lot lines for applying this definition. 
    Lot width means the maximum horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot, measured at the front yard setback line. 

    Manufacturing means all uses that include the compounding, processing, packaging, treatment, or assembly of products and materials, provided that such use will not generate offensive odors, glare, smoke, dust, noise, vibrations, or other objectionable influences that extend beyond the lot on which the use is located. Generally, these are industries dependent upon raw materials refined elsewhere. 
    Marine business means a business oriented toward the needs of people using public waters, including the provision of bait, boating supplies such as gas, oil, incidental parts and accessories, and services such as rental, maintenance and repair of boats, motors, and similar equipment. 
    Metes and bounds description means a method of property description whereby properties are described by means of their directions from an easily identifiable location. 
    Mineral excavation or mining means the extraction of sand, gravel, rock, soil or other material from the land in the amount of 1,000 cubic yards or more and the removal thereof from the site. For the purpose of this definition, mining shall not include the removal of materials associated with the construction of a building, the removal of excess materials in accordance with approved plats or utility and highway construction, or minor agricultural and sod removal except as further regulated herein. 
    Minimum subdivision design standards means the guides, principles and specifications for the preparation of subdivision plans indicating, among other things, the minimum and maximum parameters of the various elements set forth in the plans. 
    Mottled soils. See Redoximorphic features. 
    Natural waterway means a natural passage in the surface of the earth so situated and having such a topographical nature that surface or percolating water flows through it from other areas before reaching a final ponding area. 
    Nonconforming structure means any structure that would not conform to the applicable regulations if the structures were to be erected under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Nonconforming use means use of land, buildings or structures that does not comply with all the regulations of this chapter or any amendments thereto governing the zoning district in which such use is located. 
    Noxious matter or material means material capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction or is capable of causing detrimental effects on the physical well-being of individuals or the environment. 
    Nursing home means a state-licensed facility used to provide care for aged or infirm persons who require nursing care and related services in accordance with these regulations. 
    Occupancy means the purpose for which a building is used or intended to be used. The term "occupancy" shall also include the building or rooms housing such use. Change of occupancy is not intended to include change of tenants or proprietors. 
    Off-street loading space means a space accessible from a street or driveway for the use of trucks or other vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise or materials. Such space shall be of size as to accommodate one vehicle of the type typically used in the particular business. 
    Office uses means those commercial activities that take place in office buildings where goods are not produced, sold, or repaired, and includes banks, general offices, governmental offices, insurance offices, real estate offices, travel agency or transportation ticket offices, telephone exchanges, utility offices, radio broadcasting and similar uses. 
    Open sales lot/exterior storage means any land used or occupied for the purpose of buying, selling, and storing of any goods, materials, or merchandise where such goods are not enclosed within a building. 
    Outdoor commercial recreation facility means an outdoor recreation facility operated as a business. 
    Owner means a person having sufficient legal interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under these land development regulations. 
    Parking space means a suitably surfaced and permanently maintained area either within or outside of a building of sufficient size to store a vehicle. 
    Pedestrian way means a public right-of-way across or within a block, to be used by pedestrians. 
    Performance standard means any criterion established by these land development regulations or deemed necessary by the city council to achieve the goals and objectives in these land development regulations and the comprehensive plan. 
    Pet services means a veterinary clinic, pet hospital or pet grooming shop. 
    Plan, concept, means a report in map and text form submitted as the first step of a planned unit development (PUD) proposal, depicting the location, general purpose, general type of land use, and circulation pattern, primary relationship between site elements and between the proposed development and surrounding development, proposed general schedule of development and information on the proposed developer. 
    Plan, site, means a map or graphics prepared to scale depicting the development of a tract of land, including, but not limited to, the location and relationship of the structures, streets, driveways, recreation areas, parking areas, utilities, landscaping, existing and proposed grading, walkways, and other site development information as related to a proposed development. 
    Planned unit development (PUD) means a development, developed according to a plan approved by the city, under single ownership or unified control. A planned unit development allows for flexibility not available under normal zoning district requirements. A planned unit development may include a combination of land uses. 
    Plat means a map or drawing which graphically delineates the boundary of land parcels for the purpose of identification and record of title. The plat is a recorded legal document that must conform to all state laws. 
    Preliminary plat means the preliminary map, drawing, or chart indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the planning commission and city council for their consideration and which meets all the requirements herein enumerated. 
    Principal structure or use means that one which determines the predominant use or structure as contrasted to accessory use or structure. A principal use may be either a permitted or conditional use. 
    Protective covenants means contracts entered into between private parties that constitute a restriction on the use of all or some of the private property within a subdivision for the benefit of the property owners. 
    Public land means land owned or operated by municipal, school district, county, state or other governmental units. 
    Public waters means waters of the state as defined in Minn. Stats. § 103G.005, subd. 15. 
    Redoximorphic features (commonly referred to as "mottling" or "mottled soils") means features formed in saturated soil by the process of reduction, translocation, and oxidation of iron and manganese compounds, or other soil, landscape or vegetative indicators, as defined in Minn. Rules pt. 7080.1720, subpt. 5, item E. 
    Redoximorphic soils means soils that are saturated, flooded, or ponded long enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part. 
    Regional flood means a flood that is representative of large floods known to have occurred generally in the state and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of a 100-year recurrence interval. 
    Research facility means medical, chemical, electrical, metallurgical or other scientific research conducted in accordance with the provisions of these land development regulations. 
    Rest home or nursing home means a private home for the care of children or the aged or infirm. Such a home does not contain equipment for surgical care or for the treatment of disease or injury, nor does it include maternity care or care for mental illnesses or infirmities. 
    Restaurants, Class I, means traditional restaurants where food is served by a waiter to a customer and consumed while seated at a counter or a table. Food is served predominantly on non-disposable containers. 
    Restaurants, Class II, means fast food restaurants in which a majority of the customers are served food at a counter and take it to a table to eat at or may take food outside to consume in a vehicle or off the premises. 
    Retail shopping uses means stores and shops selling personal services or goods to the general public or over a counter. 
    Retention facility means a permanent natural or manmade structure, including wetlands, for the temporary storage of runoff that contains a permanent pool of water. 
    Right-of-way means the area between property lines dedicated for public use or restricted for certain private use such as utilities. 
    Road means a public right-of-way affording primary access by vehicles to abutting property whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, boulevard, land, place, or however otherwise designated. Egress and ingress easements shall not be considered roads. 
    Screening means a physical barrier that reduces the visibility between adjoining uses by installation of berms, landscaping, walls or similar improvements. 
    Sediment means solid matter carried by water, sewage, or other liquids. 
    Setback means the minimum required horizontal distance between a sign or the vertical wall of a building and lot line or ordinary high water mark. Distances are to be measured at the closest point of the structure to the lot line at ground level. 
    Sewage means any water carrying domestic waste, exclusive of drainage of any residence, industry, agricultural or commercial establishment, whether treated or untreated, and includes the liquid waste produced by bathing, laundry, and culinary operations and from toilets and floor drains. 
    Shopping center means a retail center that is characterized by size, accessibility, readily available parking, uniform building character and separation of the automobile and pedestrian that provides retail shopping convenience with facilities which are designed and located consistent with the provisions of the comprehensive plan. 
    Sign means any written announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration, insignia or illumination used to advertise or promote the interest of any person when the same is displayed or placed out of doors in view of the general public, or inside of a building within three feet of a transparent window. A sign shall be considered as a structure or a part of a structure for the purpose of applying yard and height regulations except as herein provided. 
    Sketch plan means an informal layout of the proposed subdivision. Exact accuracy is not a requirement of a sketch plan. 
    Standard subdivision means a subdivision involving the creation of three or more parcels, tracts, or lots. 
    Story means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it; or, if there is no floor above, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above. 
    Street. 
(1)  General rules. A public right-of-way that affords the principal means of access to abutting property, except that in chapter 107, the term "street" means: 
a.  A right-of-way approved for vehicular and pedestrian traffic and accepted by the city council for maintenance and public travel. 
b.  A highway, thoroughfare, arterial, parkway, collector, avenue, drive, circle, road, boulevard or any other similar term describing an entity complying with the preceding requirements. 
(2)  Arterial street means a street or highway with access restrictions designed to carry large volumes of traffic between various sectors of the city and beyond. 
(3)  Collector street means a roadway designed to perform the function of collecting traffic from local streets and distributing it to arterials. Collector streets are identified on the comprehensive plan, except that in chapter 107 the term "collector street" means a street that carries traffic from minor streets to arterials. 
(4)  Cul-de-sac means a minor street with only one outlet and having an appropriate turnaround for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement. 
a.  Permanent cul-de-sac is one that, due to physical limitations, will not be extended beyond the subdivision. 
b.  Temporary cul-de-sac is one that is intended to accommodate a future extension of the street to adjacent property. 
(5)  Frontage road means a street located on the side of an arterial street for service to abutting property and for control of access. 
(6)  Principal arterial means a roadway that is designed to accommodate long trips at the highest allowable speeds within and through the metropolitan area. Principal arterials connect all sub-regions within the area and urban and rural service areas within metropolitan center, as well as provide connections to outstate cities. 
(7)  Private street means a privately owned street serving one or more lots. 
(8)  Service street means a minor street that is parallel and adjacent to a thoroughfare and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
(9)  Street extension means that portion of any street which does not contain a cul-de-sac and dead ends at the outer boundary of a subdivision for the purpose of providing a thru street to future development. Any street extension required to be constructed with the improvements of any subdivision shall be constructed to city street standards as set forth in chapter 22. Principal driveways and secondary access are prohibited on a street extension unless approved by the city council pursuant to the procedures for granting a variance as set forth at section 109-48. 
    Street width means the shortest distance between the edges of the surface of a street. 
    Structural alteration means any change, other than incidental repairs, that would prolong the life of the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or foundations. 
    Structure means anything manufactured, constructed or erected that is normally attached to or positioned on land, including portable structures, earthen structures, roads, signs, parking lots, and paved storage areas. 
    Subdivider means any person commencing proceedings under this Code to effect a subdivision of land under chapter 107 for his own account or for another. 
    Subdivision means the division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or more lots, either by plat, metes and bounds, or by registered land survey. In chapter 107, the term "subdivision" means the division or separation by plat, registered land survey or metes and bounds description of an area, parcel, or tract of land under single ownership into two or more parcels, tracts or lots for transfer of ownership or for residential, commercial, industrial, or other use or any combination thereof. The term "subdivision" includes resubdivision and where it is appropriate to the context relates either to the process of subdividing or the land to be subdivided. The term subdivision shall not include the separation or division of land for agricultural purposes into parcels, tracts or lots greater than 20 acres in areas where no new streets, roads or other rights-of-way are involved. 
    Tower means any ground- or roof-mounted pole, spire, structure, or combination thereof taller than 15 feet, including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, and masts, intended for the purpose of mounting an antenna, meteorological device, or similar apparatus above grade. This definition will not apply to any radio tower that is used solely for commercial broadcasting purposes over public frequencies and is more than 150 feet in height. 
    Transient sale means the temporary or transient sale and delivery of goods, wares and merchandise, or transaction of any temporary, seasonal or transient business outside of a building with a valid certificate of occupancy, in or upon any vacant lot, motor vehicle, trailer, tent or railroad car. 
    Travel trailer means any type of vehicle that can be readily adapted to or does provide facilities for a person to eat or sleep, and is readily adaptable for transporting. 
    Use, permitted, means a public or private use that may be lawfully established in a particular district or districts, which of itself conforms with all purposes, objectives, requirements, regulations, and performance standards of a particular district. 
    Vehicle means a machine propelled by power other than human power, designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and transports persons or property or pulls machinery and shall include, without limitation, automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, snowmobiles, all terrain vehicles, and tractors. 
    Vehicle, passenger, means any motor vehicle designed and used for carrying not more than ten persons. 
    Veterinary means those uses concerned with the diagnosis, treatment and care of animals, including animal or pet hospitals. 
    Warehousing means the storage of materials or equipment within an enclosed building as a principal use. 
    Waterfront uses, residential, means boat docks and storage, fish house, fish cleaning, water recreation equipment and other uses normally incidental to a lakeshore residence provided such uses are for the exclusive use of the occupants and non-paying guests. 
    Waterfront uses, wetland, means lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water table is usually at or near the surface, or the land is covered by shallow water. 
    Wetland means a distinct hydrologic feature, surrounded by non-wetland and including all contiguous wetland types except those connected solely by riverine wetlands. The term "wetland area" means a portion of a wetland. A wetland must: 
(1)  Have a predominance of hydric soils; 
(2)  Be inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions; and 
(3)  Under normal circumstances, support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation. 
    Wholesaling/warehousing means the selling of goods, equipment and materials by bulk to another business that in turn sells to the final customer. 
    Yard means a required open space on a lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed by a structure from its lowest level to the sky except as permitted in these land development regulations. The yard extends along the lot line and at right angles to such lot line to a depth or width specified in the setback regulations for the zoning district in which such lot is located. 
    Yard, front, means a yard extending along the full width of the front lot line between side lot lines and extending from the abutting street right-of-way line to depth required in the setback regulations for the zoning district in which such lot is located. In a shoreland district, it is the yard abutting water. 
    Yard, rear, means the portion of the yard on the same lot with the principal building located between the rear line of the building and rear lot line and extending for the full width of the lot. 
    Yard, side, means the yard extending along the side lot line between the front and rear yards to a depth or width required by setback regulations for the zoning district in which such lot is located. 
    Zoning administrator means the city administrator or the designee that is charged with administration and enforcement of a given provision. 
    Zoning amendment means a change of the zoning map or zoning text authorized by the city, either in the allowed use with a district, or in the boundaries of a district. 
    Zoning district means an area or areas within the limits of the community for which the regulations and requirements governing use are uniform. 
    Zoning district, overlay, means a zoning district containing regulations superimposed upon other zoning district regulations and superseding the underlying zoning district use regulations. 
(Prior Code chs. 1306, 1408; Ord. No. 99-2; Ord. No. 99-03; Ord. No. 01-04; Ord. No. 01-06; Ord. No. 04-03; Ord. No. 11-05; Ord. No. 15-04, § 2, 8-31-2015) 
Sec. 101-4. - Zoning/comprehensive plan amendments. 
(a)  Criteria for granting zoning/comprehensive plan amendments. The city council may adopt amendments to chapter 109, zoning map, and comprehensive plan relative to land uses within a particular district or to the location of the district lines. Zoning amendments shall only be used as a means to reflect changes in the goals and policies of the city as reflected in the comprehensive plan or changes in conditions in the city. 
(b)  Type of amendments. The following are types of amendments that may be effected: 
(1)  A change in the district's boundary. 
(2)  A change in a district's regulations. 
(3)  A change in any other provision of these land development regulations. 
(4)  A change in the comprehensive plan. 
(5)  Establishment of an agricultural preserve. 
(c)  Initiation of proceedings. Proceedings for amending these land development regulations shall be initiated by at least one of the following methods: 
(1)  By petition of an owner of property that is proposed to be rezoned, or for which district regulation changes are proposed. 
(2)  By recommendation of the planning commission. 
(3)  By action of the city council. 
(d)  Required exhibits. The following are required for rezoning, district regulation changes, or comprehensive plan amendments: 
(1)  Anoka County GIS property owner's list, labels and map showing property owners names and addresses within 1,000 feet of the outer boundaries of the property in question. 
(2)  A boundary line survey. The city administrator or designee may waive the requirement for a survey if no buildings or improvements are proposed. 
(3)  A general development plan showing the potential development of the property, indicating proposed streets, buildings, drainage, and landscaping. 
(4)  Such other information as determined by the city administrator or designee. 
(e)  Procedure. The procedure for a property owner to initiate a rezoning, district regulation change or comprehensive plan amendment is: 
(1)  The property owner or agent shall meet with the city administrator or designee to explain the proposal and obtain procedures and an application form. 
(2)  The applicant shall file the completed application form together with the required exhibits with the planning commission and shall pay a filing fee as established by the city council. Any application for rezoning or comprehensive plan amendment shall be received according to the submittal schedule. 
(3)  The city administrator or designee shall transmit the application and the required exhibits to the planning commission. 
(4)  The city administrator or designee shall set the date for the public hearing and shall have notices of such hearing published in the legal newspaper at least once, not less than ten days and not more than 30 days prior to said hearing. The city council may waive the mailed notice requirements for amendments to the zoning text initiated by the planning commission or city council if such notice is not required by state law. 
(5)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the city administrator or designee shall see that a similar notice shall be mailed at least ten days before the day of the hearing to all property owners of record within 1,000 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property. When an amendment involves changes in district boundaries affecting an area of five acres or less, a similar notice shall be mailed at least ten days before the day of the hearing to each owner of affected property and property situated wholly or partly within 350 feet of the property to which the amendment relates. For the purpose of giving mailed notice, the person responsible for mailing the notice may use any appropriate records to determine the names and addresses of owners. A copy of the notice and a list of the owners and addresses to which the notice was sent shall be attested to by the responsible person and shall be made a part of the records of the proceedings. The failure to give mailed notice to individual property owners or defects in the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings, provided that a bona fide attempt to comply with this subsection has been made. 
(6)  The planning commission shall hold the public hearing and then shall recommend one of three actions: approval, denial, or conditional recommendation. 
(7)  The council shall act upon the application after receiving the recommendation of the planning commission. 
a.  Except for amendments to permit affordable housing development, a resolution to amend the comprehensive plan must be approved by a two-thirds vote of all of the members of the council. Amendments to the comprehensive plan to permit an affordable housing development are approved by a simple majority of all of the members. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "affordable housing development" means a development in which at least 20 percent of the residential units are restricted to occupancy for at least ten years by residents whose household income at the time of initial occupancy does not exceed 60 percent of area median income, adjusted for household size, as determined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development; and with respect to rental units, the rents for affordable units do not exceed 30 percent of 60 percent of area median income, adjusted for household size, as determined annually by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
b.  The adoption or amendment of any portion of a zoning ordinance that changes all or part of the existing classification of a zoning district from residential to either commercial or industrial requires a two-thirds majority vote of all members of the council. 
c.  No application of a property owner for an amendment to the text of chapter 109, zoning map, or comprehensive plan shall be considered by the planning commission within a one-year period following a denial of such request, except that the planning commission may permit a new application, if, in the opinion of the planning commission, new evidence or a change of circumstances warrants it. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1310, subd. 1) 
State Law reference- Comprehensive plan amendments, Minn. Stats. § 462.355, subds. 2, 3; zoning amendments, Minn. Stats. § 462.357, subds. 3, 4. 
Chapter 103 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 103-1-103-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MINNESOTA STATE BUILDING CODE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- State building code, Minn. Stats. § 16B.59 et seq. 

Sec. 103-19. - Inclusion of state building code; exceptions. 
    This article shall perpetually include the most current edition of the state building code with the exception of the optional appendix chapters. Optional appendix chapters shall not apply unless specifically adopted. 
(Prior Code, ch. 912, subd. 1; Ord. No. 02-03; Ord. No. 03-06) 
Sec. 103-20. - Application, administration and enforcement. 
(a)  The application, administration, and enforcement of the code shall be in accordance with the state building code. The code shall be enforced within the extraterritorial limits permitted by Minn. Stats. § 326B.121 when so established by ordinance. 
(b)  The code enforcement agency of the city is called the inspection division. 
(c)  The code shall be enforced by the state certified building official designated by the city to administer the code (Minn. Stats. § 326B.133). 
(Prior Code, ch. 912, subd. 2; Ord. No. 02-03; Ord. No. 03-06) 
Sec. 103-21. - Building permits and certificates of occupancy. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  No person shall erect, alter, remodel, demolish or move any kind of structure or building or part thereof without first securing a building permit. The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as authorized in Minn. Stats. § 326B.121. Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by the code in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the city. In addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits issued for work governed by this code in accordance with Minn. Stats. § 326B.148. 
(2)  Applications for commercial and industrial building permits shall be accompanied by the following exhibits and other information as required by the building official: 
a.  A complete site plan application form together with all applicable filing requirements. 
b.  A certificate of survey of the area including the property in question and 100 feet beyond its outer boundaries, showing existing utilities, lot boundaries, dimensions, buildings, easements, foliage, topography, and waterways. 
c.  Soil borings and perc tests. 
d.  Preliminary building and site development plans showing buildings, location, dimensional parking and loading arrangement, vehicular and pedestrian access and egress, surface drainage plan, landscaping, utility plan, screening, size and location of all signs, building and floor plans of all floors, elevations of all sides of all buildings, and sections and outline material specifications as appropriate, and drainage calculations demonstrating that post-development runoff does not exceed predevelopment runoff. 
(3)  Applications for single-family building permits shall be completed on forms provided by the building official, accompanied by building plans, certificate of survey, and, at the request of the building official, iron monuments at lot corners and both staking of property lines and building site and other information as required by the building official. 
(4)  No land shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter erected, reconstructed or structurally altered shall be occupied or used, in whole or in part, for any purpose whatsoever, until a certificate of occupancy and/or final inspection has been issued by the building official. 
(5)  No change in use shall be made in any building or part thereof, now existing or hereafter erected, reconstructed or structurally altered, without a building permit having been issued by the building official, and no such permit shall be issued to make such a change unless it is in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance and the state building code. 
(6)  In the event that construction, alteration, or reconstruction of a building or structure occurs without a building permit, the building official may issue an order to stop such work until a building permit is issued. 
(7)  No building permit shall be required for a storage building which is equal to or less than 120 square feet in floor area and not more than 12 feet in height. 
(b)  Procedure. 
(1)  Completed building permit forms and appropriate fees shall be submitted to the building department. If the proposed development conforms in all respects to the city ordinances, a building permit shall be issued within 60 days. 
(2)  If the proposed development involves a zoning amendment, variance, or conditional use permit, the application shall be submitted to the planning commission and city council for review and appropriate action. 
(c)  Due process. Notice and public hearings of violations and termination proceedings and all nonconforming, incompatible, accessory, conditional, or home occupation uses, and notice of hearing shall be given by the city council to the interested party or parties by certified mail or in lieu thereof one legal published notice at least ten days before the public hearing date, which certified mail notice shall be given by the city council within a reasonable time. 
(Prior Code, ch. 912, subd. 3; ch. 1310, subd. 4(B)-(D); Ord. No. 02-03; Ord. No. 03-06; Ord. No. 08-06; Ord. No. 08-13) 
Sec. 103-22. - Requirements for residential structures. 
    Where residential buildings are authorized, permanent residential structures shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  The minimum width of the main portion of the residential building shall be not less than 24 feet. 
(2)  All residential buildings shall have permanent concrete or treated wood foundations which will anchor the structure, in compliance with the state building code. 
(3)  The roof load on residential buildings shall be designed to bear a 40-pound live roof weight. 
(4)  The exterior walls shall be constructed with no less than two-by-four dimension lumber on 16-inch centers or its structural equivalent. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1310, subd. 4(B)(9); Ord. No. 08-06; Ord. No. 08-13) 
Chapter 105 - ENVIRONMENTAL AND NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 105-1-105-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 105-19. - Findings. 
    The city hereby finds that uncontrolled and inadequately planned use of wetlands, woodlands, natural habitat areas, areas subject to soil erosion and areas containing restrictive soils adversely affects the public health, safety and general welfare by impacting water quality and contributing to other environmental problems, creating nuisances, impairing other beneficial uses of environmental resources and hindering the ability of the city to provide adequate water, sewage, flood control, and other community services. In addition, extraordinary public expenditures may be required for the protection of persons and property in such areas which may be affected by unplanned land usage. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1309, subd. 2; Ord. No. 01-04) 
Sec. 105-20. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to promote, preserve and enhance the natural resources within the city and protect them from adverse effects occasioned by poorly sited development or incompatible activities by regulating land disturbing or development activities that would have an adverse and potentially irreversible impact on water quality and unique and fragile environmentally sensitive land; by minimizing conflicts and encouraging compatibility between land disturbing and development activities and water quality and environmentally sensitive lands; and by requiring detailed review standards and procedures for land disturbing or development activities proposed for such areas, thereby achieving a balance between growth and development and protection of water quality and natural areas. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1309, subd. 3; Ord. No. 01-04) 
Sec. 105-21. - Scope and effect. 
(a)  Applicability. Every applicant for a building permit, subdivision approval, or a permit to allow land disturbing activities must submit a stormwater management plan to the zoning administrator. No building permit, subdivision approval, or permit to allow land disturbing activities shall be issued until approval of the stormwater management plan or a waiver of the approval requirement has been obtained in strict conformance with the provisions of this article. The provisions of section 105-25 apply to all land, public or private, located within the city. 
(b)  Exemptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to: 
(1)  Any part of a subdivision if a plat for the subdivision has been approved by the city council on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived; 
(2)  Any land disturbing activity for which plans have been approved by the watershed management organization within six months prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived; 
(3)  A lot for which a building permit has been approved on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived; 
(4)  Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other kinds of posts or poles; or 
(5)  Emergency work to protect life, limb, or property. 
(c)  Waiver. The city council may, after consideration by the planning commission, waive any requirement of this article upon making a finding that compliance with the requirement will involve an unnecessary hardship and the waiver of such requirement will not adversely affect the standards and requirements set forth in section 105-24. The city council may require, as a condition of the waiver, such dedication or construction or agreement to dedicate or construct as may be necessary to adequately meet said standards and requirements. The city council may enact by administrative policy a procedure for the zoning administrator to waive the requirement for a stormwater management plan for smaller-scale projects which do not propose significant land alteration. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1309, subd. 4; Ord. No. 01-04) 
Sec. 105-22. - Stormwater management plan approval procedures. 
(a)  Application. A written application for stormwater management plan approval, along with the proposed stormwater management plan, shall be filed with the zoning administrator and shall include a statement indicating the grounds upon which the approval is requested, that the proposed use is permitted by right or approved as required in the underlying zoning district, and adequate evidence showing that the proposed use will conform to the standards set forth in this article. Prior to applying for approval of a stormwater management plan, an applicant may have the stormwater management plans reviewed by the appropriate departments of the city. Two sets of clearly legible blue or black lined copies of drawings and required information shall be submitted to the zoning administrator and shall be accompanied by a receipt from the city clerk evidencing the payment of all required fees for processing and approval as set forth in section 105-23(e), and a letter of credit when required by section 105-23(d) in the amount to be calculated in accordance with that section. Drawings shall be prepared to a scale appropriate to the site of the project and suitable for the review to be performed. At a minimum the scale shall be one inch equals 100 feet. 
(b)  Stormwater management plan. The stormwater management plan shall meet all the requirements of the MPCA's General Permit to Discharge Stormwater Associated with Construction Activity (CSW Permit) No. MN R100001 and contain the following information: 
a.  Existing site map. A map of existing site conditions showing the site and immediately adjacent areas, including: 
1.  The name and address of the applicant, the section, township and range, north point, date and scale of drawing and number of sheets; 
2.  Location of the tract by an insert map at a scale sufficient to clearly identify the location of the property and giving such information as the names and numbers of adjoining roads, railroads, utilities, subdivisions, towns and districts or other landmarks; 
3.  Existing topography with a contour interval appropriate to the topography of the land but in no case having a contour interval greater than two feet; 
4.  A delineation of all streams, rivers, public waters and wetlands located on and immediately adjacent to the site, including depth of water, a description of all vegetation which may be found in the water, a statement of general water quality and any classification given to the water body or wetland by the state department of natural resources, the state pollution control agency, and/or the United States Army Corps of Engineers; 
5.  Location and dimensions of existing stormwater drainage systems and natural drainage patterns on and immediately adjacent to the site delineating in which direction and at what rate stormwater is conveyed from the site, identifying the receiving stream, river, public water, or wetland, and setting forth those areas of the unaltered site where stormwater collects; 
6.  A description of the soils of the site, including a map indicating soil types of areas to be disturbed as well as a soil report containing information on the suitability of the soils for the type of development proposed and for the type of sewage disposal proposed and describing any remedial steps to be taken by the developer to render the soils suitable; 
7.  Vegetative cover and clearly delineating any vegetation proposed for removal; and 
8.  100-year floodplains, flood fringes and floodways. 
b.  Site construction plan. A site construction plan including: 
1.  Locations and dimensions of all proposed land disturbing activities and any phasing of those activities; 
2.  Locations and dimensions of all temporary soil or dirt stockpiles; 
3.  Locations and dimensions of all construction site erosion control measures necessary to meet the requirements of this article; 
4.  Schedule of anticipated starting and completion dates of each land disturbing activity including the installation of construction site erosion control measures needed to meet the requirements of this article; and 
5.  Provisions for maintenance of the construction site erosion control measures during construction. 
c.  Plan of final site conditions. A plan of final site conditions on the same scale as the existing site map showing the site changes including: 
1.  Finished grading shown at contours at the same interval as provided above or as required to clearly indicate the relationship of proposed changes to existing topography and remaining features; 
2.  A landscape plan, drawn to an appropriate scale, including dimensions and distances and the location, type, size and description of all proposed landscape materials which will be added to the site as part of the development; 
3.  A drainage plan of the developed site delineating in which direction and at what rate stormwater will be conveyed from the site and setting forth the areas of the site where stormwater will be allowed to collect; 
4.  The proposed size, alignment and intended use of any structures to be erected on the site; 
5.  A clear delineation and tabulation of all areas which shall be paved or surfaced, including a description of the surfacing material to be used; and 
6.  Any other information pertinent to the particular project which in the opinion of the applicant is necessary for the review of the project. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1309, subd. 5; Ord. No. 01-04; Ord. No. 16-01, 4-25-2016) 
Sec. 105-23. - Plan review procedure. 
(a)  Process. Stormwater management plans meeting the requirements of this section shall be submitted by the zoning administrator to the planning commission for review in accordance with the standards of section 105-24. The commission shall recommend approval, recommend approval with conditions, or recommend denial of the stormwater management plan. Following planning commission action, the stormwater management plan shall be submitted to the city council at its next available meeting. 
(b)  Duration. Approval of a plan submitted under the provisions of this article shall expire one year after the date of approval unless construction has commenced in accordance with the plan. However, if, prior to the expiration of the approval, the applicant makes a written request to the zoning administrator for an extension of time to commence construction setting forth the reasons for the requested extension, the planning department may grant one extension of not greater than one year. Receipt of any request for an extension shall be acknowledged by the zoning administrator within 15 days. The zoning administrator shall make a decision on the extension within 30 days of receipt. Any plan may be revised in the same manner as originally approved. 
(c)  Conditions. A stormwater management plan may be approved subject to compliance with conditions reasonable and necessary to ensure that the requirements contained in this article are met. Such conditions may, among other matters, limit the size, kind or character of the proposed development, require the construction of structures, drainage facilities, storage basins and other facilities, require replacement of vegetation, establish required monitoring procedures, stage the work over time, require alteration of the site design to insure buffering, and require the conveyance to the city or other public entity of certain lands or interests therein. 
(d)  Agreement and letter of credit. If required as a condition of approval of any stormwater management plan, the applicant shall submit an agreement to construct such required physical improvements, to dedicate property or easements, or to comply with such conditions as may have been agreed to. Such agreement shall be accompanied by a letter of credit to cover the amount of the established cost of complying with the agreement. The agreement and letter of credit shall guarantee completion and compliance with conditions within a specific time, which time may be extended in accordance with subsection (b) of this section. The adequacy, conditions and acceptability of any agreement and letter of credit shall be determined by the city council or any official of the city as has been designated by resolution of the city council. 
(e)  Fees. All applications for stormwater management plan approval shall be accompanied by a processing and approval fee as set by ordinance of the city council. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1309, subd. 6; Ord. No. 01-04) 
Sec. 105-24. - Approval standards. 
(a)  Standards required for approval. No stormwater management plan that fails to meet the design standards contained in the adopted Oak Grove Public Works Design Manual approved by the city council. 
(b)  Wetlands. 
(1)  Runoff shall not be discharged directly into wetlands without presettlement of the runoff. 
(2)  A protective buffer strip of natural vegetation at least 25 feet in width shall surround all wetlands. This width is consistent with the rules adopted pursuant to Minn. Stats. §§ 103G.221-103G.2375. 
(3)  Wetlands must not be drained or filled, wholly or partially, unless replaced by restoring or creating wetland areas of at least equal public value. Replacement must be guided by the allowing principles in descending order of priority. 
a.  Avoiding the direct or indirect impact of the activity that may destroy or diminish the wetland. 
b.  Minimizing the impact by limiting the degree or magnitude of the wetland activity and its implementation. 
c.  Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected wetland environment. 
d.  Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the activity. 
e.  Compensating for the impact by replacing or providing substitute wetland resources or environments. (Compensation, including the replacement ratio and quality of replacement should be consistent with the requirements outlined in the rules adopted pursuant to Minn. Stats. §§ 103G.221-103G.2375.) 
(c)  Inspection and maintenance. All stormwater management facilities shall be designed to minimize the need of maintenance, to provide access for maintenance purposes and to be structurally sound. All stormwater management facilities shall have a plan of operation and maintenance that ensures continued effective removal of pollutants carried in stormwater runoff. The director of public works or his designee shall inspect all stormwater management facilities during construction, during the first year of operation, and at least once every five years thereafter. The inspection records will be kept on file at the public works department for a period of six years. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain any necessary easements or other property interests to allow access to the stormwater management facilities for inspection and maintenance purposes. 
(d)  Watershed management plans/groundwater management plans. Stormwater management plans shall be consistent with adopted watershed management plans and groundwater management plans prepared in accordance with Minn. Stats. §§ 103B.231 and 103B.255, respectively, and as approved by the state board of water and soil resources in accordance with state law. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1309, subd. 7; Ord. No. 01-04; Ord. No. 16-01, 4-25-2016) 
Sec. 105-25. - Grass clippings, etc. 
    No person shall apply or deposit grass clippings, leaves, or other vegetative materials on impervious surfaces or within stormwater drainage systems, natural drainageways, or wetland buffer areas. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1309, subd. 8; Ord. No. 01-04) 
Sec. 105-26. - Enforcement penalty. 
    Any person found in violation of chapter 105, article II may be subject to the provisions of chapter 1, sec. 1.7 of the city code. 
(Ord. No. 16-01, 4-25-2016) 
Chapter 107 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Subdivision regulations, Minn. Stats. § 462.358. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 107-1. - Interpretation and purpose. 
    All subdivisions of land submitted for approval after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall fully comply, in all respects, with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1402) 
Sec. 107-2. - Scope. 
    The rules and regulations governing plats and subdivisions of land contained herein shall apply within the city and other land as permitted by state statutes. In the event of overlapping jurisdiction within the prescribed area, the extent of jurisdiction shall be determined and agreed upon between the city and the other municipality or municipalities concerned. Except in the case of resubdivision, this chapter shall not apply to any lot forming a part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the county recorder prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, nor is it intended by this chapter to repeal, annul, or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions or other laws or ordinances except those specifically repealed by or in conflict with this chapter, or with restrictive covenants running with the land. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the land than is imposed or required by such existing provisions of law, ordinance, contract, or deed, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1404) 
Sec. 107-3. - Administration. 
    This chapter shall be administered by the city administrator or designee. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1406) 
Sec. 107-4. - Minor subdivisions and variances. 
(a)  Minor subdivisions. In the case of a subdivision resulting in three lots or fewer, or a combination of two lots into one lot, in an area situated where topographical, wetland and soil conditions are well-defined, or in the case of a request to divide a lot or combine lots which are a part of a recorded plat where the division or combination would add a parcel of land to an abutting lot or to create two lots and such division or combination will not result in a lot in violation of the city's zoning or subdivision regulations, an applicant may apply for approval of a minor subdivision. No minor subdivision shall be approved in conflict with the minimum standards of the city's zoning or subdivision regulations except as specifically provided in this section. If approved, a minor subdivision allows the subdivision or combination of lots without the recording of a plat or a re-plat. 
(b)  Variances. The city council may grant a variance pursuant to the requirements identified in section 109-48. 
(c)  Application required. Application for any such variance shall be made in writing by the subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat is filed for consideration, stating fully all facts relied upon by the petitioner, and shall be supplemented with maps, plans and other additional data which may aid the planning commission in the analysis of the proposed project. The plans for such development shall include such covenants, restrictions or other legal provisions necessary to guarantee the full achievement of the plan. Any variance or modification thus granted shall be recorded in resolution form setting forth the reasons which justified the action and entered in the minutes of the city council. 
(d)  Application for minor subdivision. Any person requesting a minor subdivision shall file in the office of the city administrator or designee an application together with the following information: 
(1)  Survey. A survey of the proposed division or combination showing the dimensions of all lands included therein, the boundaries of said lands, the locations of all buildings and other encroachments, and the location of all proposed construction. The city administrator or designee may recommend, and the city council may approve, waiver of the survey requirement in cases where the property previously was platted; where the property is to be combined with land that already meets criteria for a building site; or where a deed restriction is filed to prohibit future construction of a building on the property. If a survey is waived, then a scaled drawing may be required. 
(2)  Soils. Location of test holes, hydrological data, and soils information, as recommended by the city engineer, from which it can be determined that the proposed uses of the subject property are feasible. 
(3)  Legal description. A concise legal description of the subject property before and after the proposed division or combination is complete. 
(e)  Procedure for approval of minor subdivision. Upon receipt by the city administrator or designee of the application and required documents and the payment of an administrative fee established by ordinance of the city council, the city administrator or designee shall place the application on the agenda of a regular council meeting and shall present a recommendation for or against approval of the application, stating reasons for such recommendation. Approval or disapproval by the city council shall be by resolution, and resolutions of approval shall be filed in the office of the registrar or recorder for the county. Approval may be conditioned upon the dedication of drainage and utility easements or any other conditions necessary to further the purposes of the city's zoning and subdivision regulations, as determined by the city council. Nothing herein shall exempt a minor subdivision from the requirements of section 107-150, and payment of park dedication fees may be required for newly created lots. 
(f)  Ghost platting. A preliminary resubdivision plan may be required showing a potential and feasible way in which the lot or lots may be resubdivided in future years for more intensive use of the land consistent with policies and procedures for ghost platting which may be adopted by the city council. 
(g)  Minor subdivisions creating only one additional lot shall be exempt from park dedication fees. This exemption shall only be granted one time on a property within a three year period. Trail easements may still be required if warranted. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1432; Ord. No. 09-11; Ord. 15-06, § 1, 11-9-2015) 
Secs. 107-5-107-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLATTING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Platting, Minn. Stats. § 462.358, subds. 3a, 3b. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 107-27. - Preapplication meeting; sketch plan review. 
(a)  Preapplication meeting. Prior to the preparation and submission of a preliminary plat, the subdivider or owner shall meet with the city administrator or designee and other officials as appropriate in order to be made fully aware of all ordinances, regulations, and plans applicable to the area to be subdivided. 
(b)  Sketch plan review. 
(1)  At the preapplication meeting, the subdivider should submit a sketch plan of the proposed subdivision. 
(2)  The sketch plan may be presented in simple form but should show that consideration has been given to the relationship of the proposed subdivision to existing city facilities that would serve it, to neighboring subdivisions and developments, to the vegetation of a site, and to the suitability of on-site sewage disposal systems. The city administrator or designee may request that the sketch plan be submitted to the parks commission, planning commission, or both, for review and comment. Such review and comment does not constitute approval of the sketch plan. A sketch plan shall include the following information: 
a.  Name of property owner, developer and PIN. 
b.  North point and scale. 
c.  Existing buildings. 
d.  Streets within and adjacent to tract. 
e.  Proposed lot layout. 
f.  Proposed general street design. 
g.  Known physical restrictions such as floodplain or wetlands. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1410) 
Sec. 107-28. - Findings required for approval of plats. 
    The findings necessary for city council approval of the preliminary plat and the final plat shall be as follows: 
(1)  The proposed subdivision is consistent with chapter 109 and conforms with all its requirements. 
(2)  The proposed subdivision is consistent with all applicable general and specialized city, county, and regional plans, including, but not limited to, the city's comprehensive development plan. 
(3)  The physical characteristics of the site, including, but not limited to, topography, soils, vegetations, susceptibility to erosion and siltation, susceptibility to flooding, and drainage are suitable for the type and density of development and uses contemplated. 
(4)  The proposed subdivision makes adequate provision for water supply, storm drainage, sewage transportation, erosion control, and all other services, facilities and improvements otherwise required herein. 
(5)  The proposed subdivision will not cause significant environmental damage. 
(6)  The proposed subdivision will not conflict with easements of record or with easements established by judgment of a court. 
(7)  The proposed subdivision will not have an undue and adverse impact on the reasonable development of neighboring land. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1416) 
Secs. 107-29-107-59. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PRELIMINARY PLAT 

Sec. 107-60. - Procedure. 
(a)  Filing. After the preapplication meeting, the subdivider or owner shall file with the city administrator or designee the required number of copies of the preliminary plat as established by resolution of the city council. All plats and subdivisions presented to the city administrator or designee for approval by the planning commission and city council shall be accompanied by a filing fee established by ordinance of the city council. Rejection of the plat or subdivision by the city council, or abandonment or withdrawal of the proposed plat or subdivision by the subdivider or owner, shall not entitle the person who paid the fee to the return of all or any part thereof. The consolidation of preliminary and final plat review may be requested from the city staff by the developer. Such a request must be submitted to the city staff prior to setting the preliminary plat public hearing. If the staff agrees, the preliminary and final plats may be reviewed contemporaneously. 
(b)  Staff review. The city administrator or designee shall refer copies of the preliminary plat to the city engineer, the county highway department, and other applicable public agencies as needed in order to receive written comment. A staff review will be made and a written report attached prior to forwarding to the planning commission. 
(c)  Public hearing. Within 60 days after acceptance of the completed preliminary plat application, which shall include all reports, certifications and other information required by this article or requested by the planning commission, the commission shall hold a public hearing on the preliminary plat after notice of the time and place thereof has been published once in the official newspaper at least ten days before the day of the hearing. All persons present who are interested in the proposed plan shall be heard. 
(d)  Planning commission. 
(1)  The planning commission shall review the preliminary plat, taking into consideration the arrangement, location, and width of streets, their relation to the topography of the land, water supply, sewage disposal, drainage, groundwater, lot sizes and arrangement, existing trees and vegetation, the future development of adjoining lands, the requirements of the comprehensive development plan, and chapter 109. 
(2)  The commission shall, within 30 days of the closing of the hearing: 
a.  Approve, modify and approve, or disapprove the preliminary plat; and 
b.  Submit its findings and recommendations through the city administrator or designee to the city council and the subdivider. 
(e)  Approval. 
(1)  The city council shall act upon the preliminary plat within 120 days of delivery and filing of a completed preliminary plat and acceptance by the city administrator or designee. 
(2)  Approval of the preliminary plat is an acceptance of the general layout submitted and indicates to the subdivider that he may proceed with preparation and submittal of the final plat in accordance with the city council condition of preliminary approval. 
(3)  Should the subdivider desire to amend the preliminary plat as approved by the council, the amended plat shall be submitted following the original procedures set forth in this section, except for the public hearing and fees, unless the planning commission considers the scope of the revisions to constitute a new plat, in which event the hearing and fees shall be required. 
(f)  Revisions and subsequent approvals. 
(1)  The planning commission may return a conditional report. The city council may require such changes or revisions as it deems necessary for the health, safety, general welfare and convenience of the city. 
(2)  Subsequent approval shall be required of the engineering proposals required pertaining to water supply, storm drainage, sewerage and sewage disposal, sidewalks, gas and electric service, grading, gradients and roadway widths and the surfacing of streets and by other public officials having jurisdiction, prior to the approval of the final plat by the city council. 
(3)  No plan will be approved for a subdivision that covers an area subject to periodic flooding or contains extremely poor drainage facilities and which would make adequate drainage of the streets and lots impossible. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1412, subd. 6; Ord. No. 04-03) 
Sec. 107-61. - Required information. 
(a)  Identification and description. The preliminary plat shall contain sufficient information to identify and describe the proposed subdivision. Such information shall include, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Proposed name of subdivision, which shall not duplicate or be similar in pronunciation or spelling to the name of any plat heretofore recorded in the county. 
(2)  Location by section, township, range, and legal description. 
(3)  Names and addresses of the record owner, subdivider, land surveyor, engineer, designer of the plan, and any agent having control of the land. 
(4)  Graphic scale not less than one inch to 100 feet. 
(5)  North point. 
(6)  Key map showing location of the subdivision and property for at least 1,000 feet adjacent. 
(7)  Date of preparation. 
(8)  A property owner's report from the county, with mailing labels, identifying the names and addresses of properties within 1,000 feet of the outside boundary of the property to be subdivided. 
(b)  Existing conditions. The following existing conditions must be shown in the preliminary plat: 
(1)  Boundary line of proposed subdivision, clearly indicated. 
(2)  Existing zoning classifications for land within and abutting the subdivision. 
(3)  A statement of the approximate acreage and dimensions of the lots. 
(4)  Location, right-of-way width, and names of existing or platted streets or other public ways, parks and other public lands, permanent buildings and structures, easements, and section and corporate lines within the proposed subdivision and to a distance of 200 feet beyond. 
(5)  Boundary lines of adjoining land, subdivided or unsubdivided, within 200 feet, identified by name and ownership. 
(6)  Topographic data, including contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet. 
(7)  Watercourses, floodplains, delineated wetlands (per the 1989 Federal Manual as may be amended), wooded areas, rock outcrops, and other significant features shall also be shown. United States Geological Survey data shall be used for all topographic mapping where feasible. 
(8)  An accurate soil report of the proposed subdivision indicating soil conditions, properties, permeability, slope, and soil boring data in at least four locations which demonstrates compliance with the requirements of section 109-474. The locations of soil borings and percolation tests shall be shown on the survey submitted with the plat application. Soil borings and percolation tests are required to be performed consistent with the standards of MPCA Rules, Minn. Rules ch. 7080. 
(9)  Utilities on or within 200 feet of the property, including location, size, and invert elevation of public sanitary and storm sewers; location and size of water mains; location of gas mains, fire hydrants, electric and telephone poles and lines, street lights, and street pavement width. 
The direction and distance to, and size of, such facilities shall be indicated, showing invert elevation of sanitary and storm sewers, including catchbasins, manholes, and hydrants. Such data may be that available from city plans, and the source thereof so noted, unless such utilities are located on the subject property. In all instances, they shall be field checked as far as practicable. 
(c)  Subdivision design features. The following subdivision design features shall be provided: 
(1)  Layout of proposed streets showing the right-of-way widths, centerline gradients, typical cross sections, and proposed names of streets. The name of any street heretofore used in the city or its environs shall not be used unless the proposed street is a logical extension of an already named street, in which event the same name shall be used. Street names shall conform to the master street name and numbering system as adopted. 
(2)  Locations and widths of proposed pedestrian ways, drainage and utility easements. 
(3)  Layout, numbers, square footage, acreage and preliminary dimensions of lots and blocks. 
(4)  Minimum front, side, and rear setback lines shown on each proposed lot, indicating dimensions. 
(5)  Areas other than streets, pedestrian ways, drainage and utility easements intended to be dedicated or reserved for public use, including the size of such area or areas in acres. 
(6)  Zoning designation and applicable zoning standards. 
(7)  Location, size, and approximate gradient of proposed public sewer lines and water mains. If public sewer and water are not available, the subdivider's engineer shall provide site evaluation data required by Minnesota Pollution Control Agency Individual Sewage Treatment Standards (Minn. Rules ch. 7080) to determine the suitability of the site for individual sewage treatment systems. Such data, consistent with Minn. Rules ch. 7080, may include, but is not limited to, depth of the highest known or calculated groundwater table or bedrock; soil conditions, properties and permeability; slope; existence of low lands; local surface depressions and rock outcrops; legal setback requirements; soil borings and percolation tests. The data required should be determined by the city, in its discretion. 
(d)  Other information. The following additional information shall be provided: 
(1)  Proof of ownership (title opinion or title commitment) satisfactory to the city attorney. 
(2)  Statement of the proposed use of lots stating type of residential buildings with number of proposed dwelling units or type of business or industry, so as to reveal the effect of the proposed development on traffic, fire hazards, and congestion of population. 
(3)  Proposed protective covenants, if any. 
(4)  Source of water supply. 
(5)  Provisions for sewage and surface water disposal, drainage, and flood control. 
(6)  If any zoning changes are contemplated, the proposed zoning plan for the areas. 
(7)  Where the subdivider owns property adjacent to that which is being proposed for subdivision, the city council may require that the subdivider submit a sketch plan of the remainder of the property so as to show the possible relationships between the proposed subdivision and future subdivision. In any event, all subdivisions must be shown to relate well with existing or potential adjacent subdivisions. 
(8)  Wetlands must be delineated by a qualified wetland professional with the name and phone number shown on the preliminary plat. 
(9)  A proposed finished grading plan shown at contour intervals appropriate to the topography and spot elevations clearly indicating the relationship of the proposed changes to existing topography and remaining features. The following data shall be submitted with a grading plan: 
a.  Centerline street elevations at 100-foot stations with high and low points shown. 
b.  Cul-de-sac frontage along curbline with spot elevation. 
c.  Location of house pads and the elevation of the lowest floor opening shown. 
d.  Typical lot detail indicating where plot and house elevations are shown to. 
e.  Typical street section. 
f.  Drainage arrows at high points and major grade changes. Emergency overflows should be labeled and shown with spot elevations and drainage arrows. 
g.  House pads must have a minimum setback of 25 feet from all 100-year flood elevation boundaries. 
h.  100-year flood elevation must be shown for all ponding areas. 
i.  Ordinary high water elevation must be shown for all lakes and wetlands. If the ordinary high water elevation has not been established by the DNR, the normal water elevation with a date indicating when the water elevation was shot will be acceptable. 
j.  Locate soil stockpiles on grading plan. 
k.  Location and grading of any fill to be used, subject to plan approval, and a declaration or showing that existing natural soil conditions meets the requirements of section 109-474, based upon separation from redoximorphic features, or based upon on a thorough hydrogeologic investigation and analysis, approved by the city council, upon recommendation of the city engineer and building official. 
(10)  The plan for soil erosion and sediment control, both during construction and after development, has been completed. The plan shall include a timing schedule and sequence of operation indicating the anticipated starting and completion dates of the particular development sequence and the estimated time of exposure of each area prior to completion of effective erosion and sediment control measures. Gradients of waterways, design of velocity and erosion control measures, and landscaping of the erosion and sediment control system shall also be shown. 
(11)  Storm drainage design calculations using SCS Technical Report 20 or equal modeling of existing versus developed conditions for a 100-year, 24-hour rainfall event. Lots shall be graded so as to provide drainage away from building locations and directed down lot lines within drainage and utility easements. Any lot drainage which is directed onto an adjacent lot must be within a drainage easement. 
(12)  A vegetation preservation and protection plan to provide stabilization of erosive or sediment-producing areas by covering soils with: 
a.  Permanent seeding or sodding, producing areas covered with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass; 
b.  Short-term seeding, producing temporary vegetative cover such as annual grasses, grains or other temporary ground cover; or 
c.  Mulching, by the application of plants or other suitable material on the newly seeded surface to conserve moisture, hold soil in place, and aid in establishing plant cover. 
The plan shall indicate existing vegetative covering including marshlands, grasses, shrubbery and trees. The types and outlined location of all trees greater than six inches in diameter when measured at a point four feet above the ground level, shall be specified. Information, to the extent feasible, shall also be provided as to type, weakness, maturity, infestation resistance, density and spacing. Trees to be removed for streets, drives, buildings, drainage or other purposes shall be identified. 
(13)  Any variances required shall be shown on the preliminary plat. 
(14)  Such other information as may be requested by the city engineer or planning commission. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1414; Ord. No. 99-2; Ord. No. 04-03) 
Secs. 107-62-107-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FINAL PLAT 

Sec. 107-81. - Final plat procedure. 
(a)  Filing. Within one year after the date of city council approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider or owner shall file the required number of copies of the final plat and one 81/2-inch by 11-inch clear film reduction with the city administrator or designee. If the final plat is not filed within said period, the preliminary plat will be considered void unless for good cause an extension is requested in writing by the subdivider and granted by the city council. The owner or subdivider shall also submit at this time an up-to-date certified abstract of title or registered property report and such other evidence as the city attorney may require showing title or control in the subdivider. 
(b)  Conformity to preliminary plat. 
(1)  The final plat shall have incorporated all changes recommended by the city council and the city engineer, but in all other respects it shall conform to the preliminary plat as approved. The final plat shall constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record and develop within one year, provided that such a portion conforms with all requirements of this article. 
(2)  The planning commission shall determine whether the final plat submitted deviates from the approved preliminary plat and, if so, whether the submission represents a new plat. If the submission does represent a new plat, the city council shall deny the final plat and direct the subdivider to resubmit its proposal following preliminary plat requirements. 
(c)  Distribution for review. Upon delivery of the final plat and acceptance by the city administrator or designee that the final plat meets the requirements of this article, the city administrator or designee shall refer copies of the final plat to the planning commission and one copy each to the city engineer and city attorney. The abstract of title or registered property report shall be referred to the attorney for examination and report. The attorney's report shall be given to the city council. The procedure and timing for the reports of the planning commission and engineer and action by the city council are the same as for the preliminary plat, except that no public hearing is required in processing the final plat. 
(d)  Approval. 
(1)  The city council shall act on the final plat within 60 days of acceptance of the final plat by the city administrator or designee. 
(2)  If the final plat is approved, the subdivider shall record it with the county recorder within 120 days after the date of approval. Any final plat not so recorded shall be considered null and void. 
(e)  Modifications to approved final plat. No changes, erasures, modifications, or revisions shall be made in any final plat after approval has been given by the city council and endorsed in writing on the plat, unless said plat is first resubmitted to the city council and such body approves any modifications. In the event that any such final plat is recorded without complying with this requirement, the same shall be considered null and void and the city council shall institute proceedings to have the plat stricken from the records of the city. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1418) 
Sec. 107-82. - Required information. 
(a)  Preparation; surveying requirements. 
(1)  The final plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor who is registered in the state and shall comply with the provisions of state statutes and of this article. 
(2)  Surveying requirements for the final plat shall be under the regulation of the county surveyor. 
(b)  Guidance. For guidance, the applicant's surveyor may refer to the Plat Manual of Minimum Guidelines, Minnesota Land Surveyors Association. 
(c)  Certifications. The final plat shall conform to all applicable county certification requirements, as may be amended. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1420) 
Secs. 107-83-107-107. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 107-108. - General requirements. 
(a)  The proposed subdivision shall conform to the comprehensive development plan and this article. 
(b)  The arrangement, character, extent, width and location of all streets shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to reasonable circulation of traffic, to topographic conditions, to runoff of stormwater, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. Wherever feasible and necessary, the arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall provide for the continuation of existing streets in adjoining areas. Where adjoining unsubdivided areas may be subdivided in the future, the arrangement of streets in a new subdivision shall make provision for the proper projection of streets into adjoining areas by carrying the new streets to the boundaries of the new subdivision at appropriate locations. Temporary easements for vehicular movement shall be provided until the adjoining areas are developed. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1422, subd. 1) 
Sec. 107-109. - Streets. 
(a)  Widths. Street widths shall be as determined in the comprehensive development plan and official map and shall conform to county and state standards for trunk highways. If there are no such plans or standards, right-of-way widths shall conform to the following dimensions: 
Street Type Right-of-Way Roadway Collector Streets 
(9-ton design) 80 feet 44 feet urban 
40 feet rural 
8 feet minimum shoulder Minor Streets 
(7-ton design) 66 feet 32 feet urban 
24 feet rural 
3 feet minimum shoulder Cul-de-sac Streets 
(7-ton design) 66 feet 32 feet urban 
24 feet rural 
3 feet minimum shoulder Cul-de-sac 
Turnaround Radius 
(7-ton design) 
See Exhibit 4 60 feet 45 feet 
3 feet minimum shoulder  
Greater or lesser widths may be required depending upon anticipated traffic volumes, planned function of the street, and character of planned abutting land uses. 
(b)  Street Names. Names of new streets shall not duplicate existing or platted street names unless a new street is a continuation of or in alignment with the existing or platted street, in which event it shall bear the same name of the existing or platted street so in alignment. 
(c)  Intersections. Street intersections shall: 
(1)  Insofar as practical, intersect at right angles. In no case shall the angle formed by the intersection of two streets be less than 75 degrees. 
(2)  Have no more than four corners. 
(3)  Have pavement rounded by a radius of not less than 38 feet. 
(d)  Deflections. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at one point by more than ten degrees, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius adequate to ensure a sight distance within the right-of-way of not less than 500 feet for arterials, 300 feet for collectors, and 100 feet for all other streets. The planning commission may allow greater or lesser sight distances at the recommendation of the engineer. 
(e)  Tangents. A tangent of at least 300 feet shall be introduced between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets. 
(f)  Grades. All centerline gradients shall be at least 0.5 percent and shall not exceed the following: 
Classification Gradient (in percent) Collector Streets 4 Minor Streets 6  
(g)  Vertical curves. Different connecting street gradients shall be connected with vertical curves. Minimum length, in feet, of these curves shall be 20 times the algebraic difference in the percent of grade of the two adjacent slopes. 
(h)  Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet shall be avoided for minor streets. 
(i)  Minor streets. Minor streets shall be aligned to discourage use by through traffic. 
(j)  Cul-de-sac. The maximum length of a street terminating in a permanent cul-de-sac shall be 1,320 feet, measured from the centerline of the street of origin to end of the right-of-way. For the purposes of planning the extension of city streets, all cul-de-sacs shall be developed as part of a platted subdivision. 
(k)  Street extension. The city shall plan for the future extension of all public streets and rights-of-way when reviewing the location of internal streets within a subdivision. Where necessary, the city administrator or designee shall recommend and the city council approve street extensions to the boundary line of the subdivision which the subdivider shall construct and pave to city standards for completed street construction as set forth in chapter 22. In the case of hardship on the applicant or impossibility of extension of such streets because of limiting conditions, the subdivider may apply to the city council for waiver of this requirement concurrent with consideration of the preliminary plat. No street extension shall be in excess of 600 feet in length. No access for any residential lot shall be allowed on a street extension. 
(l)  Service streets. Where a subdivision abuts or contains a collector street or a railroad right-of-way, a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way may be required for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. Such service streets shall be located at a distance from the collector street or railroad right-of-way suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in residential districts or commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations. 
(m)  Half streets. Half streets shall be prohibited except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of this article, and except where it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided. Wherever there is a half street adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within such tract prior to the granting of access. The probable length of time elapsing before dedication of the full right-of-way shall be considered in this decision. 
(n)  Access to arterial streets. Where a proposed subdivision is adjacent to a limited access highway or arterial street, there shall be no direct vehicular or pedestrian access from individual lots to such highways or streets; except the city council may permit such access points to remain if they existed prior to the subdivision application, do not interfere with sight lines to the limited access highway or arterial street, and do not create any traffic hazard. To the extent feasible, access to arterial streets shall be at intervals of not less than one-fourth mile and through existing and established crossroads. 
(o)  Platting of small tracts. In the platting of small tracts of land fronting on arterial streets where there is no convenient access to existing entrances, and where access from such plat would be closer than one-fourth mile from an existing access point, a temporary entrance permit may be granted. Provision shall be made in such plats for the connection of roads to neighboring land. As the neighboring land is platted and developed, and access becomes possible at a preferred location, such temporary entrance permits shall become void. 
(p)  Reserve strips. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except under approved conditions. 
(q)  Private streets. Private streets may be allowed with city council approval after review by the city engineer and public works supervisor. All streets shall be dedicated for public use. 
(r)  Hardship to owners of adjoining property avoided. The street arrangements shall not be such as to cause hardship to owners of adjoining property in platting their own land and providing convenient access to it. 
(s)  Paved access. Reasonable access to the subdivision shall be provided via collector streets, service streets, and/or frontage roads, as recommended by the planning commission and approved by the city council, which access shall be paved according to city standards for completed street construction set forth in chapter 22. The subdivider may petition the city council to specially assess the cost of providing such paved access to the subdivision in accordance with Minn. Stats. ch. 429. For subdivisions of five lots or fewer, the city council may waive the paved access requirement set forth in this subsection, provided that the subdivider deposits with the city clerk an amount equal to 120 percent of the estimated assessment that would be levied against the subdivision property if such paved access were constructed and the cost thereof were assessed to all benefited properties in accordance with Minn. Stats. ch. 429. Such estimated assessment shall be based upon the average levy of street assessments for comparable streets over the three-year period preceding the subdivider's preliminary plat application. Such deposit shall be separately accounted for by the city and shall be used to offset any future assessments levied against the subdivision property for paved access benefiting such property. 
(t)  Subdivisions of five lots or fewer. For subdivisions resulting in five lots or fewer, the subdivider may elect to have all streets and related improvements required in connection with the subdivision to be planned, constructed, and administered through the city, it being recognized that it is generally more efficient for the city to coordinate street improvements for smaller subdivisions. The subdivider shall be responsible for paying all of the costs and fees incurred by the city in planning, constructing, and administering such street improvements, including all fees and expenses charged by agents, consultants, and contractors of the city. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 107-152, if the subdivider for subdivisions of five lots or fewer does not make the foregoing election, no building permit shall be issued for any lot until the city engineer has certified in writing that all street improvements for the subdivision are completed through the bituminous base course pursuant to the approved plans and specifications. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1422, subd. 2; Ord. No. 01-1; Ord. No. 02-03; Ord. No. 2003-01; Ord. No. 2003-05; Ord. No. 04-03; Ord. No. 05-08) 
Sec. 107-110. - Sidewalks and trails. 
(a)  Sidewalk requirements. The planning commission may recommend and the city council may approve a requirement that sidewalks be constructed within a proposed subdivision, in which case such sidewalks shall conform with the following minimum standards: 
(1)  Widths. All sidewalks shall, when installed, conform to the following minimum widths: 
Classification Width Residential districts 5 feet Commercial districts 8 feet Industrial districts 5 feet  
(2)  Grades. Sidewalks shall slope one-fourth inch per foot away from the property line and the profile of the grade shall not exceed six percent. 
(3)  Surfacing. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four-inch thick concrete, except where they cross driveways, in which case sidewalks shall be a minimum of six inches thick. 
(b)  Trail requirements. The planning commission may recommend and the city council may approve a requirement that a pedestrian trail system be incorporated within a proposed subdivision for the purpose of providing safe and convenient pedestrian circulation within the subdivision and access to adjoining properties and rights-of-way. Any such trail system shall conform to the public works design manual. When a driveway crosses an existing trail, the builder shall be responsible for creating a smooth and even transition between the trail and driveway. This may involve additional grading or paving. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1422, subd. 3; Ord. No. 01-1; Ord. No. 04-03) 
Sec. 107-111. - Blocks. 
(a)  Factors governing dimensions. Block length and width or acreage within bounding streets shall be sufficient to accommodate the size of residential lots required in the area by chapter 109, and to provide for convenient access, circulation control, and safety of street traffic. 
(b)  Length. Block lengths shall not exceed 1,800 feet nor be less than 500 feet. 
(c)  Arrangement. A block shall be so designed as to provide two tiers of lots, unless it adjoins a railroad, collector street, river or park, where it may have a single tier of lots. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1422, subd. 4) 
Sec. 107-112. - Lots. 
(a)  Location. All lots shall abut and have direct access to a street. The city may establish different access width requirements for specific lots based on lot location and shape, needs created by the permitted use and traffic volumes and patterns proximate thereto. 
(b)  Width. Lots shall have the required minimum width at the building setback line except for those lots for which the side lot lines are not parallel. 
(c)  Size. Lot dimensions shall comply with minimum lot area and other dimensional requirements specified in chapter 109. Lot size may be reduced in proportion to the area within the subdivision dedicated to right-of-way for streets, provided that the overall density of the subdivision is not increased and the minimum lot size is not less than two acres in any case. 
(d)  Side lot lines. Side lines of lots shall be substantially at right angles to street lines or substantially radial to curved street lines. 
(e)  Natural features. In the subdividing of any land, regard shall be shown for all natural features, such as wetlands, vegetation, watercourses, historic spots or similar conditions which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and stability to the proposed development. 
(f)  Lot remnants. All remnants of lots less than minimum lot size remaining after the subdivision of a larger tract must be added to adjacent lots or platted as outlots, rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels. 
(g)  Access to major streets. In the case where a proposed plat is adjacent to a limited access highway or other major highway, there shall be no direct vehicular access from individual lots to such streets and roads; except the city council may permit such access points to remain if they existed prior to the subdivision application, do not interfere with sight lines to the limited access highway or arterial street, and do not create any traffic hazards. 
(h)  Double frontage lots. Lots with double street frontage shall not be permitted except where such lots are adjacent to a major street or highway. Such lots shall have screening along the frontage on the major street or highway. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1422, subd. 5; Ord. No. 2003-01) 
Sec. 107-113. - Water supply. 
    Extensions of the public water supply system shall, when available, be designed so as to provide water service to each lot. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1422, subd. 6) 
Sec. 107-114. - Sewage disposal. 
    Extensions to the public sanitary sewer system shall, when available, be designed so as to provide sewer service to each lot. In areas being platted without public or central sewage systems, construction, location, design and inspection of all individual sewage treatment systems within the city shall be in accordance with chapter 8, and with Minnesota Pollution Control Agency Individual Sewage Treatment Systems Standards, Minn. Rules ch. 7080. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1422, subd. 7) 
Sec. 107-115. - Drainage. 
    The natural drainage system shall be used to the maximum extent feasible for the storage and flow of runoff. The design of the drainage system shall conform to Soil Conservation Service Technical Report 20, as may be amended, accepted engineering standards for a 100-year 24-hour event design (or an equivalent design approved by the city engineer) and to the city's overall stormwater management plan. The following requirements shall also apply: 
(1)  Proposed drainage facilities shall have adequate capacity to accommodate potential runoff from their entire upstream drainage area, whether within or without the subdivision. The effect of the subdivision on existing downstream drainage areas outside the subdivision shall be considered in evaluating the adequacy of the stormwater management plan. 
(2)  Stormwater runoff shall be discharged to marshlands, swamps, retention basins or other treatment facilities conforming to National Urban Runoff Program (NURP) standards. Marshlands and swamps used for stormwater shall provide for natural or artificial water level control. 
(3)  No existing ditch, stream, drain or drainage canal shall be deepened, widened, rerouted or filled without review and approval by the city. 
(4)  Where artificial channels must be constructed to augment the natural drainage system, such channels, as well as the natural drainageways, may be planned as part of a recreational trail system. Channels shall be designed to be aesthetically compatible for recreational trail use. 
(5)  Quality of stormwater runoff and water infiltrated to the water table shall remain undisturbed, to the maximum extent feasible, by development of the subdivision. 
(6)  The drainage system shall be constructed and operational as part of the first stage of development and construction. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1422, subd. 8) 
Sec. 107-116. - Tree removal and conservation of vegetation. 
    All subdivisions shall be planned, designed, constructed and maintained consistent with the following, at the city's discretion: 
(1)  Existing healthy trees and native vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent feasible and shall be protected by adequate means during construction. 
(2)  Where inadequate vegetation exists on land not being disturbed for development, permanent vegetation shall be established as soon as possible. 
(3)  Prior to certificate of occupancy, vegetation suitable to the site shall be planted. The type or species of tree planted shall be approved by the city. Trees shall have a trunk diameter (measured 12 inches above ground level) of not less than two inches, and shall be balled and burlapped and planted in not less than one cubic yard of good growing soil with a suitable amount of fertilizer. Approved multiple varieties shall be used alternately. At least three trees shall be planted in the front yard or the yard abutting the street at a distance of at least 12 feet outside of the road right-of-way. No tree shall be planted within the road right-of-way. Wooded lots may be exempt from this provision, providing that existing trees conform to the coverage described above. The developer shall escrow sufficient funds with the city in the event weather conditions do not allow planting to occur. 
(4)  Consistent with approved grading plans, existing trees shall be preserved within any right-of-way when such trees are suitably located and in good health. 
(5)  No slash, dead trees, or uprooted stumps shall remain in an improved area after development. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1422, subd. 9; Ord. No. 04-03) 
Sec. 107-117. - Erosion and sediment control. 
    The following guidelines shall be applied in the subdivision and development of land areas, at the city's discretion: 
(1)  The development shall conform to the natural limitations presented by topography and soils so as to create the least potential for soil erosion. 
(2)  Erosion and sediment control measures shall conform to standards of the National Urban Runoff Program (NURP) and shall be coordinated with the different stages of development. Appropriate control measures shall be installed prior to development when necessary to control erosion. 
(3)  The smallest practical increment of land shall be exposed at any one time during development. 
(4)  When soil is exposed, the exposure shall be for the shortest feasible period of time, but not longer than 60 days. 
(5)  Where the topsoil is removed, sufficient arable soil shall be set aside for respreading over the developed area. The soil shall be restored to a depth of four inches and shall be of a quality at least equal to the soil quality prior to development. 
(6)  Critical erosion areas exposed during construction shall be protected with temporary vegetation, mulching or other acceptable means. 
(7)  Sediment basins (debris basins, sidesilting basins, or silt traps) shall be installed and maintained to remove sediment from runoff waters from land subject to earth disturbance activities. 
(8)  Diversions shall be installed to divert surface water runoff from slopes of ten percent or steeper. 
(9)  Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development. 
(10)  Cut and fill slopes shall not be steeper than four feet horizontal to one foot vertical unless stabilized by a retaining wall, riprap or other acceptable means. 
(11)  During grading operations, necessary measures for dust control, as required by the city, shall be implemented. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1422, subd. 10) 
Secs. 107-118-107-147. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ENGINEERING STANDARDS AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 107-148. - Standards and specifications. 
(a)  Monuments. All lot corner pipes or steel rods shall be one-half inch in diameter placed flush with the finished lot grade. 
(b)  Individual wells and sewage systems. The following standards shall apply unless otherwise provided by ordinance, in which case the more restrictive standards shall apply: 
(1)  An individual well shall produce at least five gallons per minute and shall be cased or grouted to provide a safe, potable water supply. A pressure tank equal to ten times the well capacity is required. 
(2)  Each individual sewer system shall include a septic tank at least 1,250 gallons in capacity followed by an absorption system based on Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) Rules, chapter 7080, as adopted by the city, not as written. All percolation results shall be filed showing that a competent soils engineer or MPCA certified site evaluator conducted the field tests. 
(c)  Street signs. These shall be as approved by the city engineer. 
(d)  Street trees. The type or species of trees planted shall be as approved by the city. Trees shall have a trunk diameter (measured 12 inches above grade level) of not less than two inches and shall be planted balled and burlapped in not less than one cubic yard of good growing soil with a suitable amount of fertilizer. 
(e)  Utilities location. All new electric distribution lines (excluding main line feeders and high voltage transmission lines), telephone service lines, and other public utility service lines shall be buried underground unless the city council specifically finds, after study and recommendation by the planning commission that topographical, soil or any other conditions make the underground installation unreasonable or impractical. In the event the city council approves overhead utility lines, the planning commission may recommend, and the city council may require that the type of overhead pole used be of a quality and durability consistent with Rural Electrification Association Standards and aesthetically in conformance with the nature of the residential development. 
(f)  Inspection. All required improvements shall be inspected by the engineer during construction at the expense of the subdivider. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1424; Ord. No. 05-08) 
Sec. 107-149. - Easements. 
(a)  Standard drainage and utilities easements. Easements shall be at least ten feet wide measured from the lot line within the perimeter of each lot, centered on rear and other lot lines. In MPGCCs only, easements shall be five feet wide measured from the lot line within the perimeter of each lot centered on the side lot lines only. Front, rear, and other lines shall be indicated herein. Easements at least ten feet wide shall be provided adjacent to street right-of-way. They shall have continuity for alignment from block to block, and at deflection points easements for pole-line anchors shall be provided where necessary. 
(b)  Major drainageway easements. Easements shall be provided along each side of the centerline of any wetland, body of water, watercourse or drainage channel, whether or not shown in the comprehensive development plan, to a sufficient width to provide proper maintenance and protection and to provide for stormwater runoff and installation and maintenance of storm sewers. Such easements for drainage purposes shall not be less than 20 feet in width. Emergency overflow elevation shall be a minimum of two feet below the lowest surrounding house opening. 
(c)  Dedication. Easements shall be dedicated on the plat instrument for the required use. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1426, subd. 1; Ord. No. 01-09) 
Sec. 107-150. - Dedication of land or contribution of cash for public purpose. 
(a)  Public sites and open spaces. Where a proposed park, playground, drainageway or other public site as shown on the comprehensive development plan is located in part or in whole by the boundary of a proposed subdivision and such public sites are not dedicated, such public ground shall be reserved and no action taken toward approval of preliminary or final plat for a period not to exceed 90 days to allow the opportunity to consider and take action toward acquisition by the city, county, school district or other interested governmental body of such public ground, park or drainage by purchase or other causes. 
(b)  Dedication of parks, open space, and public purposes. In every subdivision of land allowing development for residential, commercial or industrial uses, a reasonable portion of such land, not to exceed ten percent, shall be dedicated to the city for public recreation space or open space, with such land being in addition to property dedicated for streets, easements, or other public ways. Public land dedications should be designated as outlots. Any land considered for dedication shall be subject to suitability criteria outlined in the comprehensive park development plan, adopted by the city council as recommended by the parks and recreation commission. The desirability and usefulness of specific parcels of land will be evaluated according to several factors, including: size, shape, location, accessibility, topography, population density, and natural features. Specific parcels for park dedication shall be recommended by the parks and recreation commission and the planning commission, with action by the city council. Said land shall be suitable for public use for one or more of the afore-described purposes and the city shall not be required to accept land that is not suitable or would require extensive public expenditures to be made usable. The boundaries of all park lands shall be properly marked by the subdivider with metal posts as approved by the city engineer. 
(c)  Cash contribution in lieu of land. The city shall have the option to require a cash contribution in lieu of dedication or to require a portion of the land and a cash contribution in lieu of the balance thereof. The cash contribution shall be calculated based upon the number of new lots created within the subdivision, excluding outlots. Any cash contribution in lieu of land shall be based upon the fair market value of the land being subdivided. The term "fair market value" is defined as the market value of the land within the subdivision on the date presented to the city council for final approval, as determined by an appraiser chosen by the city from time to time. Any cash contribution paid to the city shall be placed in a fund and used only for the acquisition and development of facilities designed or used for one or more of the afore-described purposes. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1428) 
State Law reference- Dedications, Minn. Stats. § 462.358, subd. 2b. 
Sec. 107-151. - Obligations regarding subdivision improvements. 
(a)  Payment for installation of improvements. The required improvements are to be furnished and installed by the subdivider at the sole expense of the subdivider and at no expense to the public. 
(b)  Development agreement required. Prior to installation of any required improvements and prior to approval of the final plat, the subdivider shall enter into a contract in writing with the city requiring the subdivider to furnish and construct said improvements at the subdivider's sole expense, in accordance with the plans and specifications and reasonable contract conditions, which shall include provision for supervision of details of construction by the city engineer. The agreement shall require the subdivider to either make an escrow deposit or to furnish a letter of credit equal to 125 percent of the city engineer's estimate of the total cost of the improvements to be furnished under the contract, including the cost of inspection. On request of the subdivider, the contract may provide for completion of part or all of the chapter improvements covered thereby prior to acceptance of the plat, and in such event the amount of the deposit or bond shall be reduced in a sum equal to the estimated cost of the improvements so completed prior to acceptance of the plat. 
(c)  Issuance of grading permits. No grading permit shall be issued for improvement of any subdivision prior to the approval of the preliminary plat for the subdivision, approval and execution of a development agreement, and payment by the subdivider of all park dedication fees as may be required pursuant to section 107-150(c). 
(d)  Construction plans. Construction plans for the required improvements, conforming in all respects with the standards of the city engineer and applicable ordinances, shall be prepared at the subdivider's expense by a professional engineer who is registered in the state. Such plans, together with the quantities of construction items, two blueline prints, and an estimate of the total cost of the required improvements, shall be submitted to the city engineer for approval. Upon approval, such plans and materials shall become part of the development agreement. Upon completion of the required improvements, the subdivider shall submit to the city one vellum set of the plans as approved by the city engineer to be filed as the record drawings of such improvements. 
(e)  Inspection. All required improvements within the subdivision that are to be installed under the provisions of this article shall be inspected during the course of construction by the city engineer at the subdivider's expense, and acceptance shall be subject to the city engineer's certificate of compliance with the contract. 
(f)  Improvements completed prior to approval of final plat. Improvements within a subdivision which have been completed prior to application for approval of the final plat or execution of the contract for installation of the required improvements shall be accepted as equivalent improvements in compliance with the requirements only if the city engineer shall certify that the existing improvements conform to applicable standards and the subdivider has satisfied the requirements of subsection (c) of this section. No building permit for private construction within the subdivision or certificate of occupancy shall be issued prior to certification and acceptance. 
(g)  Trunk facilities. Where a water main, sanitary sewer, storm drain or similar facility should be constructed at a larger size to serve areas outside the subdivision, the larger facility required must be constructed, the additional cost to be borne by the benefiting properties and the assessments to be determined accordingly by the city council. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1430) 
Sec. 107-152. - Building permits. 
    No building permits shall be issued for construction on any lot within the subdivision until all roadways are paved with Class 5 base material so as to be accessible by emergency vehicles. The applicant for a building permit within a subdivision shall fully comply with the requirements of section 107-151. In addition, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all roadways are fully completed in conformance with the approved plans and specifications and accepted by the city upon the recommendation of the city engineer. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1434) 
Secs. 107-153-107-172. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS PERTAINING TO STREETS 

Sec. 107-173. - Construction of new streets or upgrading existing roads. 
(a)  Procedure. Upon receipt of the city engineer's approval of the proposed plans and specifications, the subdivider shall proceed with the construction of new streets or upgrading existing streets as described by these project plans. 
(b)  Written approval. Prior to the placement of any road base material, the subdivider shall request, two days prior to such placement, written approval from the city engineer as to the suitability of the subgrade, ditching, shouldering and drainage structures to receive road base material. 
(c)  Testing. The city engineer shall direct such testing of compaction and materials as deemed necessary to determine the suitability of the work to receive road base. Such testing shall include a wheel test with a single axle truck loaded to seven tons per axle. Compaction shall meet the ordinary compaction method as defined in the latest edition to the standard specifications for construction as prepared by the state department of transportation. 
(d)  Release of placement of private utilities. Once the road base material has been placed, the city engineer shall provide written notice to the subdivider releasing the placement of private utilities. No open cut trenches shall be allowed after placement of bituminous surfacing. All buried utilities shall be placed to a minimum of 18 inches below the finished subgrade elevation. 
(e)  Bituminous surfacing. Prior to the placing of any bituminous surfacing, the subdivider shall request, two days prior to such placement, written approval by the city engineer of the road base. The city engineer shall direct such testing as necessary to determine compliance with the plans and specifications. Testing shall include, but not be limited to, oil content, density and surface deviations. No paving shall be allowed after November 15, without prior approval of the public works supervisor. 
(f)  Completion. At such time as the city engineer is satisfied with the placement of road base and surfacing, the city engineer shall provide written notice to the subdivider whereupon the subdivider shall arrange for completion of shouldering and landscaping of the project. 
(g)  Final inspection. Upon completion of the work including satisfaction of any punch list items noted by the city engineer, the subdivider shall arrange a final inspection of the project by the city engineer and the public works supervisor for the city. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the roadways are completed through the bituminous base course in conformance with the approved plans and specifications and accepted by the city upon recommendation of the city engineer. 
(h)  Subdivision of five lots or fewer. For subdivision resulting in five lots or fewer, the subdivider may elect to have all street and related improvements required in connection with the subdivision to be planned, constructed, and administered through the city, it being recognized that it is generally more efficient for the city to coordinate street improvements for smaller subdivisions. The subdivider shall be responsible for paying all of the costs and fees incurred by the city in planning, constructing, and administering such street improvements, including all fees and expenses charged by agents, consultants, and contractors of the city. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 107-152, if the subdivider for the subdivision of five lots or fewer does not make the foregoing election, no building permit shall be issued for any lot until the city engineer has certified in writing that all street improvements for the subdivision are completed through the bituminous base course pursuant to the approved plans and specifications. Upon the approval of the attendees, the city engineer shall submit to the city council a recommendation of acceptance of the completed project. 
(Prior Code, ch. 902, subd. 5; Ord. No. 02-03) 
Sec. 107-174. - Final plat approval. 
(a)  Procedure. Upon approval by the city council and payment by the developer of any outstanding fees or charges, the subdivider shall file the final plat with the county. After completion of applicable conditions of approval in the development agreement, the developer shall comply with section 107-81. All road construction work must be completed within one year of the city council approval of final plat plans. 
(b)  Warranty. Upon filing of the final plat and completion of the subdivision improvements, the subdivider shall continue the irrevocable letter of credit to an amount equal to ten percent of the original letter of credit or $25,000.00, whichever is less. This retainage shall cover any work which is determined by the city engineer and city council to be damage and/or failure of the project in excess of normal wear and tear and which occurs within 12 months after acceptance of the project by the city. 
(c)  Deficiencies. The city shall provide a written appraisal of warranty items to be accomplished by the subdivider in the tenth month following acceptance of the project. The subdivider shall have 45 days to correct all noted deficiencies. If all deficiencies are not corrected within 45 days, the city shall arrange to have the necessary work done and deduct all costs so incurred from the subdivider's letter of credit. 
(d)  Insurance. The subdivider shall provide evidence to the city of builder's risk and liability insurance in sufficient amounts to cover the work and satisfy state and county requirements. 
(Prior Code, ch. 902, subd. 1; Ord. No. 05-08) 
Sec. 107-175. - Development agreement required. 
    See section 107-151. 
(Prior Code, ch. 902, subd. 7) 
Sec. 107-176. - Technical requirements. 
(a)  Applicable technical specifications. See the public works design manual. 
(b)  Aggregate base. Class 5 base shall be placed in a minimum thickness of three inches. Aggregate base shall meet the MnDOT Class 5 gradation except as modified to require a minimum of ten percent passing the #200 sieve up to a maximum of 15 percent passing the #200 sieve for gravel surfaced roads. Aggregate base meeting MnDOT Class 5 gradation only may be used when roads are to be surfaced with bituminous base as part of the road improvements. 
(c)  Subdivisions of five lots or fewer. For subdivisions resulting in five lots or fewer, the subdivider may elect to have all streets and related improvements required in connection with the subdivision to be planned, constructed, and administered through the city, it being recognized that it is generally more efficient for the city to coordinate street improvements for smaller subdivisions. The subdivider shall be responsible for paying all of the costs and fees incurred by the city in planning, constructing, and administering such street improvements, including all fees and expenses charged by agents, consultants, and contractors of the city. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 107-152, if the subdivider for subdivisions of five lots or fewer does not make the foregoing election, no building permit shall be issued for any lot until the city engineer has certified in writing that all street improvements for the subdivision are completed through the bituminous base course pursuant to the approved plans and specifications. 
(Prior Code, ch. 902, subd. 8; Ord. No. 01-1; Ord. No. 05-08) 
Sec. 107-177. - Development standards. 
    The city has adopted and will enforce a set of development standards which will be known as the public works design manual. The public works design manual may be amended from time to time by adoption of a resolution of the city council. 
(Prior Code, ch. 902, subd. 9; Ord. No. 04-03; Ord. No. 04-12; Ord. No. 05-08; Ord. No. 12-03, § 7, 4-30-2012) 
Sec. 107-178. - Variances. 
(a)  Hardship avoided. The city council may grant a variance upon receiving a report from the planning commission in any particular case where the subdivider can show that by reason of exceptional topography or other physical conditions strict compliance with these regulations could cause an exceptional and undue hardship on the enjoyment of a substantial property right, provided that such relief may be granted without detriment to the public welfare and without impairing the intent and purpose of this ordinance. 
(b)  Variance application required. Application for any such variance shall be made in writing by the subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat is filed for consideration, stating fully all facts relied upon by the petitioner, and shall be supplemented with maps, plans or other additional data which may be required by the planning commission in the analysis of the proposed project. The plans for the subdivision shall include such covenants, restrictions, or other legal provisions necessary to guarantee the full achievement of the plan. 
(c)  Decision by city council. The planning commission shall make findings and recommendations regarding the requested variance and shall transmit these to the city council, which shall grant or deny the variance. Any variance granted shall be recorded in resolution form and entered in the minutes of the city council setting forth the reasons which justified the action. 
(Prior Code, ch. 902, subd. 10) 
Chapter 109 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning, Minn. Stats. §§ 462.357, 462.3595, 462.3597. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 109-1. - Intent and purpose. 
    This chapter is adopted for the following purposes: 
(1)  Protecting the public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the property, present and future residents of the city and surrounding environs. 
(2)  Preserving the rural character of the city and preventing overcrowding of land and undue concentration of structures by regulating the use of land and buildings in relation to the capacity of the land and buildings surrounding them. 
(3)  Dividing the city into zones and districts, restricting and regulating therein the location and use of structures and land. 
(4)  Promoting the efficient and orderly development of the residential, agricultural, business, industrial, recreational and public land uses. 
(5)  Providing adequate light, air, and convenience of access to property. 
(6)  Preserving and protecting the quiet, peaceful enjoyment and habitability of the community. 
(7)  Limiting congestion in the public rights-of-way and securing safety from fire and other dangers. 
(8)  Providing for the compatibility of existing and future land uses. 
(9)  Protecting and guiding the development of rural areas. 
(10)  Conserving and protecting natural resources. 
(11)  Protecting and preserving economically viable agricultural land. 
(12)  Preserving the quality and capacity of wetlands and flood storage areas to store, carry, purify, and discharge waters. 
(13)  Promoting the efficient utilization of roads and public infrastructure. 
(14)  Conserving the natural and scenic beauty and attractiveness of roadsides. 
(15)  Providing for the administration of this chapter and amendments thereto. 
(16)  Defining the powers and duties of the administrative officers and bodies. 
(17)  Prescribing penalties for the violation of the provisions of this chapter or any amendment thereto. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1302) 
Sec. 109-2. - General rules of construction. 
    The language set forth in the text of this chapter shall be interpreted in accordance with the following rules of construction: 
(1)  Any use not herein expressly provided as a permitted use, conditional use or accessory use is hereby expressly prohibited, unless such use is sufficiently similar to an allowed use as determined by the city council. 
(2)  All measured distances expressed in feet shall be to the nearest tenth of a foot. In the event of conflicting provisions, the more restrictive provision shall apply. 
(Prior Code chs. 1304, 1308, subd. 1 (C)) 
Sec. 109-3. - Compliance. 
(a)  Except as in this chapter specifically provided, no structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or altered, and no structure or land shall be used for any purpose or in any manner which is not in conformity with this chapter. 
(b)  From and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the use of all land and every building or portion of a building erected, altered in respect to height and area, added to, or relocated, and every use within a building or use accessory thereto, in the city shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. Any existing building or structure and any existing use or properties not in conformity with the regulations herein prescribed shall be regarded as nonconforming, but may be continued, extended or changed, subject to the special regulations herein provided with respect to nonconforming properties or uses. 
(c)  The city council or the planning commission, on its own initiative or upon request, may conduct a study to determine if a use which is neither allowed nor prohibited is acceptable and, if so, what zoning district would be most appropriate and the conditions and standards relating to development of the use. The city council, planning commission or property owner, if appropriate, may initiate the consideration of an amendment to this chapter to provide for the particular use under consideration or shall find that the use is not compatible for development within the city. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1308, subd. 1) 
Sec. 109-4. - Relation to comprehensive plan. 
    It is the policy of the city that the enforcement, amendment, and administration of this chapter be accomplished in accordance with goals, objectives, policies and exhibits contained in the comprehensive plan as developed and amended from time to time by the city council. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1308, subd. 2) 
Secs. 109-5-109-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 109-27. - Zoning administrator. 
    The zoning administrator shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and be responsible for carrying out the following duties: 
(1)  Enter upon land or within a building during reasonable working hours as found necessary to fulfill the duties as administrator of this chapter. 
(2)  Conduct inspections of buildings, structures, and uses of land to determine compliance with the terms of this chapter. 
(3)  Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter, including, but not limited to all maps, amendments, conditional use permits, variances, appeals, nonconforming uses, planned unit developments, and other applications thereto. 
(4)  Receive, file, and forward to the planning commission all applications for amendments, appeals, variances, conditional use permits, planned unit developments, and other matters which these bodies are required to consider under this chapter. 
(5)  Institute, in the name of the city, appropriate actions or proceedings against a violator as provided by law. 
(6)  Establish and enforce regulations in writing, clarifying or explaining any provision of this chapter. 
(7)  To provide such clerical, technical, and professional assistance as may be required by the planning commission in the exercise of their duties. 
(8)  To recommend policies and procedures to the city council for the orderly and efficient review and processing of applications filed with the city, including the type, scale and size of plans and drawings required for such applications, and the number of copies of such plans and drawings. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1310, subd. 5) 
Sec. 109-28. - Nonconforming uses and structures. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law, any nonconformity, including the lawful use or occupation of land or premises existing at the time of the adoption of an additional control under this chapter, may be continued, including through repair, replacement, restoration, maintenance, or improvement, unless: 
(1)  The nonconformity or occupancy is discontinued for a period of more than one year; or 
(2)  Any nonconforming use is destroyed by fire or other peril to the extent of greater than 50 percent of its estimated market value, as indicated in the records of the county assessor at the time of damage, and no building permit has been applied for within 180 days of when the property is damaged. In this case, the city may impose reasonable conditions upon a zoning or building permit in order to mitigate any newly created impact on adjacent property or water body. When a nonconforming structure in the shoreland district with less than 50 percent of the required setback from the water is destroyed by fire or other peril to greater than 50 percent of its estimated market value as indicated in the records of the county assessor at the time of damage, the structure setback may be increased if practicable and reasonable conditions are placed upon a zoning or building permit to mitigate created impacts on the adjacent property or water body. 
(b)  Expansions of nonconformities shall only be permitted upon issuance of a variance in accordance with section 109-48 and may be approved with reasonable conditions to prevent and abate nuisances and to protect the public health, welfare, or safety. This subdivision does not prohibit the city from enforcing an ordinance that applies to adult use bookstores, adult use theaters, or similar adult uses as defined in section 12-21. 
(c)  This subsection applies to shoreland lots of record in the office of the county recorder on the date of adoption of local shoreland controls that do not meet the requirements for lot size or lot width. The city may regulate the use of nonconforming lots of record and the repair, replacement, maintenance, improvement, or expansion of nonconforming uses and structures in shoreland areas according to this subsection. 
(1)  A nonconforming single lot of record located within a shoreland area shall be allowed as a building site without variances from lot size requirements, provided that: 
a.  All structure and septic system setback distance requirements can be met; 
b.  A Type 1 sewage treatment system consistent with Minn. Rules ch. 7080, can be installed or the lot is connected to a public sewer; and 
c.  The impervious surface coverage does not exceed 25 percent of the lot. 
(2)  In a group of two or more contiguous lots of record under a common ownership, an individual lot must be considered as a separate parcel of land for the purpose of sale or development if it meets the following requirements: 
a.  The lot must be at least 66 percent of the dimensional standards for lot width and lot size for the shoreland classification consistent with Minn. Rules ch. 7080; 
b.  The lot must be connected to a public sewer, if available, or must be suitable for the installation of a Type 1 sewage treatment system consistent with Minn. Rules ch. 7080, and local government controls; 
c.  Impervious surface coverage must not exceed 25 percent of each lot; and 
d.  Development of the lot must be consistent with an adopted comprehensive plan. 
(3)  A lot subject to subsection (c)(2) of this section not meeting the requirements of said subsection must be combined with the one or more contiguous lots so they equal one or more conforming lots as much as possible. 
(4)  Notwithstanding subsection (c)(2) of this section, contiguous nonconforming lots of record in shoreland areas under a common ownership must be able to be sold or purchased individually if each lot contained a habitable residential dwelling at the time the lots came under common ownership and the lots are suitable for, or served by, a sewage treatment system consistent with the requirements of Minn. Stats. § 115.55 and Minn. Rules ch. 7080, or connected to a public sewer. 
(5)  In evaluating all variances, zoning and building permit applications, or conditional use requests, the zoning authority shall require the property owner to address, when appropriate, stormwater runoff management, reducing impervious surfaces, increasing setback, restoration of wetlands, vegetative buffers, sewage treatment and water supply capabilities, and other conservation-designed actions. 
(6)  A portion of a conforming lot may be separated from an existing parcel as long as the remainder of the existing parcel meets the lot size and sewage treatment requirements of the zoning district for a new lot and the newly created parcel is combined with an adjacent parcel. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1308, subd. 4; Ord. No. 12-03, § 2, 4-30-2012) 
State Law reference- Nonconformities, Minn. Stats. § 462.357, subds. 1c., 1e. 
Sec. 109-29. - Site plan approval procedure and requirements. 
(a)  Compliance. A site plan must be approved before a building permit for a new structure or expansion of an existing structure is issued in the GB or LI districts. The purpose of such approval is to assure that new developments conform to city plans and this Code and provide the most appropriate and compatible site plan for that area. 
(b)  Application. Approval of a site plan may be initiated by the owner, user, or potential user of the subject property by filing an appropriate application with the city administrator or designee. The city administrator or designee may require the applicant to furnish a scaled drawing of any of the following items which are necessary for the proper consideration of the application: 
(1)  Lot or parcel. 
(2)  Existing grades, and buildings, zoning, and owners within 100 feet of the site. 
(3)  Finished grades and proposed drainage plan approved by the city engineer. 
(4)  Proposed buildings showing entrances and exits. 
(5)  Interior circulation, including: bike and automobile parking spaces, loading spaces, driveways, stacking spaces, walks, curbing, and lighting. 
(6)  Recreation areas. 
(7)  Proposed landscaping specifications and locations. 
(8)  Existing trees of six inches in diameter or more. 
(9)  Proposed screening. 
(c)  Application fee. An application fee, to be set by ordinance, shall accompany the application. 
(d)  Planning commission action. All requests for site plan approval shall be referred to the planning commission for a recommendation. Within 60 days after referral, the planning commission shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the request. If the application is recommended for approval or approval subject to conditions, the city council may approve the site plan listing the specific conditions. 
(e)  Findings. The following findings shall be made before a site plan may be approved. The site plan shall: 
(1)  Be compatible with the surrounding land uses; 
(2)  Preserve existing natural features whenever possible; 
(3)  Achieve a safe and efficient circulation system; 
(4)  Not place excessive traffic loads on local streets; 
(5)  Conform to the city's plans and standards for parks, streets, service drives, and walkways; 
(6)  Conform to the city's comprehensive plan; 
(7)  Achieve a maximum of safety, convenience, and amenities; 
(8)  Show sufficient landscaping to reasonably screen undesirable features and to enhance the image of the development; 
(9)  Not create detrimental disturbances to surrounding properties; 
(10)  Meet all the requirements of this chapter, unless a variance has been granted from such requirements; and 
(11)  Show efforts to conserve energy wherever practical. 
(f)  Termination of final approval. Approval of a site plan shall be for one year to allow for the initiation of construction. If construction is not started within one year, or within any extensions granted as hereafter provided, the developer may file a written request prior to the first anniversary of the date of approval with the city council for an extension. The city council may extend site plan approval for periods of not more than 12 months each upon a finding that: 
(1)  The proposed use is consistent with the city's comprehensive land use plan current at the time the request for an extension is considered; and 
(2)  The project design meets the applicable code standards in effect at the time the request for an extension is considered, or the design is modified to satisfy those standards. 
(g)  Security agreement. 
(1)  Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the owner shall file a performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or place in cash escrow an amount equal to 11/4 times the estimate of the city administrator or designee of the cost of the installation of all paving, curb and gutter, free-standing dumpster enclosures, free-standing lighting, landscaping, sidewalks, grading, and screening required of the owner. If the city administrator or designee determines that the required improvements are adequately covered by a security agreement previously furnished to the city, the administrator or designee may reduce the amount of the security agreement furnished under this subsection by the amount of the duplicate coverage. 
(2)  Upon completion of the required work items, the owner or permit holder shall apply to the city for final inspection. If the city finds that all installations meet the requirements of the approved plans and specifications, the security agreement shall be released. However, the security agreement for landscaping shall be effective and held for three years after completion of the work, in order to ensure that such landscaping will survive. If the improvements are not completed as proposed within the established time limit, the city may proceed to complete such installation by contract or force account and seek reimbursement of its cost from the security agreement. 
(3)  Prior to occupancy, the owner or permit holder shall request a final inspection from the city. If all improvements have been satisfactorily installed, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued and the deposit released to the owner. 
(4)  If the building is occupied prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy, the city may claim the deposit as liquidated damages for costs incurred by the city in enforcing these provisions of this Code. The city may enforce compliance by appropriate legal action. 
(h)  Landscaping installation and maintenance. The landscaping and screening shall be installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. If seasonal weather conditions or phasing of construction presents practical difficulties in the installation or completion of the landscaping, the completion of the landscaping may be deferred for not more than six months by the city administrator or designee. The extension of time shall be granted in writing. The owner or occupant of the premises shall maintain the landscaping and screening in good condition free from refuse and debris. All diseased or dead materials shall be replaced within the next growing season. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1320, subd. 1; Ord. No. 04-03) 
Secs. 109-30-109-46. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF APPEALS AND ADJUSTMENTS; VARIANCES AND APPEALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Board of appeals and adjustments, Minn. Stats. § 462.354, subd. 2; variances and appeals, Minn. Stats. § 462.357, subd. 6. 

Sec. 109-47. - Board of appeals and adjustments. 
    A board of appeals and adjustments is hereby established which shall be the city council and shall have the following power and duties: 
(1)  To review and make decisions regarding all applications for variances and to take action on said applications; 
(2)  To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the zoning administrator or any other administrative officer of the city in the enforcement of this chapter; and 
(3)  To hear and decide appeals by landowners who have been denied building permits due to the location of their land within an area governed by an official map duly adopted by the city. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1310, subd. 6) 
State Law reference- Board of appeals and adjustments, Minn. Stats. § 462.354, subd. 2. 
Sec. 109-48. - Variances. 
(a)  Practical difficulties. A variance from requirements of this chapter may be granted by the city when the applicant for the variance establishes that there are practical difficulties in complying with such requirements. The term "practical difficulties," as used in connection with the granting of a variance, means that the property owner proposes to use the property in a reasonable manner not permitted by a zoning requirement; the plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to the property and not created by the landowner; and the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood. Economic considerations alone do not constitute practical difficulties. Practical difficulties include, but are not limited to, inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems. 
(b)  Conditions. Variances shall only be permitted when they are in harmony with the general purposes and intent of this chapter and when the variances are consistent with the comprehensive plan. The city shall not permit as a variance any use that is not allowed under the chapter for property in the zone where the affected person's land is located. The city may permit as a variance the temporary use of a one-family dwelling as a two-family dwelling. 
(c)  Restrictions. The city may impose such restrictions and conditions in a variance to minimize the impact of such variance upon other properties in the neighborhood, and to better carry out the intent of the variance. 
(d)  Required exhibits for variances. 
(1)  List, mailing labels, and map showing property owners names and addresses within 1,000 feet of the outer boundaries of the property in question (provided by the city). 
(2)  The boundary survey and preliminary building and site development plan. The city staff may waive the survey requirement for height variances, a building closer to the front lot line that exceeds the minimum setback, and similar cases. 
(3)  Other information as required. 
(e)  Procedures. The procedure for obtaining a variance is as follows: 
(1)  The property owner or agent shall meet with the city administrator or designee to explain the situation, learn the procedures and obtain an application form. 
(2)  The applicant shall file the completed application form together with the required exhibits with the city administrator or designee and shall pay a filing fee as established by the city. Applications for variances must be submitted to the city administrator or designee according to the submittal schedule. 
(3)  The city administrator or designee shall transmit the application to the planning commission and shall notify all property owners of record within 1,000 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property in question and within 1,000 feet of all contiguous property under common ownership. 
(4)  The planning commission shall hold a public hearing and study the application and shall make a recommendation to the city council within 60 days, one of three actions: approval, denial, or approval with conditions. The 60-day period may be extended if necessary for further review by the city. 
(5)  No application by a property owner for a variance shall be submitted to the planning commission within a 12-month period following denial of such request, except that the planning commission may permit a new application if, in the opinion of the planning commission, new evidence of a change in circumstances warrants consideration. 
(6)  Approved variances shall be filed in the office of the county recorder. 
(f)  Revocation. The city council may, following a public hearing, revoke a variance if any conditions established by the city council, as part of granting the variance request, are violated. 
(g)  Expiration. When a variance has been issued pursuant to the provisions of this section, the variance shall become null and void without further action by the planning commission or city council unless construction relative to the variance commences within one year of the date of granting the variance. If a variance ceases to exist for a period of six months, it shall expire without further action by the city. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1310, subd. 3; Ord. No. 04-03; Ord. No. 11-01; Ord. No. 11-04) 
State Law reference- Variances and appeals, Minn. Stats. § 462.357, subd. 6. 
Sec. 109-49. - Appeal from administrative decisions. 
(a)  Time for appeal. An appeal may be taken to the board of appeals and adjustments by any person aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the city in the enforcement of this chapter. Such an appeal shall be made by written notice to the zoning administrator within 20 days of the order, requirement, decision or determination, shall be accompanied by an administrative fee as prescribed by the city fee schedule and shall specifically describe the facts involved and the basis for appeal. 
(b)  Proceedings. Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the zoning administrator shall transmit the notice to the board of appeals and adjustments together with all papers constituting a record upon which the action appealed was taken and shall set a time and place for a hearing on the appeal. Such time shall not be less than ten and no more than 30 days after receipt of the notice. Due notice of the hearing shall be given to the parties. 
(c)  Decision and review. Within a reasonable time after the hearing, the board of appeals and adjustments shall make its order deciding the matter and serve a copy of such order upon the applicant by mail. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1310, subd. 7) 
State Law reference- Variances and appeals, Minn. Stats. § 462.357, subd. 6. 
Secs. 109-50-109-71. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED; ZONING MAP 

Sec. 109-72. - District classification. 
    In order to classify, regulate, and restrict the location of trade and business and the location of buildings designated for specific uses; to regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings hereafter erected or altered; to regulate and limit the intensity of the use of the lot areas; and to regulate and determine the areas of yards, recreation and open space within and surrounding such buildings, the city is hereby divided into zoning districts. The use, height and area regulations are uniform in each district. Districts shall be known as: 
Symbol Name A Agriculture AP Agriculture Preserve LG Lake George Residential (1, 2, & 3) LG-HDR Lake George High Density Residential SFR Single-Family Residential MUSA MUSA-Urban Reserve District GB General Business LI Limited Industry FBP Future Business Park PI Public/Institutional PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay District CLR Closed Landfill Restricted  
(Prior Code, ch. 1312, subd. 1; Ord. No. 15-02, § 1, 3-9-2015) 
Sec. 109-73. - Zoning map. 
(a)  The location and boundaries of the districts established by this article are hereby set forth in a map known as the city zoning map. Said map and all notations, references, and data shown thereon are hereby incorporated by reference into this article and shall be as much a part of it as if all were fully described herein. It shall be the responsibility of the city administrator or designee to maintain said map, and amendments thereto shall be recorded on said map within 30 days after official publication of amendments. The official zoning map shall be kept on file in the city hall. 
(b)  Wherever uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any use district as shown on the zoning map incorporated herein, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Where district boundary lines are indicated as following streets, railroads, or similar rights-of-way, they shall be construed as following the centerlines thereof; 
(2)  Where district boundary lines are indicated as approximately following lot lines or section lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries; 
(3)  Where a lot held in one ownership, and of record at the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, is divided by a district boundary line, the entire lot shall be construed to be within the less restricted district; provided that this construction shall not apply if it increases the area of the less restricted portion of the lot by more than 20 percent; 
(4)  Where figures are shown on the zoning map between a street or property line and a district boundary line, they indicate that the district boundary line runs parallel to the street line or property line at a distance therefrom, from equivalent to the number of feet so indicated, unless otherwise indicated. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1312, subds. 2, 3) 
Sec. 109-74. - Future annexation. 
    Any land annexed to the city in the future shall be placed in the A district until placed in another district by action of the city council after recommendation of the planning commission. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1312, subd. 4) 
Secs. 109-75-109-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 109-92. - A, Agriculture District. 
(a)  Purpose. This section applies to the A, Agriculture district. This district is designed and intended to aid in guiding development toward fulfillment of the comprehensive plan and to serve the following functions: 
(1)  To include those areas where it is necessary and desirable to preserve, promote, maintain, and enhance the use of the land for long-term agricultural purposes; 
(2)  To protect such areas from encroachment by nonagricultural uses, structures, or activities and reduce possibilities of rural-urban conflicts; 
(3)  To prohibit those uses and densities that would require the premature extension of urban public facilities and services; 
(4)  To promote logical and orderly development in the best interest of the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city; 
(5)  To protect and maintain the open space for the creation of an attractive living environment; 
(6)  To protect, preserve, and maintain the unique rural lifestyle; and 
(7)  In areas that have been designated for residential development on the city's comprehensive plan, this district serves as a holding classification for future residential development. 
(b)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Public utility uses for local services when located within a public right-of-way or utility easement. 
(2)  Public and private forests and wildlife reservations. 
(3)  Publicly owned and operated property except as herein amended. 
(4)  All uses permitted in the residence districts and as regulated in the A district. 
(5)  Agricultural uses. 
(6)  Essential services. 
(7)  Home occupations not requiring interim use permit. 
(8)  Collocation of telecommunication facilities, including associated ground equipment, in or on an existing facility. 
(c)  Accessory uses. 
(1)  Private garage and accessory buildings per section 109-191 (4). 
(2)  Accessory uses as normally and customarily associated with agricultural production. 
(3)  One roadside stand offering for sale only those products grown on the premises, provided that such stand does not exceed in area of 500 square feet; is located in conformance with yard regulations; and proper provisions are made for adequate off-street parking and access. 
(d)  Conditional/interim uses. 
(1)  Accessory structures other than permitted. 
(2)  Airports/heliports when accessory to agricultural operations. 
(3)  Antenna and towers, subject to the standards of section 109-471. 
(4)  Cemeteries. 
(5)  Christmas tree sales. 
(6)  Churches. 
(7)  Commercial animal training. 
(8)  Commercial feed lots. 
(9)  Commercial greenhouse or nursery. 
(10)  Group homes subject to state statutes. 
(11)  Dog kennels. 
(12)  Essential service. 
(13)  Home occupations. 
(14)  Non-domestic animal, more than two per acre. 
(15)  Overhead and underground utilities (not part of recorded subdivision). 
(16)  Riding stables. 
(17)  Swine production. 
(18)  Trail rides. 
(19)  Veterinary clinic. 
(20)  Mineral excavation in compliance with section 109-160. 
(21)  Outdoor commercial recreation facility 
(e)  District Standards. See sections 109-72-109-74. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1314, subd. 1; Ord. No. 01-1; Ord. No. 01-06; Ord. No. 04-03; Ord. No. 12-03, § 8, 4-30-2012; Ord. 15-04, § 1, 8-31-2015) 
Sec. 109-93. - AP, Agricultural Preserve District. 
(a)  Purpose. This section applies to the AP district. The purpose of this district is to provide for an orderly means whereby agricultural lands in the city can be included in the state's agricultural preservation program for long term agricultural use as defined by the city's comprehensive plan. The AP district shall be applied and maintained in compliance with the provisions of Minn. Stats. § 473H.17, as may be amended. If any of the properties are removed from the agricultural preservation program pursuant to the required statutory process, the rural residential guiding shall apply. 
(b)  Permitted uses. In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this section, the following uses are permitted in the AP district: 
(1)  Agricultural uses and buildings as defined by this ordinance located on lots conforming to Minn. Stats. § 473H.03 as amended from time to time. 
(2)  Farm drainage and irrigation systems. 
(3)  Forest and game management areas. 
(4)  City-owned public parks, trails, public recreation areas and historic monuments. 
(5)  Home occupations not requiring interim use permits. 
(6)  Essential public services. 
(7)  Single-family dwellings. 
(c)  Accessory uses. 
(1)  Private garages and accessory buildings per section 109-191 (4). A building permit is required for all accessory buildings pursuant this Code and state building code unless farming/agricultural building uses comply with state statutes. The zoning district designation does not provide exemption from this rule. 
(2)  Accessory uses as normally and customarily associated with agricultural production. 
(3)  One roadside stand offering for sale only those products grown on the premises, provided that such stand does not exceed an area of 500 square feet; is located in conformance with yard regulations; and proper provisions are made for adequate off-street parking and access. 
(d)  Conditional/interim uses. 
(1)  Commercial greenhouse or nursery. 
(2)  Dog kennels. 
(3)  Riding stables. 
(4)  Cemeteries or memorial gardens. 
(5)  Home occupations. 
(e)  District standards. The following performance standards shall be observed in the AP Agricultural Preserve district, subject to the additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this section: 
(1)  Minimum lot size is 40 acres unless lot qualifies as an exception under Minn. Stats. § 473H.03. 
(2)  If any of the properties are removed from the agricultural preservation program pursuant to the required statutory process, the rural residential guiding shall apply. 
(3)  See section 109-214, pertaining to dimensional standards. 
(4)  See sections 109-463-109-473, pertaining to performance standards. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1314, subd. 2; Ord. No. 12-03, § 8, 4-30-2012) 
Sec. 109-94. - LG-1, LG-2, and LG-3, Lake George Single-Family Residential Districts. 
(a)  Purpose. This section applies to the LG-1, LG-2, and LG-3 Single-Family Residential Districts. These districts are intended: 
(1)  To encourage landowners with property that has frontage on Lake George to improve and upgrade the appearance of structures and residences around the lake. 
(2)  To encourage lot combination where appropriate to increase the size of historically small lots around Lake George. 
(3)  To utilize the existing capacity of the West Lake George collector system in a safe and efficient manner. 
(4)  To promote redevelopment or reuse of seasonal structures as permanent residences. 
(5)  To permit residential development on lots less than 21/2 acres when developed in strict conformance with this article and requirements for placement and operation of on-site septic systems, as applicable. 
(6)  To promote improvement of water quality of Lake George by discouraging additional stormwater runoff due to development and by ensuring that adequate sewer systems are in place prior to any new development on lots with frontage on the lake. 
(b)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Public utility uses for local service when located within the public right-of-way or utility easement. 
(2)  Publicly owned and operated property. 
(3)  Parks. 
(4)  Single-family residential uses. 
(5)  Essential services. 
(c)  Accessory uses. 
(1)  Keeping of animals, subject to chapter 4; 
(2)  Gardening and other horticultural uses; 
(3)  Private garages and accessory building per section 109-194(g)(8); and 
(4)  Open, off-street parking (unlicensed or inoperable vehicles are prohibited). 
(d)  Conditional/interim uses. 
(1)  Accessory structures other than those permitted in subsection (c) of this section. 
(2)  Bed and breakfasts. 
(3)  Residential day care, subject to applicable county ordinances and state statutes. 
(4)  Group homes. 
(5)  Housing development signs in excess of 32 square feet. 
(6)  Schools. 
(7)  Overhead utilities. 
(8)  Home occupations pursuant to section 109-195. 
(e)  District standards. 
(1)  See section 109-214, pertaining to dimensional standards. 
(2)  See sections 109-463-109-473, pertaining to performance standards. 
(f)  Special provisions. 
(1)  The LG-1 district dimensional requirement shall apply only to lots that are platted lots of record as of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(2)  The LG-2 district dimensional requirements shall apply to property that has frontage on Lake George but is not platted as of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(3)  No building permit shall be issued for new development unless the lot on which development is proposed has either an existing connection to the West Lake George collector system (if capacity is available) or adequate land area on which to install a primary and secondary on-site septic system as approved by the building official. 
(4)  No principal dwelling shall be located within 50 feet of the ordinary high water mark as established by the city engineer. 
(5)  In no case shall property which is more than 500 feet from Lake George be included in the LG-1 or LG-2 districts. 
(6)  Motor homes, recreational vehicles and travel trailers may be allowed on vacant land within the LG-1 and LG-2 districts, provided that such use satisfies all of the following requirements as determined by the city administrator or designee or building official: 
a.  Only one such use shall be allowed per lot. 
b.  Sewage shall be treated in a safe and sanitary manner and properly disposed. 
c.  Such use is for seasonal use on a temporary basis not to exceed 90 days. No such use shall be allowed after October 1 of any year. 
d.  The use must be positioned on the lot to meet the setbacks required in the LG-1 or LG-2 district, except that the setback from the ordinary high water mark of Lake George may be calculated based upon the average of the immediately adjacent properties as provided in article VIII of this chapter. 
e.  Permanent structures shall not be constructed to support the use of vacant land for motor homes, recreational vehicles or travel trailers. 
(7)  In the LG-3 district, parking of commercial vehicles in excess of 15,000 pounds gross weight is prohibited, except that they may be on the premises for up to six days per year, not more than three days at a time, to facilitate loading, unloading, and minor repair or maintenance. 
(8)  The temporary commercial vehicles, recreational vehicles, and trailers permitted above in the LG-3 district must be parked on blacktop or concrete surfaces screened from view from Lake George, adjacent property owners, and public streets. 
(9)  All uses and development shall comply with the shoreland regulations set forth in article VIII of this chapter. 
(10)  Specific lots in the LG-3 district are governed by additional covenants, conditions and restrictions pursuant to two agreements recorded with the county (Document Nos. 1986339.011 and 19856339.012). These specific lots are identified in the agreements. The city, or its representative, as a declarant of these agreements, is responsible for the enforcement of these covenants. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1314, subd. 3; Ord. No. 04-02; Ord. No. 12-03, §§ 8, 10, 4-30-2012) 
Sec. 109-95. - LG-HDR, Lake George High Density Residential District. 
(a)  Purpose. This section applies to the LG-HDR, Lake George High Density Residential District. The purpose of this district is to provide a zoning district for the senior multifamily housing development in the Lake George zoning district and to implement the objectives of the high density residential land use in the city's comprehensive plan. 
(b)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Multiple dwellings and multiple dwelling complexes, including rental and condominium apartments, providing a density of up to 20 dwelling units per acre. 
(2)  Single-family attached dwellings. 
(3)  Parks and open space. 
(4)  Essential services. 
(5)  Mixed uses as approved by the city council. 
(c)  Accessory uses. 
(1)  Gardening and other horticultural uses. 
(2)  Parking areas. 
(3)  Maintenance, management or recreation buildings incidental to the development. 
(4)  Privately owned recreational facilities, including swimming pools and tennis courts, intended solely for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their guests. 
(d)  Conditional/interim uses. 
(1)  Residential day care, subject to applicable county ordinances and state statues. 
(2)  Group homes. 
(3)  Assisted living facilities. 
(4)  Housing development signs in excess of 32 square feet. 
(5)  Public, quasi-public or private recreational facilities, including community centers and social services. 
(6)  Churches/places of assembly. 
(e)  Design and development standards. 
(1)  All uses within the LG-HDR district shall be subject to the planned unit development (PUD) regulations as established in section 109-102, including site plan review. 
(2)  See section 109-214, pertaining to dimensional standards. 
(3)  See sections 109-463-109-473, pertaining to performance standards. 
(4)  All exterior building materials shall be durable and consistent with relevant codes, regulations, and other industry standards. 
(5)  No less than 50 percent of the vertical exterior building material shall be non-combustible material, such as brick, face brick, decorative concrete, or others as approved by the city council. 
(6)  Open, off-street parking (unlicensed or inoperable vehicles are prohibited). 
(7)  Parking of commercial vehicles in excess of 15,000 pounds gross weight is prohibited. 
(8)  Motor homes, recreational vehicles, and trailers are prohibited, except that they may be on the premises for up to six days per year, not more than three days at a time, to facilitate loading, unloading, and minor repair or maintenance. 
(9)  Commercial vehicles, recreational vehicles, and trailers not prohibited elsewhere in this section must be parked on blacktop or concrete surfaces screened from view from Lake George, adjacent property owners, and public streets. 
(10)  Trash and recycling shall be stored within the principal building, within an accessory structure, or within an enclosed outdoor area easily accessible from the principal structure. The accessory structure or enclosed area shall be constructed of similar materials and have compatible architecture as the principal structure. 
(11)  The city council may require compliance with any other conditions, restrictions, or limitations it deems to be reasonably necessary to protect the residential character of the surrounding area. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1314, subd. 4; Ord. No. 12-03, § 8, 4-30-2012) 
Sec. 109-96. - SFR, Single-Family Residential District. 
(a)  Purpose. This section applies to the SFR, Single-Family Residential District. This district is established to provide for a large lot zoning of 21/2 acres or more in size. Single-family homes are permitted in this district. This district may be used in conjunction with the planned unit development overlay to provide efficient lot layouts, open space, and the preservation of natural features. All uses should be designed to eliminate any nuisance, or incompatibility with surrounding uses. This district is not intended to prohibit or restrict existing agricultural uses. 
(b)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Public utility uses for local service when located within a public right-of-way or utility easement. 
(2)  Publicly owned and operated property. 
(3)  One non-domestic animal unit per acre (excluding cattle and swine on parcels of less than 5 acres), except in a MPGCC. 
(4)  One single-family residential structure. 
(5)  Essential services. 
(6)  Home occupations not requiring an interim use permit. 
(7)  Three domestic animals per household. 
(8)  Collocation of telecommunication facilities, including associated ground equipment, in or on an existing facility. 
(c)  Accessory uses. 
(1)  One roadside stand offering for sale only those products grown on the premises and regulated within the A district. 
(2)  Open, off-street parking (unlicensed or inoperable vehicles are prohibited). In MPGCC, commercial vehicles in excess of 10,000 pounds gross weight are prohibited. Motor homes, recreational vehicles, and trailers over 20 feet long are prohibited. They may be on the premises for up to six days per year, not more than three days at a time, to facilitate loading, unloading, and minor repair or maintenance. Commercial vehicles, recreational vehicles, and trailers not prohibited above must be parked on blacktop or concrete surfaces screened from view by the golf course, adjacent property owners, and public streets. 
(3)  Gardening and other horticulture. 
(4)  Private garage and accessory building, per section 109-194. In a MPGCC, only one accessory building not exceeding 144 square feet of total building floor area with a maximum sidewall height of eight feet as measured on the inside of the building between the finished floor elevation and the bottom of the roof truss. 
(d)  Conditional/interim uses. 
(1)  Accessory structures other than permitted. 
(2)  Cemeteries. 
(3)  Bed and breakfasts. 
(4)  Christmas tree sales. 
(5)  Churches/places of assembly. 
(6)  Convents. 
(7)  Residential day care, subject to applicable county ordinances and state statutes, except as allowed by section 109-192. 
(8)  Dog kennels. 
(9)  Group homes. 
(10)  Housing development signs in excess of 32 square feet. 
(11)  Non-domestic animal unit (more than one per acre). 
(12)  Schools. 
(13)  Overhead utilities. 
(14)  Places of historic, scenic, or architectural interest. 
(15)  Home occupations. 
(16)  Open, off-street parking for more than four vehicles. 
(17)  Golf courses and adjacent residential single-family or two-unit townhome development, when proposed as part of a master-planned golf course community served by a collector wastewater treatment system, only when approved by rezoning to planned unit development pursuant to sections 101-4 and 109-102. 
(e)  District standards. 
(1)  See section 109-214, pertaining to dimensional standards. 
(2)  See sections 109-463-109-473, pertaining to performance standards. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1314, subd. 5; Ord. No. 99-03; Ord. No. 01-09; Ord. No. 12-03, §§ 8, 9, 4-30-2012; Ord. No. 15-02, § 5, 3-9-2015) 
Sec. 109-97. - MUSA, Expansion Area-Urban Reserve District. 
(a)  Purpose. This section applies to the MUSA Expansion Area-Urban Reserve District. The purpose of this district is to establish an interim land use option to preserve land in the MUSA expansion area in the city's 2030 comprehensive plan update. The MUSA expansion area will be adjacent to other areas served by public utilities and is ultimately expected to become urban or suburban in nature. This district is intended to be a holding zone until the city is ready for the introduction of regional utilities into the area, post 2030. This district will continue to promote agricultural and farming activities within the future MUSA expansion area. This zoning district is intended to preserve this area of the city in low rural development densities while permitting clustered residential developments that may be integrated with future urban development post 2030. 
(1)  Density. The standard development density within the MUSA expansion area shall be one unit per ten acres. 
(2)  For property owners who wish to pursue development prior to the introduction of regional sewer, clustered residential subdivisions are permitted. A MUSA expansion area cluster subdivision must incorporate the following design components: 
a.  MUSA cluster subdivisions shall not be located in areas that have been identified for nonresidential land uses in the post 2030 MUSA land use plan. 
b.  MUSA cluster subdivisions shall be required to meet all city zoning, subdivision, and environmental regulations. 
(3)  Minimum lot size of 10,000 square feet up to a maximum lot size of 20,000 square feet of buildable land, exclusive of water bodies, wetlands, floodplains, or transmission utility easements or street rights of way. 
(4)  Open space preservation of 75 percent of the buildable land of the parcel(s) being subdivided and developed. This open space shall be preserved for future urban development. The communal well and drain field can be located within the designated open space. 
(5)  Open space. The open space shall be platted into outlots that meet the minimum performance standards for the district. Ghost platting concept plans shall be required to illustrate how the current plat may be integrated with future urban development. Deed restrictions shall be placed over the open space which will prohibit further subdivision of the open space until the land can be served by urban infrastructure. Deed restrictions shall also be placed on all newly created lots informing the potential buyer that the adjoining open space is intended for future urban development when utilities become available. 
(6)  A communal well and sewer treatment system is required to service each lot in the MUSA expansion area. The design of the utility system shall allow for connection into the larger regional utility system when such system becomes available. Once connection is made to regional utilities, the original communal well and drain field may be abandoned. 
(7)  A homeowners' association (HOA) shall be established to own the communal well and sewer treatment facilities. These systems shall be privately owned by the HOA and managed by a professional utility approved by the city. The city shall require the private wells and sewer facilities to be professionally monitored, managed and operated at the expense of the HOA. 
(b)  Permitted uses. In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this section, the following are permitted uses in the MUSA-UR: 
(1)  Agricultural uses and buildings as defined by this ordinance located on lots ten acres or greater in size. 
(2)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(3)  Essential services, public or government utility uses. 
(4)  Forest and game management areas. 
(5)  Public parks, public campgrounds, public recreation areas and historic monuments. 
(6)  Railroad rights-of-way. 
(7)  Collocation of telecommunication facilities, including associated ground equipment, in or on an existing facility. 
(c)  Accessory uses. 
(1)  Private garages and accessory buildings for standard density development pursuant to section 109-191 (4). 
(2)  Accessory uses as normally and customarily associated with agricultural production. 
(3)  One roadside stand offering for sale only those products grown on the premises, provided that such stand does not exceed an area of 500 square feet; is located in conformance with yard regulations; and proper provisions are made for adequate off-street parking and access. 
(d)  Conditional/interim uses. 
(1)  Churches. 
(2)  Cemeteries. 
(3)  Commercial greenhouses or nurseries. 
(4)  Dog kennels. 
(5)  Home occupations. 
(6)  Riding stables. 
(7)  Non-domestic animals, more than two per acre. 
(8)  Schools. 
(e)  District standards. The following performance standards shall be observed in the MUSA-UR for clustered subdivisions, subject to the additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this section: 
(1)  Platting required. 
(2)  Standard density within the MUSA-UR shall be one unit per ten acres of land. 
(3)  The density for a MUSA-UR clustered residential subdivision shall not exceed four units per ten acres of buildable land. The lots shall be clustered into an urban neighborhood design. 
(4)  Only one accessory building is permitted in the MUSA-UR clustered residential subdivision not to exceed 144 square feet of floor area with a maximum height of eight feet. 
(5)  See section 109-214, pertaining to dimensional standards. 
(6)  See sections 109-463-109-473, pertaining to performance standards. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1314, subd. 5A; Ord. No. 12-03, § 8, 4-30-2012) 
Sec. 109-98. - GB, General Business District. 
(a)  Purpose. This section applies to the GB, General Business District. The purpose of this district is to provide for the establishment of general retail commercial shopping and service needs activities that draw from and serve customers from the entire community or sub-region, to include convenience goods, shopping goods, personal services and limited institutional uses. 
(b)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Agricultural uses with the exception of feedlots. 
(2)  Single-family dwellings and accessory uses legally established prior to August 31, 2009 (adoption date of the 2030 comprehensive plan). 
(3)  Banks without a drive-through window. 
(4)  Restaurants (Class I and II with or without alcoholic beverage license). 
(5)  Grocery stores. 
(6)  Convenience stores. 
(7)  Essential services. 
(8)  Business, professional and nonprofit organization offices. 
(9)  Call centers. 
(10)  Churches/places of public assembly. 
(11)  Day care, subject to state statutes. 
(12)  Hospitals and clinics. 
(13)  Nonprofit clubs. 
(14)  Office uses. 
(15)  Mortuary and funeral homes. 
(16)  Public garages. 
(17)  Public utility uses for local service, when located within public right-of-way or utility easement. 
(18)  Other school institutions (vocational, technical, private, parochial, public). 
(19)  Rest homes and nursing homes, subject to state statutes. 
(20)  Pet services. 
(21)  Hair salons/barbershops. 
(22)  Contractor's shops. 
(23)  Retail shopping uses. 
(c)  Accessory uses. 
(1)  Parking in conformance with section 109-196. 
(2)  Outdoor trash enclosures. 
(3)  Office spaces associated with a permitted use. 
(4)  Signage in conformance with section 109-479. 
(5)  Adult use, accessory as defined in chapter 12, article II and subject to such provisions. 
(d)  Conditional/interim uses. 
(1)  Adult uses in compliance with chapter 12, article II. 
(2)  Automobile sales. 
(3)  Automobile repair and reconditioning. 
(4)  Car washes. 
(5)  Cemeteries. 
(6)  Christmas tree sales. 
(7)  Commercial greenhouses or nurseries. 
(8)  Commercial recreation, minor or major. 
(9)  Dog kennels. 
(10)  Drive-through windows. 
(11)  Hotels/motels. 
(12)  Marine businesses. 
(13)  Indoor storage facilities. 
(14)  Laundromats. 
(15)  Open storage when appurtenant to an approved principal use, subject to limitations such as location, screening, type application, and any other restrictions imposed by the city council. 
(16)  Adult use, principal as defined in chapter 12, article II and subject to such provisions. 
(17)  Uses determined by the city council to be similar to those permitted in this section. 
(18)  Communications towers in accordance with section 109-471. 
(e)  District standards. 
(1)  Site plan review. All uses within the GB district shall be subject to the site plan review procedures and provisions. 
(2)  Dimensional standards. See section 109-214. 
(3)  Performance standards. See sections 109-463-109-473. 
(4)  Exterior materials. All buildings within this district shall be of masonry construction, its equivalent or better. Front walls of such buildings facing on streets must be finished with face brick, ornamental blocks, stone, glass, wood or their aesthetic equivalent as determined by the city council. Other walls shall be faced with a common brick or its equivalent. Any building wall facing a residential district shall not be finished with exposed plain-faced poured concrete or concrete block. All designs may be required to incorporate pitched roofs, not less than 4:12, to reflect the rural residential character of the community. 
(5)  Dumpster enclosure. Trash containers kept outside a building shall be screened by an enclosure. A durable gate shall be provided where the open side of the enclosure is visible from a public street or residential district. All gates shall provide 100 percent opaqueness and shall be constructed in conformance with standards on file in the office of planning. Such enclosures must be of sufficient size to accommodate the containers and any mechanical means of servicing the containers. They shall be located in the side or rear yard of the property in such a manner as to provide easy access thereto, and shall conform to the setback requirements for parking and driving areas. Enclosures shall be maintained in conformance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(6)  Floor area. The minimum floor area is 2,000 square feet. 
(7)  Access. The fire department shall be provided access to sites within this district by means of a key, electronic device or any other reasonable means of entry if the key holder is not present. 
(Prior Code chs. 1314, subd. 6, ch. 1328, subd. 3(C)(2); Ord. No. 11-01; Ord. No. 12-03, § 8, 4-30-2012; Ord. No. 13-06, § 1, 9-30-2013; Ord. No. 16-03, § 1, 8-29-2016) 
Sec. 109-99. - LI, Limited Industry District. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  This section applies to the LI, Limited Industry District. This district is established to provide employment opportunities and to group individual uses in locations accessible to rail and highways so that the movement of raw materials, finished products and employees can be carried on efficiently, in an unobtrusive manner, and in a manner that does not adversely effect residential areas and for consistency with the 2030 city comprehensive plan. 
(2)  It is recognized that, while the city is predominantly residential in character, industrial uses are part of the city's land use pattern. The regulations for this district are intended to encourage industrial development that is compatible with surrounding or abutting land uses. To accomplish this compatibility, development in the planned industrial district: 
a.  Is limited to administrative, wholesaling, manufacturing, and related uses that can be carried on in an unobtrusive manner; 
b.  Must provide suitable open spaces, landscaping, and parking areas; and 
c.  Must establish reasonable controls on external effects such as storage, lightning, noise, dust, smoke and congestion. 
(b)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Single-family dwellings and accessory uses legally established prior to August 31, 2009 (adoption date of the 2030 comprehensive plan). 
(2)  Wholesale/warehousing businesses. 
(3)  Manufacturing. 
(4)  Public utility uses for local service, when located within the public right-of-way or utility easement. 
(5)  Agricultural uses, with the exception of feedlots. 
(6)  Corporate headquarters. 
(c)  Accessory uses. 
(1)  Parking in conformance with section 109-196. 
(2)  Outdoor trash enclosures. 
(3)  Offices in conjunction with a permitted or approved conditional use. 
(4)  Signage in conformance with section 109-479. 
(d)  Conditional uses. 
(1)  Adult uses in compliance with chapter 12, article II. 
(2)  Airports/heliports. 
(3)  Automobile repair and reconditioning. 
(4)  Car/truck washes. 
(5)  Vehicle and equipment auctions and sales. 
(6)  Christmas tree sales. 
(7)  Commercial greenhouses or nurseries. 
(8)  Contractor or building material storage yards. 
(9)  Essential services. 
(10)  Railroad lines and switching yards. 
(11)  Railroad storage. 
(12)  Research facilities. 
(13)  Seasonal businesses. 
(14)  Communications towers in accordance with section 109-471. 
(15)  Open storage when appurtenant to an approved principal use, subject to limitations such as location, screening, type, application, and any other restrictions imposed by the city council. 
(16)  Uses determined by the city council to be similar to those permitted in this section. 
(17)  Distribution centers. 
(e)  Design and development standards. 
(1)  Site plan review. All uses within the LI district shall be subject to the site plan review process and provisions. 
(2)  Dimensional standards. See section 109-214. 
(3)  Performance standards. See sections 109-463-109-473. 
(4)  Screening. See section 109-463-109-464. 
(5)  Glare and lighting. See section 109-470. 
(6)  Signs. See section 109-479. 
(7)  Off-street parking and loading. See section 109-196. 
(8)  Exterior materials. No building shall be constructed within the LI limited industrial district of more than 75 percent sheet aluminum, asbestos, iron, steel, or corrugated aluminum exterior surfacing. Exterior surfaces of all buildings shall be faced with face brick, stone, architectural concrete, masonry units, pre-cast concrete, or such other surfacing material deemed equal or better, as may be approved by the city council. The term "architectural concrete masonry unit" shall mean a concrete masonry unit of which the face has been shaped, ground, scored, split, or otherwise processed to produce a unit with specific aesthetic texture or shadow. 
(9)  Dumpster enclosure. Trash containers kept outside a building shall be screened by an enclosure. A durable gate shall be provided where the open side of the enclosure is visible from a public street or a residential district. All gates shall provide 100 percent opaqueness. Such enclosures must be of sufficient size to accommodate the containers and any mechanical means of servicing the containers. They shall be located in the side or rear yard of the property in such a manner as to provide easy access thereto, and shall conform to the setback requirements for parking and driving areas. 
(10)  Access. The fire department shall be provided access to sites within this district by means of a key, electronic device or any other reasonable means of entry if the key holder is not present. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1314, subd. 7) 
Sec. 109-100. - FBP, Future Business Park District. 
(a)  Purpose. This section applies to the FBP, Future Business Park District. The purpose of this district is to provide for a holding zone until a landowner/developer makes an application for development, at which time the city may rezone the affected property consistent with the 2030 city's comprehensive plan, provided that the development does not result in the premature extension of public utilities, facilities, or services. 
(1)  Future business park development shall provide for a mix of commercial, office, low intensity industrial, warehousing, and wholesale showroom uses which provide a harmonious transition to residential development and neighborhoods. 
(2)  The FBP district shall consist of low-profile, high-quality and attractive buildings with open space, quality landscaping, building orientation, setbacks, preservation of natural features and other special requirements. 
(3)  Existing residential and agricultural land uses that were legally established prior to August 31, 2009 (adoption date of the 2030 comprehensive plan) shall be deemed conforming and will be allowed to continue, pending future redevelopment consistent with the city's comprehensive plan. 
(b)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Single-family dwellings and accessory uses legally established prior to August 31, 2009. 
(2)  Business, professional and nonprofit organization office buildings. 
(3)  Banks and financial institutions. 
(4)  Medical offices, except for inpatient facilities that operate between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(5)  Dental/chiropractic clinics, offices and laboratories. 
(6)  Post offices. 
(7)  Low-intensity contractor services. 
(8)  Government and public utility buildings. 
(9)  Churches, religious institutions and places of assembly. 
(10)  Showrooms. 
(11)  Nursing homes, assisted living facilities, and similar uses. 
(12)  Other acceptable uses as determined by the city council. 
(c)  Accessory uses. 
(1)  Recreational and open spaces for those employed on site. 
(2)  Retail sales of products, provided that such sales do not exceed 15 percent of the gross floor area in the building. Retail sales in excess of 15 percent of the gross floor area of the building shall require a conditional use permit, and hours of operation are limited to 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
(3)  Off-street parking and loading. 
(4)  Parking structures. 
(d)  Conditional/interim uses. 
(1)  Medical offices that offer inpatient services and operate between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(2)  Day care facilities. 
(3)  Drive-through services accessory to any permitted or conditional use. 
(4)  Light industry, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Limited number of semi-trailer trucks and truck docking facilities; 
b.  Architectural compatibility; and 
c.  Low impact with regard to noise, visible emissions, odors, and vibrations. 
(5)  Warehousing, wholesaling and distributors, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Limited number of semi-trailer trucks and truck docking facilities; 
b.  Architectural compatibility; and 
c.  Low impact with regard to noise, visible emissions, odors, and vibrations. 
(6)  Light manufacturing and assembly. 
a.  Light manufacturing and assembly, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Limited number of semi-trailer trucks and truck docking facilities; 
2.  Architectural compatibility; and 
3.  Low impact with regard to noise, visible emissions, odors, and vibrations. 
b.  Typical light manufacturing and assembly uses include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Printing, publishing, and related support activities. 
2.  Computer and electronic products. 
3.  Audio and video equipment. 
4.  Electronic components, except semiconductors. 
5.  Household appliances. 
6.  Office supplies, except paper manufacturing. 
7.  Medical equipment and supplies. 
8.  Pharmaceuticals. 
9.  Apparel. 
10.  Electrical lighting equipment. 
11.  Musical instruments. 
12.  Signs. 
13.  Sporting and athletic goods. 
(7)  Retail sales in excess of 15 percent of the gross floor area of the building. 
(8)  Outside display of merchandise when appurtenant to a principal use. 
(9)  Hotels. 
(10)  Physical fitness clubs. 
(11)  Animal (veterinary) hospitals. 
(12)  Laboratories. 
(13)  Educational facilities. 
(14)  Telecommunications towers. 
(15)  Research, design and development facilities. 
(16)  Other acceptable uses as determined by the city council. 
(e)  Prohibited uses. 
(1)  Residential subdivision of land. 
(2)  Rezoning of land inconsistent with the guiding of the comprehensive plan and the FBP district requirements. 
(3)  Home occupations requiring an interim use permit. 
(f)  Design and development standards. 
(1)  Site plan review. All uses within the BP District shall be subject to the site plan review procedures and provisions. 
(2)  Dimensional standards. See section 109-214. 
(3)  Performance standards. See sections 109-463-109-473. 
(4)  Screening. See sections 109-463 and 109-464. 
(5)  Glare and lighting. See section 109-470. 
(6)  Signs. See section 109-479. 
(7)  Off-street parking and loading. See section 109-196. 
(8)  Building materials and design. 
a.  All sides, elevations, and facades of buildings and structures shall be visually pleasing and architecturally and aesthetically compatible with the surrounding environment. Building materials shall be selected for their ability to present a visual statement of a building's purpose, attractiveness, and permanence. 
b.  A minimum of 20 percent of the building exterior shall be brick, natural stone, stucco, copper, or glass. 
c.  A maximum of 80 percent of the building exterior may be decorative concrete, split face (rock face) decorative block, and/or decorative pre-cast concrete panels. Decorative concrete shall be color-impregnated in earth tones (rather than painted) and shall be patterned to create a high-quality appearance. 
d.  A maximum of 20 percent may be wood, metal, fiber cement lap siding, or similar product, if used as accent materials that are integrated into the overall building design. 
e.  Buildings shall be designed to avoid long, monotonous building walls. A building elevation shall include architectural elements such as varying building height, building setback, or building material or design every 100 feet of horizontal length. Alternative architectural elements may be approved by the city council which achieve the purpose of reducing the visual impact of long building walls. 
f.  Building elevations that face a public street or residential zoning district shall include design and architectural elements of a quality generally associated with a front facade to include generous window coverage. 
g.  All mechanical equipment shall be screened with parapets or the roof form. 
(9)  Access. Parcels in the business park shall have access to an internal parkway and/or external county roads. Common access drives and parking facilities are encouraged. 
(10)  Standard drainage and utility easements. Easements shall be at least ten feet wide, measured from the lot line within the perimeter of each lot, centered on the rear and other lot lines. 
(11)  Sewer and water. In the absence of public water and sewer facilities, private wells and sewer treatment systems may be constructed to serve the lots at the responsibility of the individual lot owner or developer. All such private systems shall conform to the requirements established and set out in chapter 24, article II. 
(12)  Landscaping. 
a.  Site improvements shall be designed in the way that most effectively maintains predevelopment topography, drainage patters, and ecological functions. 
b.  In order to protect and preserve natural areas in proximity to the Cedar Creek Greenway Corridor, a detailed natural resource inventory of the site is required in conjunction with the subdivision application and general landscape plan. 
c.  A minimum of 25 percent of the surface area of each lot or set of combined lots shall consist of green space consisting of landscaped area with street trees, grass, ponding, and shrubbery or other approved ground cover identified on the general landscape plan. 
d.  At least 12 feet of landscaped area shall be provided adjacent to all buildings, except for walks, plaza space, and approved loading docks. 
e.  If an earth berm is proposed to supplement the screening, the berm shall be undulating in order to give a natural appearance and shall not obstruct site distance at entry drives. 
f.  Trees. 
1.  Existing, healthy trees and native vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent feasible and shall be protected by adequate means during construction. 
2.  A minimum of one tree per 50 feet, or fraction thereof, of lot perimeter shall be required. 
3.  Size. Canopy trees shall not be less than 2.5 caliper inches measured four feet off-ground and coniferous trees shall not be less than 2 caliper inches and not less than six feet in height. 
4.  Location. Tree locations shall be identified on the general landscape plan and approved by the city. 
5.  Type. Trees shall be suitable for the soil and site conditions and complement others in the area. Native species are required unless otherwise necessary. No more than 25 percent of trees may be of a single species. 
(13)  Loading dock area and screening. 
a.  Loading docks shall not occupy greater than ten percent of the building perimeter. 
b.  They shall not be located in required yard setbacks and should be located in a way which minimizes visibility from residential zoning districts and public streets. 
c.  Any loading dock within 300 feet of a residential zoning district shall be separated from the residential district by a building or a wall. 
d.  The city may approve of other alternatives for noise abatement and screening. 
(14)  Additional parking/paving requirements and setbacks. 
a.  The interior of parking lots shall be provided with landscape areas consisting of at least five percent of the total surface area. 
b.  Landscaping shall break up rows of parking approximately every 20 spaces. 
c.  Where practical, the landscaping areas shall be designed to receive stormwater runoff from the adjacent parking area. 
d.  Parking stalls, parking aisles, and fire lanes may encroach within the required yard setbacks, but shall be located the following distances from property lines: 
1.  Front: 25 feet. 
2.  Rear and interior: 20 feet, except no setback is required to accommodate shared/joint parking, loading dock circulation, or fire lanes across a common lot line within an integrated development. 
3.  Side yard, if adjacent to a public street: 25 feet. 
4.  Side yard, if adjacent to a private street: 20 feet. 
5.  If adjacent to a residential zoning district: 50 feet to include a landscape buffer which is 70 percent opaque and 15 feet in width. 
e.  Fire lanes that are not utilized for traffic circulation on the parcel may encroach within this yard setback. 
(15)  Stormwater management and erosion control facilities. 
a.  Drainage and stormwater improvements shall be designed with an emphasis on integrated stormwater management practices such as vegetative swales, filter strips, bioretention and similar improvements as approved by the city engineer and as established and set out in section 105-22. 
b.  Stormwater ponding may utilize new technologies such as roof gardens, piping under parking lots, etc. as approved by the city engineer. 
(g)  Special district requirements. The following standards shall be observed, subject to additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this Code, in the buffer zone between business park and residential districts. Where a business park district abuts a residential district, any new development shall include a landscaped buffer zone consisting of the following: 
(1)  There shall be a protective strip of land or vegetated buffer at least 70 percent opaque and not less than 15 feet in width. 
(2)  This protective strip shall contain no structures except for a fence, shall not be used for parking, off-street loading or storage, but can be included as part of the building setbacks. 
(3)  The landscape treatment may include a compact screen wall or fence, but shall not extend within 15 feet of the street right-of-way. 
(4)  The planting or fence design shall be approved by the city council or designee as being in harmony with a residential neighborhood and providing sufficient screening of the commercial area. 
(5)  Any hedge or fence shall be no less than six feet in height and no more than eight feet in height in the business park district. 
(6)  Trucks, vans and trailers that are regularly driven or towed as part of the operation of any permitted use may be parked, but may not be used for the storage or sale of merchandise. 
(7)  Semi-trailers shall not be parked or stored on the same lot for more than five days in any 30-day period. 
(8)  Temporary storage buildings and/or containers designed to be easily moved are permitted as an accessory use for up to six months in a 12-month period. Such structures shall be concealed and screened from view of the general public. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1314, subd. 9; Ord. No. 12-03, § 8(ch. 1314, subd. 8), 4-30-2012) 
Sec. 109-101. - PI, Public/Institutional District. 
(a)  Purpose. This section applies to the PI, Public/Institutional District. This district is established to provide a specific zoning district for facilities, structures, services, and land uses within public ownership or quasi-public ownership. The primary objective of uses within this district is the provision of services, rather than the sale of goods or services. It is intended that uses within this district shall be compatible with adjoining development. 
(b)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Public utility uses for local service when located within a public right-of-way or utility easement. 
(2)  Publicly owned utility buildings, structures and essential services necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the community. 
(3)  Public parks, trails and recreational facilities. 
(4)  Public and private schools, educational institutions, and recreational facilities operated or maintained by public schools and educational institutions. 
(5)  Municipal government buildings, storage facilities, and publicly owned lands. 
(6)  Collocation of telecommunication facilities, including associated ground equipment facility. 
(7)  Churches, religious institutions and places of assembly. 
(c)  Accessory uses. 
(1)  Any use which is clearly accessory and subordinate to a permitted use allowed in the public district. 
(2)  Incidental repair, processing, and storage necessary to conduct a permitted principal use, but not exceeding 30 percent of the floor space of the principal building, may be acceptable uses as determined by the city council. 
(d)  Conditional/interim uses. 
(1)  Personal communication service systems (PCS) towers. 
(2)  Day care facilities associated with places of assembly (religious institutions). 
(3)  Cemeteries. 
(e)  District standards. 
(1)  Dimensional standards. See section 109-214. 
(2)  Performance standards. See sections 109-463-109-473. 
(3)  Screening. See section s 109-463 and 109-464. 
(4)  Glare and lighting. See section 109-470. 
(5)  Signs. See section 109-479. 
(6)  Off-street parking and loading. See section 109-196. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1314, subd. 10; Ord. No. 12-03, § 8(ch. 1314, subd. 9), 4-30-2012)) 
Sec. 109-102. - Planned Unit Development (PUD). 
(a)  Purpose. This section applies to planned unit development (PUD). The purpose of this section is to promote creative and efficient use of land by providing design flexibility in the application of the provisions of a primary zoning district through approval of a development plan pursuant to this section and approval of a rezoning to a PUD overlay district pursuant to section 101-4. Approval of a PUD shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  Intent. This section is intended to protect natural features in private, common or public open space, improve the efficiency of public streets and utilities, provide transitions in land use in keeping with the character of adjacent land use, and improve the arrangement of structures, facilities and amenities on a site for both private of public benefit. The PUD provisions are not intended to replace the regulations or restrictions of the underlying zoning district. However, the PUD provisions allow such provisions to be modified or varied, provided that such variance is consistent with the general spirit and intent of this chapter and the comprehensive plan. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Planned unit development (PUD) means a planned use of property which may involve multiple uses and/or multiple structures on a single parcel of property. Prior to issuance of permits for development within a PUD, the city council shall adopt a rezoning to a PUD overlay district and a development plan pursuant to procedures set forth in this section and section 101-4. 
(d)  Authorization. Planned unit development approval may authorize: 
(1)  Variety. Within a comprehensive site design concept, a mixture of land uses, housing types and densities. 
(2)  Sensitivity. Through the departure from the strict application of required setbacks, yard areas, lot sizes, minimum house sizes, minimum requirements, and other performance standards associated with the underlying zoning district, approval of a planned unit development can maximize the development potential of land while remaining sensitive to its unique and valuable natural characteristics. No modification, variance or departure from the standards contained in the underlying zoning district shall vary by more than 40 percent from such standards, except when the development is served by a collector wastewater treatment system, and the city council finds that the treatment capabilities of the system justify such greater departure. Notwithstanding the restrictions contained in this subsection, the city council shall have discretion to establish the minimum lot size of a planned unit development within the agricultural zoning district during the development stage review process set forth at in subsection (j)(5) of this section. 
(3)  Efficiency. The consolidation of areas for recreation, open space, conservation and reductions in street lengths and other utility related expenses. 
(4)  Density cluster. The project density may be clustered, basing density on the number of units or floor area per acre for an overall development rather than specific lot or floor area requirements. No lot shall have less than one contiguous acre of buildable land, except when the development is served by a collector wastewater treatment system and the city council finds that the treatment capabilities of the system justify such greater departure. When calculating the allowed density of a project approved as a PUD, the total area shall be decreased by an amount equal to 50 percent of the area within the property boundaries delineated as wetland. 
(5)  District integration. The combination of uses that are allowed in separate zoning districts such as: 
a.  Mixed residential allows densities and land use types to vary within the project. 
b.  Mixed land uses with the integration of compatible land uses within the project. 
(6)  Urban street section. Upon review and approval of the city engineer, plans and specifications for internal streets within a PUD may be based upon an urban design standard with surmountable curbs. 
(7)  Farmland and open space. Land that has been previously farmed or existed as open space may be considered eligible for rezoning to a PUD, provided that such lands preserve existing natural features or are altered to create unique natural features. The cost of creating natural features shall not be used in the calculation of public benefit required by subsection (d)(4) of this section. 
(e)  Allowed uses. Uses within the PUD may include only those uses generally considered associated with the general land use category shown for the area on the official comprehensive plan. Specific allowed uses and performance standards for each PUD shall be delineated in an ordinance and development plan. The PUD development plan shall identify all the proposed land uses and those uses shall become permitted uses with the acceptance of the development plan. Any change in list of uses presented in the development plan will be considered an amendment to the PUD and will follow the procedures specified in subsection (g) of this section. 
(f)  Required standards. 
(1)  The PUD shall be consistent with the standards and purposes of the comprehensive plan and this chapter and shall achieve maximum coordination between the proposed development and the surrounding uses and advance the conservation of woodlands and wetlands, as well as the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the community and residents of the PUD. The planning commission and city staff shall consider the location of the buildings, compatibility with surrounding land uses, parking areas and other features with respect to the topography of the area and existing natural features such as creeks, rivers and large trees; the efficiency, adequacy and safety of the proposed layout of streets and driveways; the adequacy and location of green areas; the adequacy, location and screening of parking areas; the adequacy and location of utilities, including wastewater treatment facilities; and such other matters as the reviewing body may find to have a material bearing upon the stated standards and objectives of the comprehensive plan and this chapter. 
(2)  The granting of a PUD shall in no way waive or reduce any other stipulation or requirement of other city, county, or state statutes or ordinances. 
(3)  The city council shall review and consider applications for approval of a PUD pursuant to procedures set forth in subsection (g) of this section. Upon review and consideration, the city council may approve or deny the application for approval of a PUD. If the city council approves the PUD application, it shall be pursuant to adoption of rezoning of the subject property to PUD overlay district pursuant to section 101-4, including the adoption of reasonable conditions that the city council considers necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(4)  The applicant shall demonstrate and the city council shall find that approval of a PUD results in specific public benefit in terms of conservation of natural resources, protection of sensitive areas such as woodlands and wetlands, creation of active and passive recreational open space, provision for public facilities, including, but not limited to, playgrounds, trails, picnic shelters, fire, police and public works facilities. When making this finding, the city council shall consider whether the public benefit resulting from the approval of a PUD substantially exceeds the public benefit resulting from the approval of a subdivision of the same land without a approval of PUD. In no case shall the public benefit resulting from the approval of a PUD be less than two times the value of the park, open space, easement, roadway, and related dedications required pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations. 
(5)  The applicant shall grant to the city conservation easements protecting all delineated wetlands. The easements may prohibit any development or alteration of land within 75 feet of delineated wetlands. 
(g)  Coordination with subdivision regulations. Subdivision review under the subdivision regulations shall be carried out simultaneously with the review of the PUD. The plans required under this section shall be submitted in a form that will satisfy the requirements of the chapter 107 for the preliminary and final plat, as well as applicable requirements of this chapter. 
(h)  Revisions and/or changes. 
(1)  Changes in uses, changes in the location, size, or height of structures, any rearrangement of lots, blocks and building tracts, changes in the provision of common open spaces, and all other changes to the approved final development plan may be made only upon approval of an amendment to the PUD by the city council after a public hearing conducted by the city council or planning commission. Any changes shall be recorded as amendments to the recorded copy of the final development plan. 
(2)  All of the provisions applicable to the original district within which the PUD is established shall apply to the PUD district except as otherwise provided in approval of the development plan. 
(3)  If substantial development has not occurred within a specified time after approval of the PUD district, the city council may direct the planning commission to initiate revocation of approval of the city council's rezoning to a PUD overlay district. It shall not be necessary for the city council to find that the rezoning was in error. 
(i)  Phasing and guarantee of performance. 
(1)  The city staff shall compare the actual development accomplished in the various PUD zones with the approved development schedule. In no case shall this review occur at intervals greater than one year. 
(2)  Upon recommendation of the planning commission and for good cause shown by the property owner, the city council may extend the limits of the development schedule. 
(3)  The construction and provision of all of the common open space, utilities, and public and recreational facilities that are shown on the development plan must proceed at the same rate or faster as the construction of the other infrastructure improvements. The city staff shall review all of the building permits issued for the PUD and examine the construction which has taken place on the site. If they find that the rate of construction of infrastructure is greater than the rate at which common open spaces and public and recreational facilities have been constructed and provided, they shall forward this information to the city council for action. 
(4)  A letter of credit shall be required to guarantee performance by the developer. The amount of this letter of credit and the specific elements of the development program that it is intended to guarantee will be stipulated in the development agreement. The development agreement shall require the developer to pay reasonable fees for administration and processing of the PUD. 
(j)  Procedure for processing a planned unit development. 
(1)  Application conference. Upon the filing of an application, the applicant of the proposed PUD shall attend a meeting with city staff. The primary purpose of the meeting shall be to provide the applicant with an opportunity to gather information and obtain guidance as to the general suitability of the proposal for the area for which it is proposed and its conformity to the provisions of this section before incurring substantial expense in the preparation of plans, surveys and other data. 
(2)  Concept plan. 
a.  Procedure. The concept plan provides an opportunity for the applicant to submit a plan to the city showing the applicant's basic intent and the general nature of the entire development without incurring substantial cost. 
b.  Schedule. 
1.  The developer meets with city staff to discuss conceptual plans for the proposed developments. 
2.  The applicant shall file the concept stage application and preliminary plat together with written data describing total acreage, overall density, density of the developed area of the PUD, area of open space, proposed plan for a collector wastewater treatment facility, if applicable, and other relevant information that helps convey the applicant's intent for the development. 
3.  Within 30 days after verification by city staff that the required plan and supporting data is adequate, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing. 
4.  The planning commission shall conduct the hearing and report its findings and make recommendations to the city council. Notice of the hearing shall consist of a legal property description, description of request, and be published in the official newspaper at least ten days prior to the hearing and written notification of the hearing shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the hearing to owners of land within 1,000 feet of the boundary of the property in question. 
5.  The city council may hold a public hearing after the receipt of the report and recommendations from the planning commission. If the planning commission fails to make a report within 60 days after receipt of the application, then the city council may proceed without the report. The city council may approve the concept plan and attach such conditions as it deems reasonable. Approval shall require a four-fifths vote of the entire city council. 
(3)  Development stage. If the city council approves the concept plan, the applicant shall submit the development stage application and final plat. The application shall proceed and be acted upon in accordance with this chapter and pursuant to provisions for rezoning set forth in section 101-4. If appropriate because of the limited scale of the proposal, the concept stage and development stages may proceed simultaneously. 
(4)  Applications. 
a.  General concept stage. Applications at this stage shall include: 
1.  Preliminary plat and information required by chapter 107. 
2.  The applicant's name and address if different from the landowner. 
3.  The landowner's name and address and interest in the subject property. The applicant shall include evidence that the applicant has sufficient control over the subject property to effectuate the proposed PUD, including a statement of all legal, beneficial, tenancy and contractual interests held in or affecting the subject property and including an up-to-date certified abstract of title or certificate of title for registered property, and such other evidence as the city attorney may require to show the status of title or control of the subject property. 
4.  The names and addresses of all professional consultants who have contributed to the development of the PUD plan being submitted, including attorney, land planner, engineer and surveyor. 
b.  Present status. Applications at this stage shall include: 
1.  The address and legal description of the property. 
2.  The existing zoning classification and present use of the subject property and all lands within 1,000 feet of the property. 
3.  A map depicting the existing development of the property and all land within 1,000 feet thereof and indicating the location of existing streets, property lines, and easements with invert elevations on and within 100 feet of the property. 
4.  A written statement generally describing the proposed PUD and the market that it is intended to serve and its demand, showing its relationship to the comprehensive plan and how the proposed PUD is to be designed, arranged and operated in order to permit the development and use of neighboring property in accordance with the applicable regulations. 
5.  Site conditions, depicted as graphic reproductions of the existing site conditions at an appropriate scale to show necessary details, including: 
(i)  Contours, at a minimum of two-foot intervals. 
(ii)  Location, type and extent of tree cover. 
(iii)  Slope analysis. 
(iv)  Location and extent of water bodies, wetlands and floodplains within 1,000 feet of the property. 
(v)  Existing drainage patterns. 
(vi)  Vistas and significant views. 
(vii)  Soil conditions as they affect development. 
(viii)  All utilities and facilities shall be shown above or below ground. 
All of the graphics should be the same scale as the final plan to allow easy cross reference. The use of overlays is recommended for clear reference. 
6.  Schematic drawing of the proposed development concept, including, but not limited to, the general location of major circulation elements, public and common open space, residential and other land uses. 
7.  A statement of the estimated total number of dwelling units proposed for the PUD and a tabulation of the proposed approximate allocations of land use expressed in acres and as a percentage of the total project area, which shall include at least the following: 
(i)  Area devoted to residential uses. 
(ii)  Area devoted to residential use by building type. 
(iii)  Area devoted to common open space and wastewater treatment, if applicable. 
(iv)  Area devoted to public open space. 
(v)  Approximate area devoted to streets. 
(vi)  Approximate area devoted to, and number of, off-street parking and loading spaces and related access. 
(vii)  Approximate area and floor area devoted to commercial and neighborhood business uses. 
(viii)  Approximate area and floor area devoted to light industrial or office use. 
(ix)  Infrastructure layout and phasing, including, but not limited to, streets and utilities. 
8.  When the PUD is to be constructed in stages during a period of time extending beyond a single construction season, a schedule for the development of such stages or units shall be submitted stating the approximate beginning and completion dates for each such stage or unit and the proportion of the total PUD public or common open space and dwelling units to be provided or constructed during each such stage and overall chronology of development to be followed from stage to stage. 
9.  When the proposed PUD includes provisions for public or common open space or service facilities, a statement describing the provision that is to be made for the care and maintenance of such open space or service facilities, including, for collector wastewater treatment facilities, a statement of the operating capabilities of such facilities and a showing that the facilities are adequate to serve the project. 
10.  Any restrictive covenants that are to be recorded with respect to property included in the proposed PUD. 
11.  The city may excuse an applicant from submitting any specific item of information or document required in this stage that it finds to be unnecessary or irrelevant to the consideration of the specific proposal. 
12.  The city may require the submission of any additional information or documentation that it may find necessary or appropriate to full consideration of the proposed PUD. 
(5)  Development stage application. Development stage submissions should depict and outline the proposed implementations of the general concept stage for the PUD. Information from the general concept stage may be included for background and to provide a basis for the submitted plan. The development stage submission shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  A final plat and information required by chapter 107. 
b.  Required number of sets of preliminary plans (as established by resolution of the city council) drawn to an appropriate scale to show necessary details containing at least the following information: 
1.  Proposed name of the development (which shall not duplicate nor be similar in pronunciation to the name of any plat theretofore recorded in the county where the subject property is situated). 
2.  Property boundary lines and dimensions of the property and any significant topographical or physical features of the property. 
3.  The location, size, use and arrangement including height in stories and feet and total square feet of ground area coverage and floor area of proposed buildings, and existing buildings which will remain, if any. 
4.  Location, dimensions of all driveways, entrances, curb cuts, parking stalls, loading spaces and access aisles and all other circulation elements including bike and pedestrian; and the total site coverage of all circulation elements. 
5.  Location, designation and total area of all common open space. 
6.  Location, designation and total area proposed to be conveyed or dedicated for public open space, including parks, playgrounds, and recreational facilities. 
7.  Proposed lots and blocks, if any and numbering system. 
8.  The location, use and size of structures and other land uses on adjacent properties. 
9.  Detailed sketches and provisions of proposed landscaping. 
10.  General grading and drainage plans for the developed PUD. Grading plans should identify the proposed house pad elevations, drainage patterns on each lot, drainage direction arrows for the entire site for each lot, and the type of house proposed on each lot. 
11.  Any other information that may have been required by the planning commission or city council in conjunction with the approval of the general concept plan. 
c.  An accurate legal description of the entire area within the PUD for which final development plan approval is sought. 
d.  A tabulation indicating the number of residential dwelling units and expected population. 
e.  A tabulation indicating the gross square footage, if any, of commercial, neighborhood business, and light industrial floor space, by type of activity. 
f.  Preliminary architectural plans indicating use, floor plan, building elevations and exterior wall finishes of proposed buildings. 
g.  A detailed site plan, suitable for recording and showing the physical layout, design and purpose of all streets, easements, rights-of-way, utility lines and facilities, lots, blocks, public and common open space, general landscaping plan, structure, and uses. 
h.  Preliminary grading and site alteration plan illustrating changes to existing topography and natural site vegetation. The grading plan should clearly reflect the site treatment and its conformance with the approved concept plan. Grading plans should identify the proposed house pad elevations, drainage patterns on each lot, drainage direction arrows for the entire site for each lot, and the type of house proposed on each lot. 
i.  A preliminary plat prepared in accordance with chapter 107. 
j.  A soil erosion control plan acceptable to watershed districts, the department of natural resources, soil conservation service, or any other agency with review authority clearly illustrating erosion control measures to be used during construction and as permanent measures. 
(k)  Control of planned unit development following completion. 
(1)  After the building permit has been issued, no changes shall be made in the approved development plan except upon application as provided below: 
a.  Any building or structure that is totally or substantially destroyed may be reconstructed only in compliance with the development plan, unless an amendment to the development plan is approved pursuant to subsection (h) of this section. 
b.  Changes in the use of the common open space may be authorized by an amendment to the development plan pursuant to subsection (h) of this section. 
c.  Any other changes in the development plan must be authorized by an amendment of the development plan pursuant to subsection (h) of this section. 
(2)  Approval of the PUD shall include a guarantee for the maintenance and repair of any landscaping, grounds, and structures for two years after construction of the development is completed. Such guarantee shall be in the form of a bond, letter of credit, or cash escrow account. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1326; Ord. No. 01-09; Ord. No. 04-03) 
Sec. 109-103. - CLR, Closed Landfill Restricted District. 
(a)  Purpose. This section pertains to the CLR district. This district is intended to apply to former landfills that are qualified to be under the Closed Landfill Program of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA). The purpose of the district is to limit uses of land within the closed landfill, both actively filled and related lands, to minimal uses in order to protect the land from human activity where response action systems are in place and, at the same time, are protective of human health and safety. This district shall only apply to the closed landfill's land management area, the limits of which are defined by the MPCA. This district shall apply whether the landfill is in public (MPCA, county, city, township), Indian tribal, or private ownership. 
    For purposes of this section, the land management area for the Oak Grove Landfill, a qualified facility under the MPCA's Closed Landfill Program, is described as: 
(b)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Uses allowed in this district include outdoor equipment or small buildings used in concert with gas extraction systems (i.e. gas to energy system), other response action systems, monitoring wells, or any other equipment designed to protect, monitor or otherwise ensure the integrity of the landfill monitoring or improvement systems. Fences and gates shall be allowed under these provisions. 
(c)  Accessory uses. 
(1)  Accessory uses shall be limited to installation, operation and maintenance of equipment to support permitted uses. 
(d)  Conditional uses. 
(1)  Conditional uses shall be limited to passive uses to protect the integrity of the landfill area and to protect any person from hazards associated with the landfill. The landfill shall be planted in cover crops and shall be maintained by the MPCA. 
(2)  Any proposed conditional use must be approved by the commissioner of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) and the city. Such approved use shall not disturb or threaten to disturb, the integrity of the landfill cover, liners, any other components of any containment system, or the function of any monitoring system that exists upon the described property. 
(e)  General regulations. 
(1)  Requirements for parking, signs, height and other regulations are set forth in section 109 article VI of this code. 
(Ord. No. 15-02, § 2, 3-9-2015) 
Secs. 109-104-109-132. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CONDITIONAL USE AND INTERIM USE PERMITS; REQUIREMENTS FOR CONDITIONAL OR INTERIM USES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Conditional use permits, Minn. Stats. § 462.3595; interim uses, Minn. Stats. § 462.3597. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 109-133. - Permits granted or denied. 
    Conditional use or interim use permits may be granted or denied in any district as provided by this division. The city council shall consider the advice and recommendations of the planning commission and the effect of the proposed use upon the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of occupants of surrounding lands, existing and anticipated traffic conditions, including parking facilities on adjacent streets and land, the effect on utility and school capacities, the effect on property values of property in the surrounding area, and the effect of the proposed use on the comprehensive plan. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1310, subd. 2(A)) 
Sec. 109-134. - Procedure. 
(a)  The property owner or his authorized representative shall fill out and submit to the city administrator or designee an application for a conditional use or interim use permit together with required exhibits and a fee to be determined by the city council from time to time by ordinance. 
(b)  The city administrator or designee shall refer the application to the planning commission. The city administrator or designee shall set the date for a public hearing and have notice of such hearing published at least once in the legal newspaper not less than ten days prior to the hearing. Property owners within 1,000 feet of the property shall be notified by mail, although failure of any property owner to receive such notification shall not invalidate the proceedings. 
(c)  The planning commission shall consider the petition according to the submittal schedule. 
(d)  The petitioner or his representative shall appear before the planning commission in order to answer questions concerning the proposed conditional use. 
(e)  The report of the planning commission shall be placed on the agenda of the city council following referral from the planning commission. 
(f)  The city council shall take action on the application after receiving the report of the planning commission. If it grants the conditional use or interim use permit, the city council may impose conditions (including time limits) it considers necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and such conditions may include a time limit for the use to exist or operate. 
(g)  An amended conditional use or interim use permit application shall be administered in a manner similar to that required for a new conditional use or interim use permit. Amended conditional use or interim use permits shall include re-applications for permits that have been denied, requests for changes in conditions, and as otherwise described in this article. 
(h)  No application for a conditional use or interim use permit shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of said order of denial. 
(i)  If a time limit or periodic review is included as a condition by which a conditional use permit is granted, the conditional use or interim use permit shall be reviewed at a public hearing with notice of said hearing published at least ten days prior to the review. It shall be the responsibility of the city administrator or designee to schedule such public hearings, and the owner of land having a conditional use permit shall be required to pay a fee for said review. 
(j)  Approved conditional use or interim use permits shall be filed in the office of the county recorder. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1310, subd. 2(B)) 
Sec. 109-135. - Required exhibits. 
    The following exhibits shall be submitted with an application for a conditional use or interim use permit: 
(1)  Anoka County GIS property owners' list, labels and map showing property owners' names and addresses within 1,000 feet of the outer boundaries of the property in question. 
(2)  A boundary line survey. The city administrator or designee may waive the requirement for a survey if no buildings or improvements are proposed. 
(3)  A general development plan showing the potential development of the property, indicating proposed streets, buildings, drainage, and landscaping. 
(4)  Such other information as determined by the city administrator or designee. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1310, subd. 2(D)) 
Sec. 109-136. - Issuance criteria. 
    In granting a conditional use or interim use permit, the city council shall consider the advice and recommendations of the planning commission and the effect of the proposed use on the comprehensive plan and upon the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of occupants of surrounding lands. Among other things, the council shall consider the following: 
(1)  Factors of noise, glare, odor, electrical interference, vibration, dust, and other nuisances. 
(2)  The use shall not create an excessive burden on existing parks, police and fire, schools, streets and other public facilities and utilities which serve or are proposed to serve the area. 
(3)  The effect on sensitive environmental features including wetlands, slopes, floodplains, woodlands, lakes, surface water and groundwater. 
(4)  The use shall be compatible with adjacent land uses so that existing uses and property values will not be adversely affected and there will be no deterrence to development of vacant land. 
(5)  The use shall not have an adverse effect upon adjacent properties, including aesthetics, scenic views, character and integrity of the neighborhood. 
(6)  The use, in the opinion of the city council, shall be reasonably related to the overall needs of the city and to the existing land use. 
(7)  The use shall be consistent with the purposes of this chapter and the purposes of the zoning district in which the applicant intends to locate the proposed use. 
(8)  The use shall not be in conflict with the comprehensive plan. 
(9)  The use will not cause traffic congestion or hazards. 
(10)  The use shall have adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and necessary facilities. 
(11)  The use will not adversely impact the environment, natural resources or water quality. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1310, subd. 2(D)) 
Sec. 109-137. - City council findings/additional conditions. 
    In addition, the city council may adopt additional conditions that the city council considers necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and the best interest of adjacent residents or the community as a whole. These conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Hours of operation; 
(2)  Limitations on intensity; 
(3)  Performance standards; 
(4)  Controlling access; 
(5)  Additional fencing, landscaping, screening; 
(6)  Limiting the height, size or location of buildings; and 
(7)  Periodic review. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1310, subd. 2(E)) 
Sec. 109-138. - Revocation. 
(a)  Where a conditional use or interim use permit has been issued pursuant to the provisions of this article, such permit shall become null and void without further action by the planning commission or city council unless construction commences within one year of the date of granting such conditional use or interim use. A conditional use permit shall be deemed to authorize only one particular use and shall expire if that use shall cease for more than six consecutive months. 
(b)  In the event that the applicant violates any of the conditions set forth in the permit, the city council shall have the authority to revoke the conditional use permit or interim use following a public hearing. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1310, subd. 2(F)) 
Secs. 109-139-109-159. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIFIC USES 

Sec. 109-160. - Mineral mining and related activities. 
(a)  Generally. An interim use permit is required to remove, store, or excavate rock, sand, gravel, minerals, clay, silt, or other like material in the city or to fill or raise the existing surface grades in excess of 1,000 cubic yards. 
(b)  Interim use permit application. An application for the interim use permit shall be made in writing to the city council in the form specified by the city engineer. In addition to all other required information, the application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The correct legal description of the land upon which excavation is proposed. 
(2)  The name and address of the applicant and owner of the land. 
(3)  The names and addresses of all adjacent landowners within a 1,000-foot radius. 
(4)  The general purpose of the proposed excavation. 
(5)  The estimated time required to complete the proposed excavation and rehabilitation. 
(6)  The names of the highways, streets, or other public roadways within the city upon which the material shall be transported. 
(7)  Specifications for the following, using appropriate maps, photographs, and surveys: 
a.  The physical relationship of the proposed excavation site to the community and existing community development. 
b.  Site analysis information such as trees, depth of topsoil, adjacent and on-site buildings and land uses, flood levels, watercourses, and two feet elevation and percent slope within 100 yards beyond the perimeter of the site, and topography maps with elevations not exceeding intervals of two feet. 
c.  The estimated quantity, distance and method by which the materials are to be moved or transported. 
d.  The depth of water tables throughout the proposed excavation site. Use mottled soil or monitoring wells which have been in place for at least one year. Historical data specific to this site shall also be included. 
e.  The average thickness of overburden on the proposed site before and after excavation. 
f.  Environmental assessment worksheet and or environmental impact statement, if required. 
g.  Phasing plan with schedule. 
h.  Required separation to highest known groundwater. 
(8)  The plan of operation, including processing, if any, the nature of the processing and equipment, location of the processing plant, source of water, disposal of water, reuse of water, and the use of explosives. 
(9)  Plans for drainage, wind and water erosion control, sedimentation and dust control, maintenance of security on the proposed excavation site, control of access to open excavation and control of weeds and unsightly vegetation. 
(10)  A comprehensive rehabilitation plan showing suitable provisions for rehabilitation of the excavated area to a usable condition compatible with the adjacent land such that it will not become a health or safety hazard or a nuisance. Such plan shall, at a minimum, include anticipated final elevations, with topography elevations not exceeding intervals of two feet, slopes and plans for the return of subsoil and topsoil for at least 100 yards beyond the perimeter of the site. Where the council deems practical and necessary, such plan shall also include adjoining related areas where excavations have previously been made which remain under the control of the applicant or the owner of the land on which the excavation is proposed. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1014, subd. 3; Ord. No. 04-03) 
Sec. 109-161. - Reserved rights by the city council; issuance of interim use permit; council action; inspection fee. 
(a)  Upon referral of the application from the city engineer, the city council shall evaluate the application in accordance with the standards and requirements set forth in this section. 
(b)  The city council shall issue an interim use permit only upon a finding that the proposed excavation activities will not be dangerous or otherwise detrimental to persons residing or working in the vicinity thereof or the public health, safety, or welfare, and will not significantly impair the use, enjoyment, or value of a neighboring property. 
(c)  The city council, in its discretion, may attach conditions to protect the public health, safety and welfare, to avoid traffic congestion or hazard, to promote conformity of a proposed use with the character of adjoining property and uses, or to avoid significantly reducing or impairing the use, enjoyment, or value of any neighboring property. 
(1)  Prerequisites to obtaining interim use permit. The city council, as a prerequisite to the issuance of an interim use permit, or after the permit has been granted, may require the applicant or owner of the licensed premises to: 
a.  Reimburse the city for the cost of periodic inspections by the city engineer, building official and zoning administrator or other city employees for the purpose of determining that the provisions of the permit and all applicable ordinances are being followed. 
b.  Submit to the city council a detailed map of the highways, streets, roads, or other public ways within the city upon and along which the materials removed or brought in shall be transported (haul roads). The city shall inspect the haul roads proposed to be used by the applicant or owner and shall recommend to the city council necessary upgrading or repairing of the haul roads prior to their use by the applicant or owner. The city council shall designate the haul roads and shall incorporate the recommendations of the responsible city officials in the excavation/land reclamation permit issued to the applicant. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant or owner to maintain the haul roads in accordance with the provisions set forth in the permit. The city shall periodically inspect haul roads to ensure compliance with the excavation operations, and the applicant or owner shall make any necessary repairs to the haul roads as recommended by the city. All costs of inspection provided for in this subsection shall be borne by the applicant or owner. The use of the haul roads shall be further subject to any road and weight restrictions imposed by the city. 
c.  Submit annually in writing to the city council the estimated quantity of minerals to be excavated. If the quantity of minerals to be excavated is, for any reason, likely to exceed the original estimate herein required, the applicant or owner shall notify the city council of the change in estimated quantity. 
d.  Comply with such other requirements as the city council shall from time to time deem proper and necessary for the protection of its citizens and the general welfare. 
(2)  Inspections. At least once a year, and more often if deemed necessary, the city may inspect all excavation sites for which an interim use permit has been issued pursuant to this section and report such findings to the city council. The operator or owner of any excavation operation found in violation of the requirements of this section or his permit shall remedy such violations within the time specified by written notice from the city. 
(3)  Surety bond. The city council shall require the applicant or owner of the premises on which the excavation operation is located to post a surety bond with a surety acceptable to the city or cash escrow in an amount equal to at least 125 percent of the cost of rehabilitation of the premises or such other sum as the city council in its discretion deems necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare, running to the city, conditioned to pay the city the extraordinary cost and expense of repairing, from time to time, any highways, streets or other public ways where such repair work is made necessary by the special burden resulting from hauling and travel, and removing material from any pit or excavation, and conducting required rehabilitation and conditioned further to comply with all the requirements of this section and the particular interim use permit, and to pay any expense the city may incur by reason of doing anything required be done by any applicant. Said bond shall remain in full force and effect for a minimum period of one year after expiration of the permit to guarantee the required rehabilitation as well as the other requirements herein provided. 
(4)  Modification of operations. The operators shall change, alter or modify immediately any excavation or operation therein deemed by the city council inspector to be unsanitary or dangerous or polluted or contrary to the general health and welfare of the community. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1014, subds. 3, 4, 8, 9, 12; Ord. No. 04-03) 
Secs. 109-162-109-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 109-191. - Permitted encroachments. 
    The following shall not be considered as encroachments on setback and height requirements subject to other conditions hereinafter provided: 
(1)  In side and rear yards, fences 30 percent open; walls and hedges six feet in height or less; balconies, eaves, extensions or decks eight feet above grade may extend into the yards to within ten feet of a lot line, provided that said balconies or decks do not extend over driveways. 
(2)  On any lot, nothing shall be placed or allowed to grow in such a manner as materially to impede the vision of traffic or prevent the maintenance and operation of utility equipment. On a corner lot, the landowner shall be required to maintain a clear view within the 30-foot intersection sight distance triangle measured from the end of the road. 
(3)  In rear yards, outdoor patio, gazebos, and outdoor eating facilities, provided that these are not less than ten feet from any lot line. 
(4)  Height limitations shall not apply to barns, silos, other structures on farms, church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, flag poles, public and public utility facilities, and parapet walls extending not more than four feet above the limiting height of the building except as hereinafter provided. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1308, subd. 7) 
Sec. 109-192. - Group care homes. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions in this chapter: 
(1)  Permitted single-family uses. A state-licensed residential facility or housing with services registered under Minn. Stats. ch. 144D serving six or fewer persons, a licensed day care facility serving 12 or fewer persons, and a group family day care facility licensed under Minn. Rules, pts 9502.0315 to 9502.0445 to serve 14 or fewer children shall be considered a permitted single-family residential use of property, except that a residential facility whose primary purpose is to treat juveniles who have violated criminal statutes relating to sex offenses or have been adjudicated delinquent on the basis of conduct in violation of criminal statutes relating to sex offenses shall not be considered a permitted use. 
(2)  Permitted multifamily uses. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (1) of this section, a state-licensed residential facility serving from seven through 16 persons or a licensed day care facility serving from 13 through 16 persons shall be considered a multifamily residential use of property upon issuance of a conditional use permit for same. 
Sec. 109-193. - Prohibited dwelling units. 
    No cellar, garage, tent, recreational vehicle, travel trailer, basement with unfinished structure above, or accessory building shall at any time be used as a permanent dwelling unit. In all residential zoning districts of the city, unless prohibited elsewhere in this Code or by other regulations, a recreational vehicle may be occupied on a temporary basis not exceeding 14 days per calendar year. Recreational vehicles shall not be occupied for any length of time in any other zoning districts. 
(a)  Pursuant to authority granted by Minn. Stats. § 462.3593, subdivision 9, the City of Oak Grove opts-out of the requirements of Minn. Stats. § 462.3593, which defines and regulates temporary family health care dwellings. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1310, subd. 4(B)(8); Ord. No. 08-06; Ord. No. 08-13; Ord. No. 16-02, § 1, 7-25-2016) 
Sec. 109-194. - Accessory buildings, structures and uses. 
(a)  No accessory building or private garage shall be constructed or developed on a lot prior to the time of construction of the principal building to which it is an accessory. 
(b)  Any new home shall have a garage as an accessory use, whether such garage is attached or detached. 
(c)  An attached garage may be remodeled for use as living quarters integrated with an existing home, provided that an attached or detached garage is constructed concurrently with such building remodeling or there is an existing detached garage or accessory building which is in compliance with the dimensional standards contained in subsection (h)(1) of this section. 
(d)  No accessory building or detached private garage shall be located nearer the front lot line than the principal building except when the lot is three acres or greater and the existing principal building is located a minimum of 200 feet from the front lot line. Then the accessory building or detached private garage may be located closer to the front lot line than the principal dwelling, but not closer than 50 percent of the principal dwelling's setback. In the case of a corner lot, the front lot line shall be located on the side on which the principal building is addressed. The remaining lot side with street frontage shall meet the minimum front yard setback of 40 or 50 feet on roads classified as collector and arterial. See Lot line in section 101-3. 
(e)  Accessory buildings shall not be the focal point of the property and the material and/or architecture must be complementary to the principal structure. 
(f)  No accessory building or detached private garages shall exceed the elevation of the principal building on a lot, except as permitted by section 109-191 (4). However, on lots of 11/2 acres or more, the total building height shall not exceed 25 feet from the natural ground level, or the maximum elevation of the principal building, whichever is highest. 
(g)  Requirements for accessory buildings with total acreage to include to the center of the road. 
(1)  Construction of any accessory buildings pursuant to this section shall require a building permit except as follows: 
a.  No building permit shall be required for a storage building that is equal to or less than 200 square feet in floor area and not more than 12 feet in height. 
b.  Storage buildings 196 square feet or less existing prior to enactment of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be legally nonconforming. 
(2)  On lots 1.49 acres and less, the total building floor area for accessory buildings shall not exceed 1,200 square feet, and the sidewall height shall not exceed 12 feet as measured on the inside of the building between the finished floor elevation and the bottom of the roof truss. Not more than one accessory building and up to two 120-square foot storage buildings/sheds and one private garage (attached or detached) shall serve a principal building. 
(3)  On lots of 1.50 to 2.49 acres, the total building floor area for accessory buildings shall not exceed 1,800 square feet, and the sidewall height shall not exceed 16 feet as measured on the inside of the building between the finished floor elevation and the bottom of the roof truss. Not more than one accessory building and up to two 120-square foot storage buildings/sheds and one private garage (attached or detached) shall serve a principal building. 
(4)  On lots of 2.50 to 3.99 acres, the total building floor area for accessory buildings shall not exceed 2,400 square feet, and the sidewall height shall not exceed 16 feet as measured on the inside of the building between the finished floor elevation and the bottom of the roof truss. Not more than two accessory buildings and up to three 120-square foot storage buildings/sheds and one private garage (attached or detached) shall serve a principal building. 
(5)  On lots of 4.00 to 5.99 acres, the total building floor area for accessory buildings shall not exceed 3,600 square feet and the sidewall height shall not exceed 16 feet as measured on the inside of the building between the finished floor elevation and the bottom of the roof truss. Not more than two accessory buildings and up to three 120-square foot storage buildings/sheds and one private garage (attached or detached) shall serve a principal building. 
(6)  On lots of 6.00 to 9.99 acres, the total building floor area for accessory buildings shall not exceed 5,000 square feet and the sidewall height shall not exceed 16 feet as measured on the inside of the building between the finished floor elevation and the bottom of the roof truss. Not more than two accessory buildings and up to three 120-square foot storage buildings/sheds and one private garage (attached or detached) shall serve a principal building. 
(7)  On lots of ten acres or larger, the total building floor area for accessory buildings shall not exceed 9,000 square feet and the sidewall height shall not exceed 16 feet as measured on the inside of the building between the finished floor elevation and the bottom of the roof truss. Not more than three accessory buildings and up to four 120-square foot storage buildings/sheds and one private garage (attached or detached) shall serve a principal building. 
(8)  On lots located in a master planned golf course community (MPGCC) or the Lake George 3 (LG-3) zoning district, the total building floor area shall not exceed 144 square feet, and the height shall not exceed eight feet. Only one such building shall be allowed per lot. Such buildings require a building permit. 
(9)  On lots abutting Lake George, one water-oriented accessory building in accordance with article VIII of this chapter may be constructed to be included in the total maximum number of allowed accessory buildings per lot. 
(h)  Requirements for detached garages. 
(1)  A detached private garage size shall contain not less than 576 square feet total building floor area. An accessory building used for vehicle storage as permitted in subsection (c) of this section shall contain not less than 576 square feet of floor area. A detached garage shall not exceed 1,200 square feet. 
(2)  Detached private garages shall be of woodframe construction and shall be of similar design and building materials as the principal building, including, but not limited to, siding and the pitch of the roof, and shall not be the focal point on the property. In cases where the roof pitch of the principal building cannot be determined, the roof pitch shall be the minimum required by the uniform building code. Detached private garages shall incorporate building materials used on the principal building. 
(i)  No accessory building or detached private garage may be placed on an easement. 
(j)  Proposed accessory buildings which meet the definition of the term "agricultural building" in Minn. Stats. § 326B.103, subd. 3 may be exempt from the requirement to obtain a building permit but are subject to all standards of this section, with the exception of size restrictions and total number restrictions. A site plan must be submitted and administratively approved by the building official or city administrator or designee prior to commencing construction on any accessory which qualifies as an agricultural building. 
(k)  Semi-trailers, truck boxes, and similar storage containers are prohibited on lots containing less than seven acres. Temporary uses may be allowed with city council approval for up to 60 days within an 18-month period. On lots containing more than seven acres, no more than two such storage containers shall be allowed. 
(l)  No home occupation shall be conducted in any accessory building without a permit. 
(m)  Lean-tos attached to an existing structure shall be included into the allowable square footage of a building and will be subject to the square footage restrictions based on lot sizes as permitted in subsections (g)(2)-(7) of this section. 
(n)  A storage building that is equal to or less than 240 square feet in floor area and not more than 12 feet in height shall be allowed per lot and shall not be included in the maximum number of accessory buildings allowed per lot. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1308, subd. 6; Ord. No. 00-03; Ord. No. 04-02; Ord. No. 04-03; Ord. No. 05-06; Ord. No. 08-06; Ord. No. 09-02; Ord. No. 09-06; Ord. No. 12-03, § 3, 4-30-2012; Ord. No. 15-02, § 3, 3-9-2015; Ord. No. 18-07, § 1, 8-27-2018) 
Sec. 109-195. - Home occupations. 
(a)  Public hearing required for interim use permit. An interim use permit for a home occupation is a permit authorized by the city council only after a public hearing by the planning commission. 
(b)  Home occupations; no interim use permit required. All home occupations that conform to the following standards may be conducted without approval of an interim use permit as provided under this section: 
(1)  Permitted home occupations shall be conducted only by property owners of the premises and shall not be conducted in any building on the premises other than the building which is used by the occupant as the private dwelling. 
(2)  The area set aside for home occupations shall not be less than 50 percent of the total floor area of such residence. 
(3)  Home occupation may have one sign per dwelling which shall comply with the requirements of section 109-479. 
(4)  There shall be no exterior or garage storage of any materials, including business equipment, merchandise, inventory or heavy equipment, with the exception that one light commercial, home business-related vehicle and associated trailer may be parked on the site. For the purposes of this section, the term "light commercial vehicle" is a vehicle that does not exceed 28 feet in length or a gross vehicle weight rating of 16,000 pounds. One business-related trailer shall be allowed, provided that the trailer is attached to a vehicle and the combined length of the vehicle and trailer does not exceed 46 feet. No other materials may be stored. No home occupation shall be conducted in any accessory building without a permit. 
(5)  Permitted home occupations shall not include the employment of any persons not residing on the premises in the performance of the occupation. 
(6)  The use of heavy industrial equipment other than is usual for purely domestic or hobby purposes is prohibited. 
(7)  The off-street loading and off-street parking requirements of section 109-196 must be provided. 
(8)  Merchandise shall not be openly displayed or offered for sale within the residence except within the space allowed by this section. 
(9)  The operation of any wholesale or retail business, unless it is conducted entirely by mail or by occasional home invitation and does not involve the sale, shipment, or delivery of merchandise on the premises, is prohibited. 
(10)  Any home occupation or activity that produces noise or noxious odors, vibrations, glare, fumes, fire hazard, or electric interference detectable to normal sensory perception beyond the property line is prohibited. 
(11)  A home occupation shall average eight or fewer customers daily. 
(12)  The hours of operation shall be reasonable so as not to interfere with the residential character of the neighborhood. 
(13)  Exterior lighting shall be directed and shielded from neighboring properties and public ways. 
(14)  The use shall not create unreasonable pedestrian, automobile, or truck traffic in excess of a single-family residence. 
(c)  Home occupation; interim use permit required. 
(1)  All home occupations that do not conform to the standards of subsection (b) of this section shall only be conducted upon approval of an interim use permit. Interim use permits granted by this section shall be temporary in nature and shall be granted to a designated natural person who resides at a residential address. Interim use permits are not transferable from person to person or from address to address. 
(2)  Applications for home occupation interim use permits shall be filed with the planning department together with a filing fee established by city council in an annual fee ordinance. The application shall be forwarded to the planning commission for a public hearing. All such hearings shall be held at public meetings of the planning commission and shall be conducted as provided division 1, article V of this chapter. Legal notice of all such hearings shall be given as required for petitions for any interim use permit. At the conclusion of its hearing, the planning commission shall make findings of fact and recommendations to the city council. Notwithstanding provisions to the contrary, the city council may waive the requirement for a survey in circumstances where no buildings or site improvements are proposed. 
(3)  The initial interim use permit may be approved by the city council following a public hearing for a period up to two years and thereafter may be administratively renewed with city council approval for periods between one and five years, depending on the type of business, the level of impact, demonstration of and compliance with any imposed conditions, and the absence of violations of city ordinances. Alternatively, should any of the above impacts or violations exist, a public hearing may be required for renewal. 
(4)  An interim use permit for a home occupation shall further conform to the following provisions: 
a.  On-site sales, wholesale or retail, shall not be the primary objective of the business. Limited on-site sales may be permitted, provided that the effect on traffic levels shall not be judged unacceptable by the city council. Upon report of objectionable traffic, the city council may restrict or rescind on-site sales approval. 
b.  Signs shall comply with section 109-479. 
c.  The business shall not employ more than three persons in the dwelling or accessory building who are not immediate family members living in the associated residence. 
d.  Storage or sales of hazardous substances as defined in Minn. Stats. § 182.651, subd. 14, bulk chemicals, or petroleum products shall be specifically prohibited unless done so in compliance with the requirements of the county community health and environmental services department. Requirements may include additional licensing. Storage of agricultural chemicals as allowed by state statutes is not prohibited. 
e.  Any other restrictions or conditions as the city council may determine to be necessary to avoid conflict with surrounding residential land usage. 
(5)  The city hereby reserves the right, upon issuing any interim use permit, to inspect (with or without notice) the premises in which the occupation is being conducted to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section or any conditions additionally imposed. 
a.  Notice of inspection. The city official or designated representative may, but shall not be required to, give an occupant of the dwelling advance notice of the inspection. 
b.  Refusal to permit access. Any person who shall, without good cause, refuse to permit access to a dwelling by the city official or designated representative for the purpose of making the inspection shall receive a notice to terminate the use. 
(d)  Procedures. The city council shall follow the procedures for issuance of a conditional use permit in this division 1, article V of this chapter for issuance of an interim use permit for a home occupation, as such requirements are found by the city council to be applicable to the use. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1308, subd. 17; Ord. No. 09-02; Ord. No. 11-01) 
Sec. 109-196. - Off-street parking and loading. 
(a)  Application of off-street parking and loading regulations. The regulations and requirements set forth in this section shall apply to the required and non-required off-street parking and loading facilities in all but agricultural and residential use districts. 
(b)  General provisions. 
(1)  Expansion of existing uses. Expansion of existing uses and/or structures will require the application of the provisions of this section to both the existing and new uses and/or structures. 
(2)  Floor area. The term "floor area," for the purpose of calculating the number of off-street parking spaces required, means the net usable floor area of the various floors, exclusive of hallways, utility space, storage areas other than warehousing. 
(3)  Benches in places of public assembly. In stadiums, churches and other places of public assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews or other similar seating facilities, each 22 inches of such seating facility shall be counted as one seat for the purpose of determining required parking. 
(4)  Minimum size of parking spaces. Each parking space shall be not less than nine feet wide and 20 feet in length, exclusive of access drives, and each space shall be served by a minimum 25-foot driving lane. 
(5)  Not allowed. Parking shall not be allowed in areas not designated for off-street parking. 
(6)  Joint parking facilities. Off-street parking facilities for a combination of one or more uses may be provided collectively in any district except the LG-1, LG-2 and SFR districts, provided that the total number of spaces provided shall equal the sum of the separate requirements for each use. 
(7)  Control of off-street parking facilities. When required accessory off-street parking facilities are provided elsewhere than on the lot on which the principal use served is located, written authority for using such property for off-street parking shall be filed with the city so as to maintain the required number of off-street parking spaces during the existence of said principal use. No such parking facility at its closest point shall be located more than 300 feet from the premises. 
(8)  Use of parking area. Required off-street parking space in all districts shall not be utilized for open storage of goods or for the storage of vehicles that are inoperable or for lease, rent or sale. 
(c)  Location. All accessory off-street parking facilities required herein shall be located as follows: 
(1)  Spaces accessory to single-family dwellings on the same lot as the principal use served. 
(2)  There shall be no off-street parking space within 20 feet of any street right-of-way. 
(3)  No off-street open space parking area containing more than four parking spaces shall be located closer than 20 feet from an adjacent lot zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(d)  Design and maintenance of off-street parking areas. 
(1)  Required site plan. At the time of submitting an application for a building permit, the applicant shall also submit a site plan to the city demonstrating that the provisions of this section have been complied with. 
(2)  Access and location. Parking areas shall be designed so as to provide an adequate means of access to a public street. Said driveway access shall not exceed 30 feet in width at the right-of-way or public walk centerline and shall be so located as to cause the least interference with traffic movement. 
(3)  Calculating space. When determining the number of required off-street parking spaces results in a fraction, each fraction of one-half or more shall constitute another space. 
(4)  Surfacing and drainage. Off-street parking areas shall be improved with a durable and dustless surface. Such areas shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulation within the area. These requirements shall also apply to open sales lots. Durable and dustless surface may include crushed rock and similar treatment for parking accessory to residential structures. All other uses shall utilize asphalt, concrete, or other surface (water sealed) as approved by the city engineer or building inspector. 
(5)  Lighting. Artificial lighting shall be planned, designed, constructed and maintained consistent with the International Dark-Sky Association philosophy and the following standards: 
a.  Lighting shall be directed away from the public right-of-way and nearby or adjacent residential or agricultural conservation districts. 
b.  Commercial parking lots shall be lighted to a minimum level of one foot-candle. 
c.  All sources of artificial lights shall be so fixed, directed, designed or sized that the minimum subtotal of their illumination on a cloudy night will not increase the level of illumination on any nearby residential property by more than 0.1 foot-candle in or within 25 feet of a dwelling nor more than 0.5 foot-candle on any part of the property. Street lights installed to provide lighting at intersections or midblock on any street for traffic safety will be exempted from these standards. 
d.  Glare, whether direct or reflected as different from general illumination, shall not be visible from beyond the limits of the immediate site from which it originates. 
(6)  Curbing and landscaping. All open off-street parking areas designed to have head-in parking along the interior property line shall provide a bumper curb not less than three feet from such property line or a guard of normal bumper height to ensure that no part of any car shall project beyond the required setbacks. When such area is for six or more spaces and not located in the rear of the building, a bumper curb or fence shall be erected at the required parking setback line and grass or planting shall occupy the space between the property line and said curb or fence. 
a.  In all business and industrial districts, a minimum 15-foot setback shall be required for any impervious surface that occurs within the required front yard setback. The area within this setback shall be landscaped. 
b.  All parking which occurs within the required front yards shall be screened to at least the height of the headlights of the parked vehicles or three feet. The use of screening shall require at least two types of screening materials. 
(7)  Parking space abutting residential use districts. When a required off-street parking space for six or more vehicles is located abutting residential use districts, a compact evergreen hedge or fence of adequate design, not over six feet in height or less than 31/2 feet in height shall be erected and maintained along the residential use district property line. The fence shall not be less than 75 percent opaque. 
(8)  Maintenance of off-street parking spaces. The operator of the principal use, uses or structure shall maintain, in a neat and adequate manner, the parking space, accessways, landscaping and required curbs and fences. 
(e)  Required parking. The number of required off-street parking spaces shall be as follows: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. At least two parking spaces for each dwelling unit. A garage or carport stall shall constitute a parking space. No person in any district shall convert a garage or carport to living space unless other acceptable provisions are made to provide the required parking space. 
(2)  Schools, elementary and junior high. At least one parking space for each classroom, plus one additional space for each 50-student capacity. 
(3)  Schools, high school through college. At least one parking space for each seven students, based on design capacity, plus one for each two classrooms. 
(4)  Churches, auditoriums, funeral homes. At least one parking space for each three seats, based on the design capacity of the main assembly hall. 
(5)  Theaters, athletic fields. At least one parking space for each three seats of design capacity. 
(6)  Community centers, post offices, pool halls, libraries, private clubs, lodges. Ten spaces plus one for each 300 square feet of floor area in excess of 2,000 square feet of floor area in the principal structure. 
(7)  Hospitals. At least one parking space for each three hospital beds, plus one for each four employees. 
(8)  Golf courses, country clubs, tennis clubs, public swimming pools, marinas. 20 spaces, plus one for each 300 square feet in excess of 1,000 square feet of floor area in the principal structure. 
(9)  Rest homes, nursing homes, day nurseries. Four spaces, plus one for each 500 square feet in excess of 1,000 square feet of floor area in the principal structure. 
(10)  Office buildings, banks, professional offices. At least one off-street parking space for each 300 square feet of net floor area. 
(11)  Retail sales and service establishments. At least one off-street parking space for each 150 square feet of net floor area. 
(12)  Class II restaurants. At least one space per 50 square feet of net floor area, plus one for every three seats. 
(13)  Class I restaurants, cafes. At least one space for each three seats, based on capacity design. 
(14)  Gasoline service stations, auto repair shops. Four off-street parking spaces for each service stall. 
(15)  Bowling alleys. At least five off-street parking spaces for each alley. 
(16)  Skating rinks, dance halls, golf driving ranges, miniature golf courses, trampoline centers and similar uses. At least 15 off-street parking spaces, plus one additional space for each 300 square feet of floor area over 2,000 square feet. 
(17)  Manufacturing and processing facilities. At least four off-street parking spaces, plus one additional space for each 800 square feet of net floor area in the principal structure. At least one parking space per 11/2 employees on site at maximum shift; plus, for visitors, at least one parking space for each 25 employees; plus, for company vehicles, at least one parking space to accommodate each company-owned or leased truck or vehicle usually found on the premises. 
(18)  Shopping centers and combined commercial offices or service uses. At least one parking space per 200 square feet of gross leasable area. 
(19)  Open sales lots, lumber yards, auto sales lots, auto leasing lots. One parking space for each 2,000 square feet of land up to the first 8,000 square feet, plus one parking space for each 4,000 square feet of land up to a parcel of 24,000 square feet, plus one parking space for each 6,000 square feet thereafter. 
(20)  Commercial day care centers. One space for each teacher or employee, plus one space for every five children receiving care. 
(f)  Off-street loading and unloading. 
(1)  Location. All loading berths shall be 25 feet or more from the public street. Each loading berth shall be located with appropriate means of access to a public street in a manner that will least interfere with traffic. 
(2)  Size. Berths shall be not less than 12 feet in width and 50 feet in length. All loading berths shall maintain a height of 14 feet or more. 
(3)  Surfacing. All loading berths and accessways shall be surfaced with a minimum of bituminous material. 
(4)  Accessory use. Any area allocated as a required loading berth or access drive so as to comply with the terms of this section shall not be used for the storage of goods, inoperable vehicles, nor be included as a part of the area necessary to meet the off-street parking data. 
(5)  Screening. Loading and service areas that occur in the front of industrial buildings shall be at least 50 percent screened to a height of four feet from eye level from adjacent roadways. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1324; Ord. No. 04-03) 
Secs. 109-197-109-213. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 

Sec. 109-214. - Residential and commercial/industrial districts; shoreland ordinance. 
(a)  The dimensional standards shall apply in districts as shown in the following table: 
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
Standard A AP SFR LG-1 LG-2 LG-3 LG-HDR MPGCC MUSA MUSA Cluster Sub Lot area per dwelling unit 10 acres 40 acres 2.5 acres 40,000 square feet 60,000 square feet 10,000 square feet 1.5 acres 7,000 square feet (single-family) 
3,500 square feet (two-unit townhome) 10 acres 10,000 square feet up to 20,000 square feet Main floor area per dwelling unit, in square feet 1,040 1,040 1,040 1,040 1,200 As approved per PUD As approved per PUD 1,170 
(single-level) 
1,040 (two-story or townhome) 1,040 As approved per PUD Main floor area per two-story dwelling unit, in square feet 875 875 875 875 875 875 875 1,040 875 875 Garage floor area, in square feet 576 576 576 576 576 576 576 576 576 576 Planned unit development floor area per dwelling unit, in square feet 1,170 1,170 1,170 1,170 1,200 As approved per PUD As approved per PUD As approved per PUD 1,170 As approved per PUD Lot width at front setback line, in feet (front setback is lakeside for lake lots) 300 500 300 100 150 As approved per PUD - 85 300 100 Side yard setback from right-of-way, in feet 40 40 40 20 20 20 40 20 40 20 Side yard setback, in feet 20 20 20 10 10 10 30 10 20 10 Rear yard setback, in feet 50 50 50 30 30 10 30 20 50 25 Rear yard setback to ROW, in feet 30 30 30 Front yard setback, in feet 40 40 40 30 30 30 50 30 40 30 Front yard is lakeside, in feet (unsewered) - - - 75 75 75 - - Front yard is lakeside, in feet (sewered) - - - 50 50 50 - - Structure/septic setbacks to unrestricted wetlands, in feet 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 Minimum separation between lowest floor and mottled soils, in feet Two Two Two Two Two Two Two Two Two Two Side/rear yard setback for accessory buildings, in feet 20 20 20 - Maximum height, in feet 35 35 35 35 35 45 50 35 35 35 Maximum height of nonresidential structures without a CUP, in feet 45 45 45 45 45 45 50 45 45 45 Lot depth, in feet 150 - 150 130 130 50 150 130 (single-family) 
65 (two-unit townhome) 150 100 Impervious surface coverage 35% 25% 35% 25% 25% 25% 25% 35% 45% Standard road frontage, in feet 300 500 300 100 100 60 100 85 300 100 Cul-de-sac frontage, in feet 100 100 100 100 100 60 - 50 Outside corner lot frontage (2.5 acres), in feet 100 100 100 100 100 60 - 100 100 60 Inside corner lot frontage, in feet - - - - - 98 - - Setbacks along principal arterial streets, in feet 50 50 50 50 50 50 40 50 50 50 Standard drainage and utility easements, in feet 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 5 10 5 Driveway setback to side lot line, in feet 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 5 10 5 Maximum Primary driveway width, in feet 28 28 28 28 28 32 28 32 28 28  
COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 
Standard GB LI PI FBP Side yard setback from right-of-way, in feet 30 30 30 30 Side yard setback, in feet 20 20 20 20 1 Rear yard setback, in feet 30 30 30 30 1 Front yard setback, in feet 15 40 40 40 Structure/septic setbacks to unrestricted wetlands, in feet 25 25 25 25 Maximum height, in feet 30 / 35 2 30 / 35 2 30 / 35 2 30 / 35 2 Minimum separation between lowest floor and mottled soils, in feet Two Two Two Two Maximum height of nonresidential structures without a CUP, in feet 45 45 45 35 Lot depth, in feet 150 150 150 160 Impervious surface coverage 40% 40% 40% 65% Standard road frontage, in feet 100 100 100 100 Cul-de-sac frontage, in feet 100 100 100 100 Outside corner lot frontage (2.5 acres), in feet 100 100 100 100 Lot width at front setback line, in feet 100 100 100 100 Nonresidential lot area, in acres One One One One Building setback to residential lot line, in feet 35 75 - 50 3 Setbacks along arterial street, in feet 50 50 50 30 Setback from city or other public road right-of-way, in feet 30 30 30 30 Minimum landscaped area or green space 25% 25% 25% 25% 1 If the lot is part of an integrated development, the interior rear and side setbacks may be reduced to ten feet in order to accommodate shared use of loading dock circulation, fire lanes, and other site improvements. 2 Building height up to 35 feet if building is sprinkled. 3 The required building setbacks from a residential zoning district shall be 50 feet and shall include a landscape buffer of 15 feet in width with at least 70 percent opacity.  
SHORELAND ORDINANCE 
Standard Natural Environment Lakes Recreational Development Lakes General Development Lakes Rum River Seelye Brook Cedar Creek Unsewered structure setback, in feet 150 100 75 150 100 100 Sewered structure setback, in feet 150 75 50 150 50 50 Sewage treatment system setback, in feet 150 75 50 100 75 75 Water oriented accessory structure, in feet 10 10 10 10 10 10 Setbacks** from top of bluff (structure and controlled vegetative cutting), in feet 30 30 30 30 1 30 1 30 1 Setback** from federal, state or county right-of-way line, in feet 50 50 50 50 50 50 Lot area, in acres See section 
109-291 See section 
109-291 See section 
109-291 4 2 2 2 2 2 Lot width at building line See section 
109-291 See section 
109-291 See section 
109-291 300 3 300 3 300 3 Lot width at OHW* - - - 250 3 250 3 250 3 Shore impact zone for permitted Ag land uses 50 50 50 50 50 50 *OHW means ordinary high water mark. **All setbacks are measured from the OHW. 1 Controlled vegetative cutting near the Rum River shall be 150 feet from the OHW and 30 feet from the bluff line. Controlled vegetative cutting near Seelye Brook shall be 100 feet from the OHW and 30 feet from the bluff line. 2 Only the area above the OHW shall be used to meet lot area standards. 3 The lot width standard shall be met by both the OHW level and at the building line.  
(b)  Within the LG-3 district, dimensional standards may be superseded through the PUD process with approval of a development plan, provided that such a PUD within the LG-3 district must include waterfront property as a significant component, provide a harmonious mix of senior multifamily residential and commercial uses, include a self-contained collective wastewater treatment system, and increase public lake access, use and enjoyment by providing a lakefront trail, public dock, or similar publicly-beneficial lakefront facility. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1316; Ord. No. 01-09; Ord. No. 04-02; Ord. No. 04-03; Ord. No. 10-___; Ord. No. 12-03, § 5, 4-30-2012; Ord. No. 15-02, § 4, 3-9-2015; Ord. No. 18-06, § 1, 8-27-2018; Ord. No. 19-02, § 1, 2-11-2019; Ord. No. 19-03, § 1, 2-11-2019) 
Sec. 109-215. - Front yard setback averaging. 
    In any residential district where adjoining principal buildings existing at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived have a lesser setback than that required, the required front yard of a new structure shall not be less than the average front yard of the buildings on each side for 400 feet and in no case shall be less than 20 feet. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1308, subd. 10) 
Sec. 109-216. - Setbacks adjacent to residential areas. 
    Where a business district is adjacent to a residential district, the minimum building setback from the lot line shall be 35 feet. In the case of industrial districts, such minimum setback shall be 75 feet. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1308, subd. 11) 
Sec. 109-217. - Setbacks along arterial. 
    Along streets designated as arterial in the comprehensive plan, the minimum setback for all buildings shall be 50 feet from the planned right-of-way line. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1308, subd. 12) 
Sec. 109-218. - Height. 
    The height of structures used for churches, schools and similar uses may extend to 45 feet in residential districts with non-occupancy structures of greater height requiring a conditional use permit. The required setback from any residential lot shall be at least equal to the height, and the distance between any two detached principal buildings shall be no less than one-half the sum of the heights of the two structures. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1308, subd. 13) 
Secs. 109-219-109-246. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - GROUNDWATER PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Groundwater protection, Minn. Stats. ch. 103H. 

Sec. 109-247. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aquifer means a saturated, permeable geologic unit that can transmit and yield economic quantities of water under ordinary hydraulic gradients. 
    Best management practices (BMP) plan means a plan that incorporates practicable voluntary methods that are capable of preventing and minimizing degradation of groundwater, considering economic factors, availability, technical feasibility, implementability, effectiveness, and environmental effects. Best management practices apply to schedules of activities, design and operation standards, restrictions of practices, maintenance procedures, waste and hazardous waste management plans, practices to prevent site releases, spillage or leaks, application and use of chemicals, drainage from raw materials storage, operating procedures, treatment requirements, and other activities causing groundwater degradation. 
State Law reference- Best management practices Minn. Stats. § 103H.151. 
    Junk includes parts of machinery, motor vehicles, trailers, unused appliances stored in the open; remnants of wood; decayed, weathered or broken construction materials no longer suitable as approved building materials; metal or any other material or castoff material of any kind, whether or not the same could be put to any reasonable use. 
    Junk automobiles includes any motor vehicle, part of a motor vehicle or former motor vehicle, stored in the open, which does not have attached thereto a valid and current license plate by the proper state agency or is not in operable condition. 
    Junk yard means an open area where waste, used or secondhand materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber, tires and bottles. A junk yard includes an auto reduction yard. 
    Manicured lawn means an area that has been sodded or seeded with turf species (e.g. bluegrass, perennial rye, etc.) and is maintained with regular mowing operations and periodic applications of fertilizer and/or pesticide. 
    Moderate potential groundwater risk area means a geographic area defined by natural features where the estimated time of travel may range from several years to decades for water-borne surface contaminants from activities conducted at or near the land surface, resulting in groundwater degradation to the surficial aquifer. 
    Natural vegetative cover means the preservation or establishment of ground cover, flower beds, shrubs, or trees not requiring the use of fertilizers or pesticides after initial planting. Natural vegetative covers are encouraged as an alternative to the manicured laws. 
    Recycling facilities means facilities primarily used for the process of collecting and preparing recyclable materials and reusing the materials in their original form or using them in a manufacturing process that does not cause the destruction of recyclable materials in a manner that prevents further use. 
    Surficial aquifer means an unconfined saturated, permeable geologic unit near the ground surface, often known as the water table or uppermost aquifer. 
    URRWMO means the Upper Rum River Watershed Management Organization. 
    Very high to high potential groundwater risk area means a geographic area defined by natural features where the estimated time of travel may range from either hours to months or weeks to years for water-borne surface contaminants from activities conducted at or near the land surface, resulting in groundwater degradation to the surficial aquifer. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1020, subd. 2; Ord. No. 01-05) 
Sec. 109-248. - Purpose and authority. 
    The residents of the Upper Rum River Watershed Management Organization's (URRWMO) jurisdiction depend exclusively on groundwater from the surficial aquifer for a safe drinking water supply. The entire city is contained within the boundaries of the URRWMO. Certain land use practices and activities may seriously threaten or degrade this groundwater supply. The purpose of this article is to institute land use regulations, restrictions, and guidelines to protect the groundwater and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the residents who live within the boundaries of the URRWMO. This article is in accordance with authority granted by Minn. Stats. § 103.235 and is intended to achieve the goal of groundwater degradation prevention in concert with Minn. Stats. § 103H.001. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1020, subd. 1; Ord. No. 01-05) 
Sec. 109-249. - Groundwater protection overlay district A. 
(a)  Boundary. The groundwater protection overlay district A is a very high to high potential groundwater risk area and includes the entire city. This area is subject to the most stringent land use and development restrictions. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses within the groundwater protection overlay district A. Uses not listed below or in subsection (c) of this section are to be considered prohibited uses: 
(1)  Parks and playgrounds, provided that there are no on-site waste disposal or fuel storage tank facilities. 
(2)  Wildlife areas. 
(3)  Trails, such as biking, skiing, nature and fitness trails. 
(4)  Sewered residential with a city-approved best management practices plan. 
(5)  Unsewered (single-family) residential with a city-approved best management practices plan. 
(6)  Agricultural activities that have demonstrated or documented the implementation of best management practices, as may be determined by the state department of agriculture, for fertilizer and pesticide uses. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following may be allowed as conditional uses within the groundwater protection overlay district A. Uses not listed below or in subsection (b) of this section are to be considered prohibited uses: 
(1)  Commercial and industrial uses in unsewered areas with a city-approved best management practices plan. 
(2)  Wastewater spray irrigation facilities as approved by the state pollution control agency and operated in accord with this Code, Minnesota Rules and with all permits. 
(d)  Prohibited uses. In addition to the general prohibition on uses not listed above, the following are specifically prohibited uses within the groundwater protection overlay district A. These uses are prohibited based on the very high to high potential groundwater risk that activities routinely associated with these uses (storage, use and handling of potential pollutants) will cause contamination: 
(1)  Animal feedlots, unless constructed and operated in accordance with Minn. Rules ch. chapter 7020. 
(2)  Bulk fertilizer and/or pesticide facilities without a contingency plan prepared in accordance with Minn. Stats. § 18C.235. 
(3)  Hazardous waste storage or treatment facilities. 
(4)  Junk yards, auto reduction yards or auto salvage yards. 
(5)  Landfills. 
(6)  New cemeteries. 
(7)  Nurseries for ornamental plants, greenhouses, and pesticide and fertilizer storage and use associated with retail sales outlets that do not possess a chemigation permit, if required, in accordance with Minn. Stats. § 18C.205, or a contingency plan, in accordance with Minn. Stats. § 18C.235. 
(8)  Salt storage in uncovered facilities. 
(9)  Storage tanks of any size unless compliance with Minn. Rules ch. 7150 can be demonstrated. 
(10)  Unlicensed vehicle repair establishments. 
(11)  Wastewater spray irrigation facilities, except as approved by the state pollution control agency and operated in accord with this Code, Minnesota Rules and with all permits. 
(e)  Existing facilities. Where any of the uses listed in subsection (d) of this section exist within the groundwater protection overlay district A on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, owners of these facilities will be required to complete an approved BMP plan and upgrade their facilities to prevent groundwater degradation within five years from the date of the ordinance enactment. The BMP plan and the plans for the proposed upgrade must be approved, and the appropriate approval or permit issued by the city, prior to any work being initiated. Expansion of the prohibited use will not be allowed unless there is a concurrent BMP plan preparation and upgrade of the facilities. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1020, subd. 3; Ord. No. 01-05) 
Sec. 109-250. - Groundwater protection overlay district B. 
(a)  Applicability. No portion of the city is within groundwater protection overlay district B; therefore this section applies only if district B is extended to portions of the city at the discretion of the city council. District B standards may be adequate when reviewing a variance to district A standards. 
(b)  Boundary. The groundwater protection overlay district B is a moderate potential groundwater risk area extending from Roanoke Street N.W. to the western boundary of the URRWMO, except sections 25, 29, 30, 32, 35, and 36 in the city of St. Francis and sections 7, 9, 10, 12, and 36 in the town of Burns, as shown on the map on file in city hall. Land use restrictions within the groundwater protection overlay district B are less restrictive than in overlay district A. 
(c)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted within the groundwater protection overlay district B. Uses not listed here or in subsection (d) of this section are to be considered prohibited uses: 
(1)  All uses listed as permitted uses in groundwater protection overlay district A. 
(2)  All uses not prohibited or listed as conditional uses in this section. 
(3)  Wastewater spray irrigation facilities when as approved by the state pollution control agency and operated in accord with this Code, Minnesota Rules and with all permits. 
(d)  Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted on a case-by-case basis, providing that adequate groundwater protection or monitoring measures, as determined by the city, are instituted: 
(1)  Animal feedlots unless constructed and operated in accordance with Minn. Rules ch. 7020. 
(2)  Bulk fertilizer and/or pesticide facilities without a contingency plan prepared in accordance with Minn. Stats. § 18C.235. 
(3)  New cemeteries. 
(4)  Nurseries for ornamental plants, greenhouses, and pesticide and fertilizer storage and use associated with retail sales outlets that do not possess a chemigation permit, if required, in accordance with Minn. Stats. § 18C.205, or a contingency plan, in accordance with Minn. Stats. § 18C.235. 
(5)  Recycling facilities. 
(e)  Prohibited uses. In addition to the general prohibition on uses not listed above, the following uses are specifically prohibited within the groundwater protection overlay district B. These uses are prohibited based on the high probability that activities associated with these uses (storage, use and handling of potential pollutants) will cause groundwater contamination. 
(1)  Hazardous waste storage or treatment facilities. 
(2)  Junk yards, auto reduction yards, or auto salvage yards. 
(3)  Landfills. 
(4)  Salt storage in uncovered facilities. 
(5)  Wastewater spray irrigation facilities except as approved by the Minnesota PCA and operated in accordance with Minnesota Rules and applicable permits. 
(6)  Storage tanks of any size unless compliance with Minn. Rules ch. 7150 can be demonstrated. 
(7)  Unlicensed vehicle repair establishments. 
(f)  Existing facilities. Where any of the uses listed in subsection (e) of this section exist within the groundwater protection overlay district B on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, owners of these facilities will be required to complete an approved BMP plan and upgrade the facilities to prevent groundwater degradation within five years from the date of the ordinance enactment. The BMP plan and the plans for the proposed upgrade must be approved, and the appropriate approval or permit issued by the city, prior to any work being initiated. Expansion of the prohibited use will not be allowed unless there is a concurrent BMP plan preparation and upgrade of the facilities. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1020, subd. 4; Ord. No. 01-05) 
Sec. 109-251. - Lawn standards; recommendations. 
    These standards may be imposed by the city as a condition on new or additional development by covenant, approved landscape plan or other manner: 
(1)  Commercial/industrial lawn standard. All commercial and industrial uses are allowed to maintain up to a maximum of 60 percent of the site area as a manicured lawn. The remaining portion of the site, exclusive of impervious areas and the manicured lawn, shall be maintained in natural vegetative cover. 
(2)  URRWMO fertilizer type and application guidelines (manicured lawns). 
a.  Fertilizer usually contains nitrogen, phosphate and potash. Nitrogen is the most important lawn nutrient, but it can contaminate groundwater with nitrates. The numbers on a fertilizer bag indicate the percentage of these three plant nutrients. For example, a fertilizer labeled 10-1-4 contains ten percent nitrogen, one percent phosphate and four percent potash. 
b.  Choose a fertilizer high in water insoluble nitrogen (WIN). WIN is released slowly and helps prevent "lawn burn" and groundwater contamination. 
c.  Apply the amount of fertilizer shown in the chart below around May 1 and the same amount around September 15. If lawn watering is not practiced, apply half the amount of fertilizer shown. For example, a 3,000 square-foot lawn and a 10-1-4 fertilizer (ten percent nitrogen) used 30 pounds of fertilizer in May and 30 pounds after September 15. If lawn watering is not practiced, the same size lawn used 15 pounds each time. Set the lawn spreader at half the setting suggested on the fertilizer bag. Place the amount of fertilizer needed for 1,000 square feet (see below chart) into the spreader. Apply the fertilizer to a 1,000 square foot area. If the spreader empties before you finish, decrease the setting; if you have excess fertilizer, increase the setting. Write down the setting and use the same one each fertilizing period. 
POUNDS OF FERTILIZER TO APPLY 
Lawn area, in square feet Percent Nitrogen in Purchased Fertilizer 5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 45% 1,000 20 10 7 5 4 3 2 2,000 40 20 13 10 8 6 4 3,000 60 30 20 15 12 10 7 4,000 80 40 27 20 16 13 9 5,000 100 50 33 25 20 17 11 10,000 200 100 66 50 40 35 23 20,000 400 200 133 100 80 70 47  
(Prior Code, ch. 1020, subd. 5; Ord. No. 01-05) 
Secs. 109-252-109-280. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SHORELAND MANAGEMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Shoreland development, Minn. Stats. § 103F.201 et seq.; municipal shoreland management, Minn. Stats. § 103F.221; Riparian protection and water quality practices, Minn. Stats. § 103F.48. 

Sec. 109-281. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage and so as to give this article its most reasonable application. 
    Accessory structure means any building or improvement subordinate to a principal use which, because of the nature of its use, can reasonably be located at normal structure setbacks or greater than normal structure setbacks. 
    Best management practices (BMP) plan means a plan that incorporates practicable voluntary methods that are capable of preventing and minimizing degradation of groundwater, considering economic factors, availability, technical feasibility, implementability, effectiveness, and environmental effects. Best management practices apply to schedules of activities, design and operation standards, restrictions of practices, maintenance procedures, waste and hazardous waste management plans, practices to prevent site releases, spillage or leaks, application and use of chemicals, drainage from raw materials storage, operating procedures, treatment requirements, and other activities causing groundwater degradation. 
    Bluff means a topographic feature such as a hill, cliff, or embankment having the following characteristics (an area with an average slope of less than 18 percent over a distance of 50 feet or more shall not be considered part of the bluff): 
(1)  Part or all of the feature is located in a shoreland area; 
(2)  The slope rises at least 25 feet above the ordinary high water level of the water body; 
(3)  The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to a point 25 feet or more above the ordinary high water level which averages 25 percent or greater; and 
(4)  The slope must drain toward the water body. 
    Bluff impact zone means a bluff and land located within 20 feet from the top of a bluff. 
    Boathouse means a structure designed and used solely for the storage of boats or boating equipment. 
    Building line means a line parallel to a lot line or the ordinary high water level at the required setback beyond which a structure may not extend. 
    Commercial use means the principal use of land or buildings for the sale, lease, rental, or trade of products, goods, and services. 
    Commissioner means the commissioner of the department of natural resources. 
    Conditional use means a land use or development as defined by ordinance that would not be appropriate generally, but may be allowed with appropriate restrictions as provided by official controls upon a finding that certain conditions as detailed in chapter 109 exist, the use of development conforms to the comprehensive land use plan of the community, and the use is compatible with the existing neighborhood. 
    Deck means a horizontal, unenclosed platform with or without attached railings, seats, trellises, or other features, attached or functionally related to a principal use or site and at any point extending more than three feet above ground. 
    Dwelling site means a designated location for residential use by one or more persons using a temporary or movable shelter, including camping and recreational vehicles sites. 
    Dwelling unit means any structure or portion of a structure or other shelter designed as short-or long-term living quarters for one or more persons, including rental or timeshare accommodations such as motel, hotel, and resort rooms and cabins. 
    Extractive use means the use of land for surface or subsurface removal of sand, gravel, rock, industrial minerals, other nonmetallic minerals, and peat not regulated under Minn. Stats. §§ 93.44 to 93.51. 
    Hardship means the same as that term is defined in Minn. Stats. ch. 462. 
    Height of building means the vertical distance between the highest adjoining ground level at the building or ten feet above the lowest ground level, whichever is lower, and the highest point of a flat roof or average height of the highest ridge of a pitched or hipped roof. 
    Industrial use means the use of land or buildings for the production, manufacture, warehousing, storage or transfer of goods, products, commodities or other wholesale items. 
    Intensive vegetation clearing means the complete removal of trees or shrubs in a contiguous patch, strip, row, or block. 
    Lift means a machine or device designed to pick up, raise, or carry a person or object above the water. 
    Lot means a parcel of land designated by plat, metes and bounds, registered land survey, auditor's plot, or other accepted means and separated from other parcels or portions by said description for the purpose of sale, lease, or separation. 
    Lot width means the shortest distance between lot lines measured at the midpoint of the building line. 
    Nonriparian lot means a lot that does not have frontage on a stream, river or other watercourse. 
    Ordinary high water level. The boundary of public waters shall be an elevation delineating the highest water level that has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape, commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. 
    Public waters means any waters as defined in Minn. Stats. § 103G.005, subd. 15. 
    Public works design manual means the manual that provides a reference for developers, builders, and their engineers as well as city engineering and consultant engineering personnel, for use in design, construction, and connection to public infrastructure within the city. 
    Residential planned unit development means a use where the nature of residency is nontransient and the major or primary focus of the development is not service-oriented. For example, residential apartments, timeshare condominiums, townhouses, cooperatives, and full fee ownership residences would be considered as residential planned unit developments. To qualify as a residential planned unit development, a development must contain at least five dwelling units or sites. 
    Riparian means a lot that has frontage on a stream, river or other watercourse. 
    Setback means the minimum horizontal distance between a structure, sewage treatment system, or other facility and an ordinary high water level, sewage treatment system, top of a bluff, road, highway, property line, or other facility. 
    Sewage treatment system means a septic tank and soil absorption system or other individual or cluster type sewage treatment system as described and regulated in section 109-297. 
    Sewer system means pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, force mains, and all other construction, devices, appliances, or appurtenances used for conducting sewage or industrial waste or other wastes to a point of ultimate disposal. 
    Shore impact zone means land located between the ordinary high water level of a public water and a line parallel to it at a setback of 50 percent of structure setback. 
    Shoreland means land located the following distances from the ordinary high water level of public waters: 1,000 feet from the ordinary high water level of a lake, pond or flowage and 300 feet from a river or stream or the landward extent of a floodplain designated by ordinance on a river or stream, whichever is greater. When approved by the commissioner, the limits of shorelands may be reduced whenever the waters involved are bounded by topographic divides that extend landward from the waters for lesser distances. For the purposes of this article, any existing parcel where 50 percent or more of the parcel by area is contained within 1,000 feet from the ordinary high water level, as determined by the zoning administrator, shall be subject to the requirements of this article. 
    Steep slope means land having average slopes over 12 percent, as measured over horizontal distances of 30 feet or more, that are not bluffs. 
    Structure means any building or appurtenance, including decks, except aerial or underground utility lines, such as sewer, electric, telephone, telegraph, gas lines, towers, poles, and other supporting facilities. 
    Subdivision means land that is divided for the purpose of sale, rent, or lease, including planned unit developments. 
    Variance means the same as that term defined or described in Minn. Stats. ch. 462 and this chapter. 
    Water oriented accessory structure or facility means a small, aboveground building or other improvement, except stairways, fences, docks, and retaining walls, which, because of the relationship of its use to a surface water feature, reasonably needs to be located closer to the public waters than the normal structure setback. Examples of such structures and facilities include boathouses, gazebos, screen houses, fish houses, pump houses and detached decks. 
    Wetland means lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water table is usually at or near the surface, or the land is covered by shallow water. For purposes of this article, a wetland must: 
(1)  Have a predominance of hydric soils; 
(2)  Be inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions; and 
(3)  Under normal circumstances, support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation. 
    Wetland area means a portion of a wetland or the wetland. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1105) 
Sec. 109-282. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to provide for the wise utilization of shoreland areas in order to preserve the quality and natural character of the public waters of the city. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1102, subd. 1) 
Sec. 109-283. - Statutory authorization. 
    This article is adopted pursuant to the authorization and policies contained in Minn. Stats. § 103F.221, Minn. Rules pts. 6120.2500-6120.3900, and the planning and zoning enabling legislation in Minn. Stats. ch. 462. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1102, subd. 2) 
Sec. 109-284. - Policy. 
    The uncontrolled use of shorelands of the affects the public health, safety and general welfare, not only by contributing to pollution of public waters, but also by impairing the local tax base. Therefore, it is in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare to provide for the wise subdivision, use and development of shorelands of public waters. The state legislature has delegated responsibility to local governments of the state to regulate the subdivision, use and development of shorelands of public waters and thus preserve and enhance the quality of surface waters, conserve the economic and natural environmental values of shorelands, and provide for the wise use of waters and related land resources. This responsibility is hereby recognized by the city. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1102, subd. 3) 
Sec. 109-285. - Jurisdiction. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to the shorelands of the public water bodies as classified in section 109-290. A body of water created by a private user where there was no previous shoreland may, at the discretion of the city council, be exempt from this section. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1102, subd. 4) 
Sec. 109-286. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    It is not intended by this article to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall prevail. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1102, subd. 5) 
Sec. 109-287. - Permits required. 
(a)  A permit is required for the construction of buildings or building additions (and including such related activities as construction of decks and signs), the installation and/or alteration of sewage treatment systems, and those grading and filling activities. Application for a permit shall be made to the city building official on the forms provided. The application shall include the necessary information so that the city building official can determine the site's suitability for the intended use and that a compliant sewage treatment system will be provided. 
(b)  A permit authorizing an addition to an existing structure shall stipulate that an identified nonconforming sewage treatment system, as defined by section 109-298, shall be reconstructed or replaced in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  The building official shall issue a permit for each activity requiring a permit as specified in subsection (a) of this section. This permit will specify that the use of land conforms to the requirements of this article. Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized by permit shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1106, subd. 1) 
Sec. 109-288. - Notification to the department of natural resources. 
(a)  Copies of all notices of any public hearing to consider variances, amendments, or conditional uses under local shoreland management controls shall be sent to the commissioner or his designee and postmarked at least ten days before the hearings. Notices of hearings to consider proposed subdivisions/plats shall include copies of the subdivision/plat. 
(b)  A copy of approved amendments and subdivisions/plats and final decisions granting variances or conditional uses under local shoreland management controls shall be sent to the commissioner or to his designee and postmarked within ten days of final action. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1106, subd. 2) 
Sec. 109-289. - Variances. 
(a)  Variances shall also meet the criteria set forth in section 109-48. 
(b)  Variances may only be granted in accordance with Minn. Stats. ch. 462, as applicable. A variance may not circumvent the general purpose and intent of this article. No variance may be granted that would allow any use that is prohibited in the zoning district in which the subject property is located. Conditions may be imposed in the granting of a variance to ensure compliance and to protect adjacent properties and the public interest. In considering a variance request, the planning commission and city council must also consider whether the property owner has reasonable use of the land without the variance, whether the property is used seasonally or yearround, whether the variance is being requested solely on the basis of economic consideration, and the characteristics of development on adjacent properties. 
(c)  The planning commission and city council shall hear and decide requests for variances in accordance with the rules that it has adopted for the conduct of business. When a variance is approved after the department of natural resources has formally recommended denial in the hearing record, the notification of the approved variance required in section 109-288 shall also include the planning commission's summary of the public record/testimony and the findings of facts and conclusions which supported the issuance of the variance. 
(d)  For existing developments, the application for a variance shall clearly demonstrate whether a conforming sewage treatment system is present for the intended use of the property. The variance, if issued, shall require reconstruction of a nonconforming sewage treatment system. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1106, subd. 3) 
Sec. 109-290. - Shoreland classification system. 
    The public waters of the city have been classified below, consistent with the criteria found in Minn. Rules pt. 6120.3300 and the protected waters inventory map for the county. 
(1)  Lakes and ponds. 
Natural Environment Lakes DNR ID# Acres Grass, Township 33N Range 24W section 10, 11, 14, 15 02-92P 159 Township 33N Range 24W section 20 02-95W 15 Hickey, Township 33N Range 24W section 20, 21, 28 02-96W 73 Mud, Township 33N Range 24W section 21, 22, 27, 28 02-97P 175 Mud, Township 33N Range 24W section 6, 7; Township 33N Range 25W section 1, 12 02-105P 172 Swan, Township 33N Range 24W section 25 02-98P 273 Norris, Township 33N Range 24W section 6; Township 33N, Range 25W, section 1 02-106P 120 Township 33N Range 24W section 20 02-95W NA Township 33N Range 24W section 30 02-099W 14 Township 33N Range 24W section 6 02-276W 26 Township 33N Range 24W section 7, 18 02-285W 31 Township 33N Range 24W section 19 02-293W 10 Township 33N Range 24W section 4 02-346W 12 Township 33N Range 24W section 3, 10 02-348W 31 Township 33N Range 24W section 1/12 02-352W 73 Township 33N Range 24W section 9 02-356W 27 Township 33N Range 24W section 4, 9 02-357W 45 Township 33N Range 24W section 9 02-362W NA Township 33N Range 24W section 15 02-362W 16 Township 33N Range 24W section 16, 21 02-367W 26 Township 33N Range 24W section 29 02-369W 21 Township 33N Range 24W section 29, 32 02-371W 34 Township 33N Range 24W section 32 02-375W 130 Township 33N Range 24W section 36, 25 02-376W 12 Township 33N Range 24W section 4 02-383W NA Township 33N Range 24W section 3 02-384W NA Township 33N Range 24W section 3 02-385W NA Township 33N Range 24W section 3 02-386W NA Township 33N Range 24W section 36 02-387W 49 Township 33N Range 24W section 1, 36 02-388W NA Township 33N Range 24W section 36 02-749W 16 Recreational Development Lakes Rogers, Township 33N Range 24W section 31 104P 46 General Development Lakes George, Township 33N Range 24W section 9, 10, 15, 16 91P 486 Unnamed, Township 33N Range 24W section 17, 20 94W 63  
(2)  Rivers and streams. 
a.  Scenic. Rum River from the northwest corner of the northeast quarter of section 5 to the southwest corner of the southeast quarter of section 31, city of Oak Grove. 
b.  Tributary. 
1.  Cedar Creek from the east line of northeast quarter of section 24 to the southwest corner of section 32, City of Oak Grove. 
2.  Seelye Brook from the north line of the northwest quarter of section 6 to the midline of the southwest quarter of section 8, City of Oak Grove. 
3.  All protected watercourses in the city shown on the protected waters inventory map for the county, a copy of which is hereby adopted by reference, but not given a classification in subsections (a) or (b) of this section, shall be considered tributary. 
The Rum River is designated as a scenic river and Seelye Brook is classified as a designated tributary of the Rum River. All lands within the Rum River scenic land use district adjacent to these rivers shall also be regulated by provisions of the city's Rum River Scenic Ordinance No. 1500 and amendments thereto and any other applicable ordinance provision, whichever is more restrictive. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1108) 
Sec. 109-291. - Lot area and width standards. 
    The lot area (in square feet) and lot width standards (in feet) for single-family residential lots created after the date of enactment of the ordinance from which this section is derived for the lake and river/stream classifications are the following: 
(1)  Unsewered lakes. All types: natural environment, recreational development and general development. 
Riparian Lots Nonriparian Lots Area Width Area Width SFR 87,120 300 87,120 300  
(2)  Sewered lakes. All Types: natural environment, recreational development, and general development. 
Riparian Lots Nonriparian Lots Area Width Area Width SFR 87,120 300 87,120 300  
LG-1 Lake George 1 Area Width 40,000 100  
LG-1 Lake George 2 Area Width 60,000 150  
(3)  River/stream lot width standards. The minimum lot size requirements for rivers and streams is two acres, with the exception of the Rum River. The minimum lot size above the ordinary high water level for the Rum River is four acres. The lot width standards for single-family residential developments for the six river/stream classifications are: 
Remote Forested Transition Agricultural Urban & Tributary Scenic No Sewer Sewer Single N/A 300 300 300 300 300 300  
(4)  Additional special provisions. 
a.  Only land above the ordinary high water level of public waters can be used to meet lot area standards, and lot width standards shall be met at both the ordinary high water level and at the building line. The sewered lot area dimensions in subsection (2) of this section can only be used if publicly owned sewer system service is available to the property; 
b.  Lots intended as controlled accesses to public waters or as recreation areas for use by owners of nonriparian lots within subdivisions are permissible and shall meet or exceed the following standards: 
1.  They must meet the width and size requirements for residential lots as zoned, and be suitable for the intended uses of controlled access lots; 
2.  If docking, mooring, or over-water storage of more than six watercraft is to be allowed at a controlled access lot, then the width of the lot (keeping the same lot depth) must be increased by the percent of the requirements for riparian residential lots for each watercraft beyond six, consistent with the following table: 
CONTROLLED ACCESS LOT FRONTAGE REQUIREMENTS 
Ratio of lake size to shore length (acres/miles) Required increase in frontage (percentage) Less than 100 25 100-200 20 201-300 15 301-400 10 Greater than 400 5  
3.  They must be jointly owned by all purchasers of lots in the subdivision or by all purchasers of nonriparian lots in the subdivision who are provided riparian access rights on the access lot; and 
4.  Covenants or other equally effective legal instruments shall be developed that specify which lot owners have authority to use the access lot and what activities are allowed. The activities may include watercraft launching, loading, off-season boat storage, beaching, mooring, or docking. They shall also include other outdoor recreational activities that do not significantly conflict with general public use of the public water or the enjoyment of normal property rights by adjacent property owners. Examples of the nonsignificant conflict activities include swimming, sunbathing, or picnicking. The covenants shall limit the total number of vehicles allowed to be parked and the total number of watercraft allowed to be continuously moored, docked, or stored over water, and shall require centralization of all common facilities and activities in the most suitable locations on the lot to minimize topographic and vegetation alterations. They shall also require all parking areas, storage buildings, and other facilities to be screened by vegetation or topography as much as practical from view from the public water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1110, subd. 1; Ord. No. 04-03) 
Sec. 109-292. - Placement, design and heights of structures. 
(a)  Placement of structures on lots. When more than one setback applies to a site, structures and facilities shall be located to meet all setbacks. Where structures exist on the adjoining lots on both sides of a proposed building site, structure setbacks may be altered without a variance to conform to the adjoining setbacks from the ordinary high water level, provided that the proposed building site is not located in a shore impact zone or in a bluff impact zone. 
(1)  Location. Structures shall be located as follows: 
STRUCTURE AND ON-SITE SEWAGE SYSTEM SETBACKS (IN FEET) 
FROM ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL 
Classes of Public Waters Structures Sewage Treatment System Unsewered Sewered Lakes Natural Environment 150 150 150 Recreational Development 100 75 75 General Development 75 50 50 Rivers Remote 200 200 150 Forested and Transition 150 150 100 Agriculture, Urban, and Tributary 100 50 75 Scenic 150 150 100  
(2)  Additional structure setbacks. The following additional structure setbacks apply, regardless of the classification of the water body: 
Setback from: Setback (in feet) Top of bluff 30 Unplatted cemetery 50 Right-of-way line of federal, state, or county highway 50 Right-of-way line of town road, public street, or other roads or streets not classified 30  
(3)  Bluff impact zones. Structures and accessory facilities, except stairways and landings, shall not be placed within bluff impact zones. 
(4)  Commercial uses without water-oriented needs. Commercial uses without water-oriented needs must be located on lots or parcels without public water frontage, or, if located on lots or parcels with public water frontage, must either be set back double the normal ordinary high water level setback or be substantially screened from view from the water by vegetation or topography, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions. 
(b)  Design criteria for structures. 
(1)  High water elevations. Structures must be placed in accordance with any floodplain regulations applicable to the site. Where these controls do not exist, the elevations to which the lowest floor, including basement, is placed or flood-proofed must be determined as follows: 
a.  For lakes, by placing the lowest floor at a level at least three feet above the highest known water level, or three feet above the ordinary high water level, whichever is higher. 
b.  For rivers and streams, by placing the lowest floor at least three feet above the flood of record if data are available. If data are not available, by placing the lowest floor at least three feet above the ordinary high water level, or by conducting a technical evaluation to determine effects of proposed construction upon flood stages and flood flows and to establish a flood protection elevation. Under all three approaches, technical evaluations must be done by a state-licensed engineer consistent with Minn. Rules pts. 6120.5000-6120.6200 governing the management of floodplain areas. If more than one approach is used, the highest flood protection elevation determined must be used for placing structures and other facilities; and above the ordinary high water level, whichever is higher. 
c.  Water-oriented accessory structures may have the lowest floor placed lower than the elevation determined in this item if the structure is constructed of flood-resistant materials to the elevation; electrical and mechanical equipment is placed above the elevation; and, if long duration flooding is anticipated, the structure is built to withstand ice action and wind-driven waves and debris. 
(2)  Water-oriented accessory structures. Each lot may have one water-oriented accessory structure not meeting the normal structure setback as set forth in subsection (a) of this section if this water-oriented accessory structure complies with the following provisions: 
a.  The structure or facility shall not exceed ten feet in height, exclusive of safety rails, and cannot occupy an area greater than 250 square feet, and in the Lake George 3 (LG-3) zoning district, the facility shall not exceed eight feet in height, exclusive of safety rails, and 144 square feet in area. Detached decks shall not exceed eight feet above grade at any point; 
b.  The setback of the structure or facility from the ordinary high water level shall be at least ten feet; 
c.  The structure or facility shall be treated to reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography, increased setbacks or color, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions; 
d.  The roof may be used as a deck with safety rails, but shall not be enclosed or have a roof or canopy used as a storage area; and 
e.  The structure or facility shall not be designed or used for human habitation and shall not contain water supply or sewage treatment facilities. 
(3)  Stairways, lifts, walks, trails and landings. Stairways and lifts are the preferred alternative to major topographic alterations for achieving access up and down bluffs and steep slopes to shore area. All accesses shall meet the following design requirements: 
a.  Stairways, walks, trails, and lifts shall not exceed four feet in width on residential lots. Six-foot stairways may be used for commercial properties, public open-space and recreational properties; 
b.  Landings on residential lots shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. Landings larger than 32 square feet may be used for commercial properties, public open-space recreational and properties; 
c.  Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways, lifts or landings; 
d.  Stairways, lifts, and landings may be either constructed above the ground on posts or pilings or placed into the ground, provided that they are designed and built in a manner that ensures control of soil erosion; 
e.  Stairways, lifts, walks, trails, and landings shall be located in the most visually inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from the surface of the public water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, whenever practical; and 
f.  Facilities such as ramps, lifts, or mobility paths for persons with disabilities are also allowed for achieving access to shore area, provided that the dimensional and performance standards of items (a) to (e) of this subsection are complied with in addition to the requirements of Minn. Rules ch. 1341. 
(4)  Significant historic sites. No structure may be placed on a significant historic site in a manner that affects the values of the site unless adequate information about the site has been removed and documented in a public repository. 
(c)  Height of structures. All structures in residential districts, except churches and nonresidential agricultural structures, must not exceed 35 feet in height. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1110, subd. 2; Ord. No. 04-02; Ord. No. 04-03) 
Sec. 109-293. - Shoreland alterations. 
    Alterations of vegetation and topography shall be regulated to prevent erosion into public waters, fix nutrients, preserve shoreland aesthetics, preserve historic values, prevent bank slumping, and protect fish and wildlife habitat. 
(1)  Steep slopes. The city engineer shall evaluate possible soil erosion impacts and development visibility from public waters before issuing a permit for construction of sewage treatment systems, roads, driveways, structures, or other improvements on steep slopes. When determined necessary, conditions shall be attached to issued permits to prevent erosion and to preserve existing vegetation screening of structures, vehicles, and other facilities as viewed from the surface of public waters, assuming summer, leaf-on vegetation. 
(2)  Vegetation alterations. Vegetation removal or alteration within shore and bluff impact zones and on steep slopes shall be subject to the following standards: 
a.  Clear-cutting of trees and shrubs is prohibited. 
b.  Limited clearing, pruning, and trimming of trees and shrubs to provide a view from the principal site and to accommodate the placement of permitted stairways and landings, access paths, beach and watercraft access areas and water-oriented accessory structures or facilities may be permitted provided that: 
1.  The screening of structures, vehicles, or other facilities as viewed from the water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, is not substantially reduced; and 
2.  Along rivers, existing shading of water surfaces is preserved. 
c.  Controlled vegetative cutting near the Rum River shall be 150 feet from the ordinary high water level and 30 feet from the bluff line. Controlled vegetative cutting near Seelye Brook shall be 100 feet from the ordinary high water level. 
d.  Subsections (a)-(c) of this subsection are not applicable to the removal of trees, limbs, or branches that are dead, diseased, or pose safety hazards. 
(3)  Topographic alterations/grading and filling. 
a.  Grading and filling and excavations necessary for the construction of structures, sewage treatment systems, and driveways under validly issued construction permits for these facilities do not require the issuance of a separate grading and filling permit. However, the grading and filling standards in this subsection must be incorporated into the issuance of permits for construction of structures, sewage treatment systems, and driveways. A grading and filling permit shall be required for: 
1.  The movement of more than ten cubic yards of material on steep slopes or within shore or bluff impact zones. 
2.  The movement of more than 50 cubic yards of material outside of steep slopes and shore or bluff impact zones. 
b.  The following considerations and conditions shall be adhered to during the issuance of construction permits, grading and filling permits, conditional use permits, variance, and subdivision approvals: 
1.  Grading or filling in any wetland must be evaluated to determine how extensively the proposed activity would affect the following functional qualities of the wetland. This evaluation must also include a determination of whether the wetland alteration being proposed requires permits, reviews, or approvals under the Wetland Conservation Act or by other local, state, or federal agencies such as a watershed district, the state department of natural resources, or the United States Army Corps of Engineers. The applicant will be so advised. 
(i)  Sediment and pollutant trapping and retention; 
(ii)  Storage of surface runoff to prevent or reduce flood damage; 
(iii)  Fish and wildlife habitat; 
(iv)  Recreational use; 
(v)  Shoreline or bank stabilization; and 
(vi)  Noteworthiness, including special qualities such as historic significance, critical habitat for endangered plants and animals, or others. 
2.  Alterations shall be designed and conducted in a manner that ensures only the smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for the shortest time possible. 
3.  Mulches or similar materials shall be used, where necessary, for temporary bare soil coverage, and a permanent vegetation cover must be established as soon as possible. 
4.  Methods to minimize soil erosion and to trap sediments before they reach any surface water feature shall be used. 
5.  Altered areas shall be stabilized to acceptable erosion control standards consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water conservation districts and the United States Soil Conservation Service. 
6.  Fill or excavated material shall not be placed in a manner that creates an unstable slope. 
7.  Plans to place fill or excavated material on steep slopes must be reviewed by the city engineer for continued slope stability and shall not create finished slopes of 30 percent or greater. 
8.  Fill or excavated material shall not be placed in bluff impact zones. 
9.  Any alterations below the ordinary high water level of public waters shall first be authorized by the commissioner under Minn. Stats. § 103G.405 or 103G.407. 
10.  Alterations of topography will only be allowed if they are accessory to permitted or conditional uses and do not adversely affect adjacent or nearby properties. 
11.  Placement of natural rock riprap, including associated grading of the shoreline and placement of a filter blanket, is permitted if the finished slope does not exceed three feet horizontal to one foot vertical, the landward extent of the rip-rap is within ten feet of the ordinary high water level, and the height of the rip-rap above the ordinary high water level does not exceed three feet. 
12.  At the end of excavation or filling operations, the disturbed areas shall be restored with topsoil or other approved cover material and shall be reseeded within one growing season with native indigenous vegetation. 
13.  Excavation on shorelands where the intended purpose is connection to a public water shall require a permit from the city before construction is begun. Such permit may be obtained only after the commissioner of the department of natural resources has issued a permit for work in the beds of public waters. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1110, subd. 3) 
Sec. 109-294. - Placement and design of roads, driveways, and parking areas. 
(a)  All roads and parking areas shall be designed to take advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve maximum screening from view from public waters. Documentation shall be provided by a qualified individual that all roads and parking areas are designed and constructed to minimize and control erosion to public waters consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water conservation district, or other applicable technical materials. 
(b)  Roads, driveways, and parking areas shall meet structure setbacks and shall not be placed within bluff and shore impact zones when other reasonable and feasible placement alternatives exist. If no alternatives exist, they may be placed within these areas and must be designed to minimize adverse impacts. 
(c)  Public and private watercraft access ramps, approach roads, and access-related parking areas may be placed within shore impact zones, provided that the vegetative screening and erosion control conditions of this section are met. For private facilities, the grading and filling provisions of section 109-293 shall be met. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1110, subd. 4) 
Sec. 109-295. - Stormwater management. 
    The following general and specific standards shall apply: 
(1)  General standards. 
a.  When possible, existing natural drainageways, wetlands, and vegetated soil surfaces must be used to convey, store, filter, and retain stormwater runoff before discharge to public waters. 
b.  Development must be planned and conducted in a manner that will minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities, erosion potential and reduce and delay runoff volumes. Disturbed areas must be stabilized and protected as soon as possible and facilities or methods used to retain sediment on the site. 
c.  When development density, topographic features, and soil and vegetation conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle stormwater runoff using natural features and vegetation, various types of constructed facilities such as diversions, settling basins, skimming devices, dikes, waterways, and ponds may be used. Preference must be given to designs using surface drainage, vegetation, and infiltration rather than buried pipes and manmade materials and facilities. 
d.  New constructed stormwater outfalls to public waters must provide for filtering or settling of suspended solids and skimming of surface debris before discharge. 
(2)  Specific standards. 
a.  Impervious surface coverage of lots must not exceed 25 percent of the lot area. 
b.  When constructed facilities are used for stormwater management, documentation must be provided by a qualified individual that they are designed and installed consistent with the current edition of the city stormwater pollution prevention plan, the public works design manual and the local surface water management plan. 
c.  Prior to beginning construction, the contractor must obtain a general stormwater permit for construction activities from the state pollution control agency. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1110, subd. 5) 
Sec. 109-296. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses allowable within shoreland areas shall be subject to the review and approval procedures, and criteria and conditions for review of conditional uses established community-wide. The following additional evaluation criteria and conditions apply within shoreland areas: 
(1)  Evaluation criteria. Thorough evaluation of the water body and the topographic, vegetation, and soil conditions on the site shall be made to ensure: 
a.  The prevention of soil erosion or other possible pollution of public waters, both during and after construction. 
b.  The visibility of structures and other facilities as viewed from public waters is limited. 
c.  The site is adequate for water supply and on-site sewage treatment, if applicable. 
d.  The types, uses, and numbers of watercraft that the project will generate are compatible in relation to the suitability of public waters to safely accommodate these watercraft. 
(2)  Conditions attached to conditional use permits. The city council, upon consideration of the criteria listed in subsection (1) of this section and the purposes of this article, may attach such conditions to the issuance of the conditional use permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this article and said conditions may be more restrictive than this article. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1110, subd. 6) 
Sec. 109-297. - Water supply and sewage treatment. 
(a)  Water supply. Any public or private supply of water for domestic purposes shall meet or exceed standards for water quality of the state department of health and the state pollution control agency. 
(b)  Sewage treatment. Any premises used for human occupancy must be provided with an adequate method of sewage treatment as follows: 
(1)  Publicly owned sewer systems must be used where available. 
(2)  All private sewage treatment systems shall meet or exceed the state pollution control agency's standards for individual sewage treatment systems contained Minn. Rules ch. 7080 without appendices, a copy of which is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
(3)  On-site sewage treatment systems must be set back from the ordinary high water level in accordance with the setbacks contained in section 109-292. 
(4)  All proposed sites for individual sewage treatment systems shall be evaluated in accordance with the evaluation criteria in subsection (4) of this section. If the determination of a site's suitability cannot be made with publicly available, existing information, it shall then be the responsibility of the applicant to provide sufficient soil borings, a percolation test or other necessary information from on-site field investigation. 
a.  Depth to the highest known or calculated groundwater table or bedrock; 
b.  Soil conditions, properties, and permeability; 
c.  Slope; and 
d.  The existence of lowlands, local surface depressions, and rock outcrops. 
(5)  Nonconforming sewage treatment systems shall be regulated and upgraded in accordance with this section. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1110, subd. 7) 
Sec. 109-298. - Nonconforming sewage treatment systems. 
(a)  A sewage treatment system not meeting the requirements of this article shall be upgraded, at a minimum, at any time a permit or variance of any type is required for any improvement on or use of the property. For the purposes of this section, a sewage treatment system shall not be considered nonconforming if the only deficiency is the sewage treatment system's improper setback from the ordinary high water level. 
(b)  The city council has by formal resolution notified the commissioner of its program to identify nonconforming sewage treatment systems. The city will require upgrading or replacement of any nonconforming system identified by this program within a reasonable period of time which will not exceed two years. Sewage systems installed according to all applicable local shoreland management standards adopted under Minn. Stats. §§ 103F.201-103F.227 in effect at the time of installation may be considered as conforming unless they are determined to be failing, except that systems using cesspools, or systems with less soil treatment area separation above groundwater than required by the Minn. Rules ch. 7080 without appendices, as adopted by the city, not as written, for design of on-site sewage treatment systems, shall be considered nonconforming. 
(c)  After initial inspection for conformance, all on-site individual sewage treatment systems shall be inspected biennially for proper operation. A system shall be determined failing if it shows signs of surface discharge or seepage from a soil treatment system to the ground surface, abandoned wells, bodies of surface water, or into any rock or soil formation the structure which is not conducive to purification by filtration or into any well or other excavation in the ground. 
(d)  All properties that are found to have nonconforming on-site individual sewage treatment systems shall be required to have their wells tested and the appropriate action taken in conformance with state department of health. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1112; Ord. No. 12-03, § 1, 4-30-2012) 
Sec. 109-299. - Subdivision/platting provisions. 
(a)  Land suitability. Each lot created through subdivision, including planned unit developments authorized under section 109-305 must be suitable in its natural state for the proposed use with minimal alteration. Suitability analysis by the local unit of government shall consider susceptibility to flooding; existence of wetlands, soil and rock formations with severe limitations for development; severe erosion potential; steep topography; inadequate water supply or sewage treatment capabilities; near-shore aquatic conditions unsuitable for water-based recreation; important fish and wildlife habitat; presence of significant historic sites; or any other feature of the natural land likely to be harmful to the health, safety, or welfare of future residents of the proposed subdivision or of the community. The city, through zoning regulations and certain environmental regulations contained within this Code, prohibits dwelling units other than single-family. Duplexes, triplexes, and multiple-family dwellings are prohibited due to the lack of public utilities. Centralized sewer systems are only allowed with city council approval. Density is calculated at 21/2 acres per dwelling unit. Within a planned unit development (see section 109-102), lot size may be reduced to 1.5 acres to preserve natural features; however, overall density within a particular development will be calculated based upon 21/2 acres per dwelling unit. 
(b)  Consistency with other controls. Subdivisions must conform to all official controls of this community. A subdivision will not be approved where a later variance from one or more standards in official controls would be needed to use the lots for their intended purpose. In areas not served by publicly owned sewer and water systems, a subdivision will not be approved unless a domestic water supply is available and a sewage treatment system consistent with 109-297 can be provided for every lot. Each lot shall meet the minimum lot size and dimensional requirements of section 109-291, including at least a minimum contiguous lawn area that is free of limiting factors sufficient for the construction of two standard soil treatment systems. Lots that would require use of holding tanks must not be approved. 
(c)  Information requirements. Sufficient information must be submitted by the applicant for the community to make a determination of land suitability. The information shall include at least the following: 
(1)  Topographic contours at two-foot intervals or less from United States Geological Survey maps or more accurate sources, showing limiting site characteristics. 
(2)  The surface water features required in Minn. Stats. § 505.021, to be shown on plats, obtained from the United States Geological Survey quadrangle topographic maps or more accurate sources. 
(3)  Adequate soils information to determine suitability for building and on-site sewage treatment capabilities for every lot from the most current existing sources or from field investigations such as soil borings, percolation tests, or other methods. 
(4)  Information regarding adequacy of domestic water supply; extent of anticipated vegetation and topographic alterations; near-shore aquatic conditions including depths, types of bottom sediments, and aquatic vegetation; and proposed methods for controlling stormwater runoff and erosion, both during and after construction activities. 
(5)  Location of 100-year floodplain areas and floodway districts from existing adopted maps or data. 
(6)  A line or contour representing the ordinary high water level, the toe and the top of bluffs, and the minimum building setback distances from the top of the bluff and the lake or stream. 
(d)  Platting. All subdivisions that create two or more lots or parcels that are two acres in size shall be processed as a plat in accordance with Minn. Stats. ch. 505. No permit for construction of buildings or sewage treatment systems shall be issued for lots created after these official controls were enacted unless the lot was approved as part of a formal subdivision. 
(e)  Controlled access or recreational lots. Lots intended as controlled accesses to public waters or for recreational use areas for use by nonriparian lots within a subdivision must meet or exceed the sizing criteria in section 109-291. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1114, subds. 1-5) 
Sec. 109-300. - Standards for commercial, industrial, public, and semipublic uses. 
(a)  Surface water-oriented commercial uses and industrial, public, or semipublic uses with similar needs to have access to and use of public waters may be located on parcels or lots with frontage on public waters. Those uses with water-oriented needs must meet the following standards: 
(1)  In addition to meeting impervious coverage limits, setbacks, and other zoning standards in this article, the uses must be designed to incorporate topographic and vegetative screening of parking areas and structures; 
(2)  Uses that require short-term watercraft mooring for patrons must centralize these facilities and design them to avoid obstructions of navigation and to be the minimum size necessary to meet the need; and 
(3)  Uses that depend on patrons arriving by watercraft may use signs and lighting to convey needed information to the public, subject to the following general standards: 
a.  No advertising signs or supporting facilities for signs may be placed in or upon public waters. Signs conveying information or safety messages may be placed in or on public waters by a public authority or under a permit issued by the county sheriff; 
b.  Signs may be placed, when necessary, within the shore impact zone if they are designed and sized to be the minimum necessary to convey needed information. They must only convey the location and name of the establishment and the general types of goods or services available. The signs must not contain other detailed information such as product brands and prices, must not be located higher than ten feet above the ground, and must not exceed 32 square feet in size. If illuminated by artificial lights, the lights must be shielded or directed to prevent illumination out across public waters; and 
c.  Other outside lighting may be located within the shore impact zone or over public waters if it is used primarily to illuminate potential safety hazards and is shielded or otherwise directed to prevent direct illumination out across public waters. This does not preclude use of navigational lights. 
(b)  Uses without water-oriented needs must be located on lots or parcels without public waters frontage, or, if located on lots or parcels with public waters frontage, must either be set back double the normal ordinary high water level setback or be substantially screened from view from the water by vegetation or topography, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1114, subd. 6) 
Sec. 109-301. - Agriculture use standards. 
(a)  General cultivation farming, grazing, nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting are permitted uses if steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones are maintained in permanent vegetation or operated under an approved conservation plan (Resource management systems) consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water conservation districts or the United States Soil Conservation Service, as provided by a qualified individual or agency. The shore impact zone for parcels with permitted agricultural land uses is equal to a line parallel to and 50 feet from the ordinary high water level. 
(b)  Animal feedlots must meet the following standards: 
(1)  New feedlots must not be located in the shoreland of watercourses or in bluff impact zones and must meet a minimum setback of 300 feet from the ordinary high water level of all public waters basins; and 
(2)  Modifications or expansions to existing feedlots that are located within 300 feet of the ordinary high water level or within a bluff impact zone are allowed if they do not further encroach into the existing ordinary high water level setback or encroach on bluff impact zones. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1114, subd. 7) 
Sec. 109-302. - Forest management standards. 
    The harvesting of timber and associated reforestation must be conducted consistent with the provisions of the Minnesota Nonpoint Source Pollution Assessment-Forestry and the provisions of Water Quality in Forest Management "Best Management Practices in Minnesota." 
(Prior Code, ch. 1114, subd. 8) 
Sec. 109-303. - Extractive use standards. 
(a)  Site development and restoration plan. An extractive use site development and restoration plan must be developed, approved, and followed over the course of operation of the site. The plan must address dust, noise, possible pollutant discharges, hours and duration of operation, and anticipated vegetation and topographic alterations. It must also identify actions to be taken during operation to mitigate adverse environmental impacts, particularly erosion, and must clearly explain how the site will be rehabilitated after extractive activities end. 
(b)  Setbacks for processing machinery. Processing machinery must be located consistent with setback standards for structures from ordinary high water levels of public waters and from bluffs. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1114, subd. 9) 
Sec. 109-304. - Mining of metallic minerals and peat. 
    Mining of metallic minerals and peat, as defined in Minn. Stats. §§ 93.44-93.51, shall be a permitted use provided the provisions of Minn. Stats. §§ 93.44-93.51 are satisfied. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1114, subd. 10) 
Sec. 109-305. - Planned unit developments (PUDs) 
(a)  Site evaluation. Proposed new or expansions to existing planned unit developments (PUDs) shall be evaluated using the following procedures and standards. Preliminary plans shall be submitted to the city in accordance with this chapter. Prior to the enactment of these plans, the commissioner of the department of natural resources must grant approval. 
(1)  The project parcel shall be divided into tiers by locating one or more lines approximately parallel to a line that identifies the ordinary high water level at the following intervals, proceeding landward: 
SHORELAND TIER DIMENSIONS 
Unsewered (in feet) Sewered (in feet) General development lakes, first tier 200 200 General development lakes, second and additional tiers 267 200 Recreational development 267 267 Natural environment 400 320 All river classes 300 300  
(2)  The area within each tier is next calculated by excluding from the tier area all wetlands, bluffs, or land below the ordinary high water level of public waters. This area and the proposed project are then subjected to either the residential or commercial planned unit development density evaluation steps to arrive at an allowable number of dwelling units or building sites. 
(b)  Maintenance and design criteria. 
(1)  Maintenance and administration requirements. 
a.  Before final approval of a planned unit development, adequate provisions shall be developed for preservation and maintenance in perpetuity of open spaces and for the continued existence and functioning of the development as a community. 
b.  Deed restrictions, covenants, permanent easements, public dedication and acceptance, or other equally effective and permanent means must be provided to ensure long-term preservation and maintenance of open space. The instruments must include all of the following protections: 
1.  Commercial uses prohibited; 
2.  Vegetation and topographic alterations other than routine maintenance prohibited; 
3.  Construction of additional buildings or storage of vehicles and other materials prohibited; and 
4.  Uncontrolled beaching prohibited. 
(2)  Facility and structure design and centralization requirements. 
a.  Residential and commercial planned unit developments must be connected to publicly owned water supply and sewer systems, if available. On-site water supply and sewage treatment systems must be centralized and designed and installed to meet or exceed applicable standards or rules of the state department of health and the state pollution control agency. On-site sewage treatment systems must be located on the most suitable areas of the development, and sufficient lawn area free of limiting factors must be provided for a replacement soil treatment system for each sewage system. 
b.  Dwelling units or sites must be clustered into one or more groups and located on suitable areas of the development. They must be designed and located to meet or exceed the following dimensional standards for the relevant shoreland classification: setback from the ordinary high water level, elevation above the surface water features, and maximum height. Setbacks from the ordinary high water level must be increased for developments with density increases. 
c.  Shore recreation facilities, including, but not limited to, swimming areas, docks, watercraft mooring areas and launching ramps, must be centralized and located in areas suitable for them. Evaluation of suitability must include consideration of land slope, water depth, vegetation, soils, depth to groundwater and bedrock, or other relevant factors. The number of spaces provided for continuous beaching, mooring, or docking of watercraft must not exceed one for each allowable dwelling unit or site in the first tier. Launching ramp facilities, including a small dock for loading and unloading equipment, may be provided for use by occupants of dwelling units or sites located in other tiers. Not more than one centralized boat launching facility for each cluster shall be located in the shoreland zone. 
d.  Structures, parking areas, and other facilities must be treated to reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography, increased setbacks, color, or other means acceptable to the city administrator or designee, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions. Vegetative and topographic screening must be preserved, if existing, or may be required to be provided. 
e.  Water-oriented accessory structures and facilities may be allowed if they meet or exceed design standards contained in section 109-292(b)(2) and are centralized. 
f.  Accessory structures and facilities may be allowed if they meet or exceed standards in section 109-292(b). 
(3)  Erosion control and stormwater management. 
a.  Erosion control and stormwater management plans shall be developed and the PUD shall be designed and constructed to effectively manage reasonably expected quantities and qualities of stormwater runoff. 
b.  For commercial PUDs, impervious surface coverage within any tier shall not exceed 25 percent of the tier area, except 35 percent impervious surface coverage may be allowed in the first tier of general development lakes with an approved stormwater management plan and consistency with section 109-295. 
c.  The likelihood of serious erosion occurring either during or after construction shall be minimized by limiting the amount and length of time of bare ground exposure. Temporary ground covers, sediment entrapment facilities, vegetated buffer strips or other appropriate techniques shall be used to minimize erosion impacts on surface water features. Erosion control plans approved by a soil and water conservation district may be required if project size and site physical characteristics warrant. 
(c)  Conversions. Existing resorts or other land uses and facilities may be converted to residential planned unit developments if all of the following standards are met: 
(1)  Proposed conversions must be initially evaluated using the same procedures and standards presented in this part for developments involving all new construction. Inconsistencies between existing features of the development and these standards must be identified. 
(2)  Deficiencies involving water supply and sewage treatment, structure color, impervious coverage, open space, and shore recreation facilities must be corrected as part of the conversion or as specified in the conditional use permit. 
(3)  Shore and bluff impact zone deficiencies must be evaluated and reasonable improvements made as part of the conversion. These improvements must include, where applicable, the following: 
a.  Removal of extraneous buildings, docks, or other facilities that no longer need to be located in shore or bluff impact zone. 
b.  Remedial measures to correct erosion sites and improve vegetative cover and screening of buildings and other facilities as viewed from the water. 
c.  If existing dwelling units are located in shore or bluff impact zones, conditions are attached to approvals of conversions that preclude exterior expansions in any dimension or substantial alterations. The conditions must also provide for future relocation of dwelling units, where feasible, to other locations, meeting all setback and elevation requirements when they are rebuilt or replaced. 
d.  Existing dwelling unit or dwelling site densities that exceed standards in this part may be allowed to continue but must not be allowed to be increased, either at the time of conversion or in the future. Efforts must be made during the conversion to limit impacts of high densities by requiring seasonal use, improving vegetative screening, centralizing shore recreation facilities, installing new sewage treatment systems, or other means. 
(d)  Open space requirements. Planned unit developments must contain open space meeting all of the following criteria: 
(1)  At least 50 percent of the total project area must be preserved as open space. 
(2)  Dwelling units or sites, road rights-of-way, or land covered by road surfaces, parking areas, or structures, except water-oriented accessory structures or facilities, are developed areas and shall not be included in the computation of minimum open space. 
(3)  Open space must include areas with physical characteristics unsuitable for development in their natural state, and areas containing significant historic sites or unplatted cemeteries. 
(4)  Open space may include outdoor recreational facilities for use by owners of dwelling units or sites, by guests staying in commercial dwelling units or sites, and by the general public. 
(5)  Open space may include subsurface sewage treatment systems if the use of the space is restricted to avoid adverse impacts on the systems. 
(6)  Open space must not include commercial facilities or uses, but may contain water-oriented accessory structures or facilities. 
(7)  The appearance of open space areas, including topography, vegetation, and allowable uses, must be preserved by use of restrictive deed covenants, permanent easements, public dedication and acceptance, or other equally effective and permanent means. 
(8)  The shore impact zone, based on normal structure setbacks, must be included as open space. For residential PUDs, at least 50 percent of the shore impact zone area of existing developments or at least 70 percent of the shore impact zone area of new developments must be preserved in its natural or existing state. For commercial PUDs, at least 50 percent of the shore impact zone must be preserved in its natural state. 
(e)  Erosion control and stormwater management. Erosion control and stormwater management plans must be developed and the PUD must: 
(1)  Be designed, and the construction managed, to minimize the likelihood of serious erosion occurring either during or after construction. This must be accomplished by limiting the amount and length of time of bare ground exposure. Temporary ground covers, sediment entrapment facilities, vegetated buffer strips, or other appropriate techniques must be used to minimize erosion impacts on surface water features. A general stormwater permit for construction activities must be obtained from the state pollution control agency and a grading plan shall be developed in accordance with the current edition of the city stormwater pollution prevention plan, the public works design manual and the local surface water management; and 
(2)  Be designed and constructed to effectively manage reasonably expected quantities and qualities of stormwater runoff. 
Impervious surface coverage within any tier must not exceed 25 percent of the tier area, except that for commercial PUDs 35 percent impervious surface coverage may be allowed in the first tier of general development lakes with an approved stormwater management plan and consistency with section 109-295. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1116;; Ord. No. 04-03) 
Secs. 109-306-109-328. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - SCENIC RIVER REGULATIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Wild and Scenic Rivers Act, Minn. Stats. § 103F.301 et seq.; local ordinances regulating same, Minn. Stats. § 103F.335. 

Sec. 109-329. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agricultural use means the management of land for the production of farm crops, their storage on the area, and/or the raising thereon of domestic pets and domestic farm animals. 
    Bluff line means a line along the top of a slope connecting the points at which the slope becomes less than 13 percent. This applies to those slopes within the land use district that are beyond the setback provision from the ordinary high water level. 
    Building line means that line measured across the width of the lot at the point where the main structure is placed in accordance with setback provisions. 
    Campground means an area accessible by foot, canoe, or other vehicle and containing campsites or camping spurs for tent and trailer camping. 
    Clear cutting means the removal of an entire stand of vegetation. 
    Commissioner means the commissioner of the department of natural resources. 
    Conditional use means a use of land which is permitted only when allowed by the city council of the city after a public hearing, if certain conditions are met which eliminate or minimize the incompatibility with other permitted uses of the district. 
    Essential services means underground or overhead gas, electrical, or water distribution systems; collection, communication, supply, or disposal systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories in conjunction therewith; but not including buildings or transmission services. 
    Forestry means the use and management, including logging, of a forest, woodland or plantation and related research and educational activities, including the construction, alteration or maintenance of wood roads, skidways, landings, and fences. 
    Hardship means the property in question cannot be put to a reasonable use under the conditions allowed by this article. Economic considerations alone shall not constitute a hardship if any reasonable use for the property exists under the terms of this ordinance. 
    Land use district means those lands designated by the commissioner as the protected land corridor along the Rum River which the commissioner has designated as components of the Minnesota Wild and Scenic Rivers System. 
    Lot means a parcel of land designated by plat, metes and bounds, registered land survey, auditors plot, or other accepted means and separated from other parcels or portions by said description for the purpose of sale, lease, or separation thereof. For the purposes of these regulations, a lot shall be considered to be an individual building site which shall be occupied by no more than one principal structure equipped with sanitary facilities. 
    Mining operation means the removal of stone, sand and gravel, coal, salt, iron, copper, nickel, granite, petroleum products, or other material from the land for commercial, industrial, or governmental purposes. 
    Nonconforming use means any use of land established before the effective date of this ordinance which does not conform to the use restrictions of a particular zoning district. This should not be confused with substandard dimensions of a conforming use. 
    Open space recreational uses means recreational uses particularly oriented to and utilizing the outdoor character of an area, including hiking and riding trails, primitive campsites, campgrounds, waysides, parks and recreation areas. 
    Ordinary high water level means an elevation delineating the highest water level that has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape. In areas where the ordinary high water level is not evident, setbacks shall be measured from the stream bank of the following water bodies that have permanent flow or open water: the main channel, adjoining side channels, backwaters and sloughs. 
    Planned cluster development means a pattern of subdivision development which places housing units into compact groupings while providing a commonly owned or dedicated open space. 
    Primitive campsites means an area that consists of individual remote campsites accessible only by foot or water. 
    Selective cutting means the removal of single scattered trees. 
    Setback means the minimum horizontal distance between a structure and the ordinary high water level, bluff line, road or highway. 
    Sewage treatment system means any system for the collection, treatment and dispersion of sewage including, but not limited to, septic tanks, soil absorption systems and drain fields. 
    Single-family dwelling means a detached building containing one dwelling unit. 
    Structure means any building, sign, or appurtenance thereto, except aerial or underground utility lines, such as sewer, electric, telephone, telegraph, or gas lines, including towers, poles, and other supporting appurtenances. 
    Subdivision means improved or unimproved land or lands which are divided for the purpose of ready sale or lease, or divided successively within a five-year period for the purpose of sale or lease, into three or more lots or parcels of less than five acres each, contiguous in area and which are under common ownership or control. 
    Substandard use means any use within the land use district existing prior to the date of enactment of the ordinance from which this article is derived that is permitted within the applicable land use district but does not meet the minimum lot area, length of water frontage, structure setbacks or other dimensional standards of this article. 
    Variance means any modification or variation of this article where it is determined that, by reason of exceptional circumstances, the strict enforcement of an ordinance provision would cause unnecessary hardship. This shall be evaluated according to the provisions contained in this Code. 
    Watershed management or flood control structure means a dam, floodwall, wingdam, dike, diversion channel, or an artificially deepened or widened stream channel following the same or approximately the same course as the natural channel, or any other structure for altering or regulating the natural flow condition of a river or stream. The term "watershed management or flood control structure" does not include pilings, retaining walls, gabion baskets, rock riprap, or other facilities intended primarily to prevent erosion and which must be authorized by permit from the commissioner. 
    Wetland means land which is annually subject to periodic or continual inundation by water and commonly referred to as a bog, swamp, or marsh. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1508) 
Sec. 109-330. - Policy and authorization. 
    This article is an ordinance for the controlling of bluff land and river land development in order to protect and preserve the outstanding scenic, recreational, natural, historical and scientific values of the Rum River in Oak Grove, Minnesota, in a manner consistent with Minnesota Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (Minn. Stats. § 103F.301 et seq.), Minn. Rules pts. 6105.0010-6105.0250, and pts. 6105.1400-6105.1500 for the Rum River, hereafter referred to as the Rum River rule. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1502) 
Sec. 109-331. - Statement of purpose. 
    The ordinance from which this article is derived is adopted to achieve the policy of section 109-330 and to: 
(1)  Conserve and protect the natural scenic values and resources of the Rum River and to maintain a high standard of environmental quality. 
(2)  Regulate the area of a lot, and the length of bluff land and water frontage suitable for building sites to reduce the effects of overcrowding and provide ample space on lots for sanitary facilities. 
(3)  Regulate the setback of structures and sewage treatment systems from bluff lines and shorelines to protect existing scenic values, vegetation, soil and water quality, floodplain areas, and bedrock from human made structures or forces. 
(4)  Regulate alterations of the natural vegetation and topography. 
(5)  Maintain property values and prevent poorly planned development. 
(6)  Prevent pollution. 
(7)  Designate land use districts along the bluff land and shoreline of the Rum River. 
(8)  Comply with Minn. Rules pts. 6105.1400-6105.1500. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1504) 
Sec. 109-332. - Jurisdiction. 
    The jurisdiction of this article shall include all lands designated within the Rum River land use district boundaries within the city as defined in Minn. Rules pt. 6105.1480. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1506, subd. 1) 
Sec. 109-333. - Compliance. 
    The use of any land within the Rum River land use district; the size and shape of lots; the use and location of structures on lots; the installation and maintenance of water supply and sewage treatment systems; the filling, grading, or dredging of any river area; the cutting of vegetation or alteration of the natural topography within the district; and the subdivision of land shall be in full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. Permits from the zoning administrator are required by this article and/or other city ordinances for the construction of structures, public or private water supply and sewage treatment systems, the grading and filling of the natural topography and erection of signs within the Rum River land use districts. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1506, subd. 2) 
Sec. 109-334. - Rules. 
(a)  It is not intended by this article to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easement, covenants, deed restrictions, or land use controls. Where this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall prevail. In case of conflict between a provision of the Minnesota Wild, Scenic, and Recreational Rivers Statewide Standards and Criteria and some other law of this state or provisions of existing ordinances, the more protective provision shall apply. 
(b)  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be held to be minimum requirements, and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any powers or rights granted by state statutes. 
(c)  All distances, unless otherwise specified shall be measured horizontally. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1506, subd. 3) 
Sec. 109-335. - Administration. 
(a)  Organization provisions. The provisions of this article shall be administered by the city zoning administrator. 
(1)  Board of adjustment. The board of adjustment of the city shall act upon all questions as they arise in the administration of this article; and hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning administrator who is charged with enforcing this article as provided by state statutes. 
(2)  Fees. Permit fees, processing fees, and inspection fees as may be established by ordinance shall be collected by the zoning administrator. 
(b)  Certification. 
(1)  Requirements. Certain land use decisions which directly affect the use of land within the designated land use districts and involve any of the following actions must be certified by the commissioner as described in subsection (b)(3) of this section: 
a.  Adopting or amending an ordinance regulating the use of land, including rezoning of particular tracts of land. 
b.  Granting a variance from a provision of this article that relates to the zoning dimension provisions of this article. 
c.  Approving a plat that is inconsistent with this article. 
(2)  Approval. No such action shall be effective until the commissioner has certified that the action complies with the Minnesota Wild and Scenic Rivers Act, the statewide standards and criteria, and the management plan. 
(3)  Certification procedure. 
a.  A copy of all notices of any public hearings, or where a public hearing is not required, a copy of the application to consider zoning amendments, variances, or inconsistent plats under this article shall be sent so as to be received by the commissioner at least 30 days prior to such hearings or meetings to consider such actions. The notice or application shall include a copy of the proposed ordinance or amendment, or a copy of the proposed inconsistent plat, or a description of the requested variance. 
b.  The city council shall notify the commissioner of its final decision on the proposed action within ten days of the decision. 
c.  The commissioner shall, no later than 30 days from the time he receives notice of the final decision, communicate either certification of approval, with or without conditions, or notice of nonapproval. 
d.  The action becomes effective when and only when either: 
1.  The final decision taken by the city council has previously received certification of approval from the commissioner; 
2.  The city council receives certification of approval after its final decision; 
3.  Thirty days have elapsed from the day the commissioner received notice of the final decision, and the city council has received from the commissioner neither certification of approval nor notice of nonapproval; or 
4.  The commissioner certifies his approval after conducting a public hearing. 
e.  In case the commissioner gives notice of nonapproval of an ordinance, amendment, variance or inconsistent plat, either the applicant or the mayor may within 30 days of said notice, file with the commissioner a demand for hearing. If the demand for hearing is not made within 30 days, the notice of nonapproval becomes final. 
1.  The hearing will be held in an appropriate local community within 60 days of the demand and after at least two weeks' published notice. 
2.  The hearing will be conducted in accordance with Minn. Stats. § 103G.311, subds. 2, 6, and 7. 
3.  The commissioner shall either certify his approval or deny the proposed action within 30 days of the hearing. 
(c)  Amendments. 
(1)  Petition. Requests for amendments of this article may be initiated by a petition of affected property owners, the planning commission, or by action of the city council. An amendment not initiated by the planning commission shall be referred to the planning commission for study and report prior to action by the city council. 
(2)  Filing. An application for an amendment shall be filed with the zoning administrator. 
(3)  Public hearing. Upon receipt in proper form of the application and other requested materials, a public hearing shall be conducted in the manner prescribed by state statutes. Following the public hearing, the city council may adopt the amendment in the manner prescribed by state statutes. 
(4)  Certification from commissioner. Certification from the commissioner must be obtained as specified in subsection (b) of this section before the proposed amendment becomes effective. 
(d)  Variances. The grant of a variance requires the presence of all the following conditions: 
(1)  The strict enforcement of the land use controls will result in unnecessary hardship. 
(2)  Granting of the variance is not contrary to the purpose and intent of this article and is consistent with the River Rule, Minn. Rules, pts. 6105.1400-6105.1500. 
(3)  There are exceptional circumstances unique to the subject property that were not created by the landowner. 
(4)  Granting of the variance will not allow any use which is neither a permitted nor conditional use in the land use district in which the subject property is located. 
(5)  Granting of the variance will not alter the essential character of the locality. 
(6)  Exception for lots that do not meet the minimum lot width requirements of this article: where a setback pattern from the ordinary high water level has already been established on both sides of a proposed building site, the setback of the proposed structure may be allowed to conform to that pattern. This provision shall apply only to lots which do not meet the minimum lot width requirements of this article. 
(7)  All granted variances to the requirements of this article must be certified in accordance with subsection (b)(3) of this section before they become effective. 
(e)  Plats. 
(1)  Copies of all plats within the Rum River land use district shall be forwarded to the commissioner within ten days of approval by the city council. 
(2)  Approval of a plat that is inconsistent with this article is permissible only if the detrimental impact of the inconsistency is more than overcome by other protective characteristics of the proposal. 
(3)  All inconsistent plats approved by the city council must be certified in accordance with subsection (b)(3) of this section. 
(f)  Conditional use permit application review by DNR. A copy of all notices of any public hearing, or where a public hearing is not required, a copy of the application to consider issuance of a conditional use permit shall be sent so as to be received by the commissioner at least 30 days prior to such a hearing or meeting to consider issuance of a conditional use permit. A copy of the decision shall be forwarded to the commissioner within ten days of such action. 
(g)  Procedures summary. The following table summarizes permit, review, and certification procedures within the land use district designated by this article. 
Types of Activities Procedures Building permits LP Sign construction permits LP Water supply permits LP Sewage system permits LP Grading, filling permits LP Conditional use permits PH-FD Amendments to ordinance PH-FD-CC Variances PH-FD-CC Inconsistent plats PH-FD-CC Planned cluster developments PH-PA-FD-CC Plats FD  
LP Permit issued by the local authority in accordance with this article and all other local ordinances. PH Copy of public hearing notice or application sent so as to be received by the commissioner at least 30 days prior to hearing or meeting. FD Local authority forwards decision to the commissioner within ten days after taking final action. CC Action becomes effective only when commissioner certifies its compliance with the Act, statewide standards and criteria, and the Rum River rule. PA Preliminary plans approved by commissioner prior to their enactment by local authority.  
(Prior Code, ch. 1520) 
Sec. 109-336. - Land use district provisions. 
(a)  Districts. 
(1)  In order to preserve and protect the Rum River and its adjacent lands which possess outstanding scenic, recreational, natural, historical, scientific and similar values, the Rum River in the city has been given the scenic river classification and the uses and classification of this river and its adjacent lands are hereby designated by land use zoning districts, the boundaries of which are based on the Rum River Rule, Minn. Rules pts. 6105.1400-6105.1500. 
(2)  The boundaries of the Rum River scenic land use district are shown on the map designated as the city official zoning map, which is made a part of this article and is on file with the zoning administrator. In case of conflict between the map and the property descriptions in the Rum River Rule, the latter shall prevail. 
(3)  If land is annexed, incorporated, or in any other way transferred to another jurisdiction, a moratorium shall exist on all construction, grading and filling, and vegetative cutting until this zoning ordinance is amended. The amended zoning shall meet the provisions of the plan which applied to the land before the transfer. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of establishing standards and criteria for the management of the Rum River land use district shall be to preserve and protect existing natural, scenic, historical, scientific, and recreational values, to reduce the effects of overcrowding and poorly planned development of adjacent lands, to prevent pollution, to preserve natural beauty and quietude, to maintain proper relationships between various land use types, and to prohibit new uses that are inconsistent with the statewide standards and criteria for Wild and Scenic Rivers, Minn. Rules pts. 6105.0010-6105.0250. 
(c)  Conditional uses. In the following table of uses: 
(1)  P means permitted use. 
(2)  C means conditional use. 
(3)  Certain of the following uses are subject to the zoning dimension provisions and sanitary provisions of section 109-338 and chapter 8. All of the following uses are subject to the vegetative cutting and grading and filling provisions of section 109-339. 
SCENIC RIVER DISTRICT 
Governmental campgrounds, subject to management plan specifications and approval by the commissioner P Private campgrounds, subject to management plan specifications and approval by the commissioner C Public accesses, road access type with boat launching facilities subject to management plan specifications and approval by the commissioner P Public accesses, trail access type, subject to management plan specifications and approval by the commissioner P Temporary docks C Other governmental open space recreational uses, subject to management plan specifications and approval by the commissioner P Other private open space recreational uses, subject to management plan specifications and approval by the commissioner C Agricultural uses P Single-family residential uses P Forestry uses P Essential services P Sewage treatment systems P Private roads and minor public streets P Signs approved by federal, state, or local government which are necessary for public health and safety and signs indicating areas that are available or not available for public use P Signs not visible from the river that are not specified above P Governmental resource management for improving fish and wildlife habitat; wildlife management areas; nature areas; accessory roads P Utility transmission power lines and pipelines, subject to the provisions of section 109-339 C Public roads, subject to the provisions of section 109-339 C  
(4)  All uses not listed as permitted or conditional uses shall not be allowed. 
(d)  Nonconforming uses. Uses that are prohibited by this section but which are in existence prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be nonconforming uses. Such uses shall not be intensified, enlarged, or expanded beyond the permitted or delineated boundaries of the use or activity as stipulated in the most current permit issued prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1510) 
Sec. 109-337. - Zoning dimensions. 
(a)  Minimum district dimensional requirements. The following chart sets forth the minimum lot size and width, setbacks, and other requirements: 
SCENIC RIVER DISTRICT 
Minimum lot size above ordinary high water level 4 acres Lot width at building line 300 feet Lot width at ordinary high water level 250 feet Structure setback from ordinary high water level 150 feet Structure setback from bluff line 30 feet On-site sewage treatment system setback from ordinary high water level 100 feet Maximum structure height except for buildings used primarily for agriculture purposes 35 feet Controlled vegetative cutting area: (see section 109-339) from ordinary high water level 150 feet from bluff line 30 feet  
(b)  Seelye Brook. On Seelye Brook, a tributary designated in the Rum River Rule, Minn. Rules pt. 6105.1440, subpt. 2, the following setbacks also apply within the Rum River land use district: 
(1)  Structure setback from ordinary high water level shall be 100 feet. 
(2)  On-site sewage treatment system setback from ordinary high water level shall be 75 feet. 
(3)  Controlled vegetative cutting area from ordinary high water level shall be 100 feet (see section 109-339). 
(c)  Density. The density of dwelling units shall not exceed one dwelling unit per lot. 
(d)  Location. Structures shall not be located on slopes greater than 12 percent, unless such structures are screened from the river view with natural vegetation where practicable, the sanitary provisions of this plan are complied with, and the building permit applicant can prove to the local zoning authority that any potential erosion or sedimentation problems related to locating a structure either do not exist or that adequate measures will be taken to prevent any of these problems through special construction methods. 
(e)  Floodway. No structures shall be placed in any floodway. Structures proposed within a floodplain shall be consistent with the city's floodplain ordinance and/or statewide Standards and Criteria for Management of Floodplain Areas of Minnesota (Minn. Rules pts. 6120.5100-6120.6200). 
(f)  Substandard lots. 
(1)  Lots of record in the office of the county recorder on the effective day of enactment of the ordinance from which this section is derived which do not meet the dimensional requirements of this section may be allowed as building sites by the city council, provided that the proposed use is permitted in the land use district, the lot was in separate ownership on the date of enactment of the ordinance from which this section is derived, all sanitary requirements are complied with, and dimensional provisions are complied with to the greatest extent practicable. 
(2)  If, in a group of two or more contiguous lots under a single ownership, any individual lot does not meet the minimum lot width requirements of this section, such individual lot cannot be considered as a separate parcel of land for purposes of sale or development, but must be combined with adjacent lots under the same ownership so that the combination of lots will equal one or more parcels of land each meeting the lot width requirements of this article, except that such lots which meet or exceed 60 percent or more of the lot width standards of this section may be considered as a separate parcel of land for the purpose of sale or development, if on-site sewage treatment systems can be installed so as to comply with this article. 
(g)  Substandard uses. All uses in existence prior to the effective date of enactment or amendment of the ordinance from which this section is derived which are permitted uses within the Rum River land use district, but do not meet the minimum lot area, setbacks or other dimensional requirements of this article are substandard uses. All substandard uses, except for substandard signs, shall be allowed to continue subject to the following conditions and exceptions: 
(1)  Any structural alteration or addition to a substandard use which will increase the substandard dimensions shall not be allowed. 
(2)  Substandard signs shall be gradually eliminated over a period of time not to exceed five years from the date of enactment or amendment of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1512) 
Sec. 109-338. - Sanitary provisions. 
(a)  Sewage treatment. Any premises intended for human occupancy must be provided with an adequate method of sewage treatment. Publicly owned sewer systems must be used where available. Where public systems are not available, all private sewage treatment systems must meet or exceed applicable rules of the state department of health, the state pollution control agency, specifically Minn. Rules ch. 7080 for individual sewage treatment systems, section 109-337 and any other applicable local government standards. 
(b)  Nonconforming sewage treatment systems. A nonconforming sewage treatment system not meeting the requirements of subsection (a) of this section must be upgraded, at a minimum, whenever a permit or variance of any type is required for any improvement on, or use of, the property. For the purposes of this provision, a sewage treatment system shall not be considered nonconforming if the only deficiency is the sewage treatment system's improper setback from the ordinary high water level. All nonconforming sewage treatment systems shall be brought into conformity or discontinued within two years of the date of enactment of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1514, subd. 1) 
Sec. 109-339. - Landscape alterations. 
(a)  Vegetative cutting. The vegetative cutting provisions in subsection (a)(1) of this section shall apply to those areas specified in section 109-337 (a) and subsection (b)(3) of this section. 
(1)  Provisions. General provisions, within designated setback areas, include: 
a.  Clear cutting, except for any authorized public services such as roads and utilities, shall not be permitted. 
b.  Selective cutting of trees in excess of four inches in diameter at a four-foot height is permitted, provided that cutting is spaced in several cutting operations and a continuous tree cover is maintained, uninterrupted by large openings. 
c.  The cutting provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this subsection shall not be deemed to prevent: 
1.  The removal of diseased or insect-infested trees, or of rotten or damaged trees that present safety hazards. 
2.  Pruning understory vegetation, shrubs, plants, bushes, grasses, or harvesting crops, or cutting suppressed trees less than four inches in diameter at breast height. 
(2)  Clear cutting. Clear cutting anywhere in the designated land use district on the Rum River is subject to the following standards and criteria: 
a.  Clear cutting shall not be used as a cutting method where soil, slope, or other watershed conditions are determined by the zoning administrator to be fragile and subject to severe erosion and/or sedimentation. 
b.  Clear cutting shall be conducted only where clear-cut blocks, patches or strips are, in all cases, shaped and blended with the natural terrain. 
c.  The size of clear-cut blocks, patches or strips shall be kept at the minimum necessary. 
d.  Where feasible, all clear cuts shall be conducted between September 15 and May 15. If natural regeneration will not result in adequate vegetative cover, areas in which clear cutting is conducted shall be replanted to prevent erosion and to maintain the aesthetic quality of the area. Where feasible, replanting shall be performed in the same spring, or the following spring. 
(b)  Grading, filling, alterations of the beds of public waters. Grading and filling of the natural topography that is not accessory to a permitted or conditional use shall not be permitted. 
(1)  Permit. Grading and filling of the natural topography that is accessory to a permitted or conditional use shall not be conducted without a grading and filling permit from the zoning administrator. A grading and filling permit may be issued only if the following conditions are properly satisfied: 
a.  Grading and filling shall be performed in a manner which minimizes earthmoving, erosion, tree clearing, and the destruction of natural amenities. 
b.  The smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for as short a time as feasible. 
c.  Temporary ground cover, such as mulch, is used and permanent ground cover, such as sod, is planted. 
d.  Methods to prevent erosion and trap sediment are employed. Methods are identified in Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas, Best Management Practices for Minnesota, published in October 1989, and the Minnesota Construction Site Erosion and Sediment Control Planning Handbook. 
e.  Fill is stabilized to accepted engineering standards. 
(2)  Permits from state. Excavation of material from, or filling in a wild, scenic or recreational river, or construction of any permanent structures or navigational obstructions therein is prohibited unless authorized by a permit from the commissioner pursuant to Minn. Stats. § 103G.245. Minn. Stats. § 103G.245 requires a permit from the commissioner before any change is made in the course, current, or cross section of public waters. 
(3)  Wetlands. Drainage or filling in of wetlands is not allowed within the land use districts designated by this section. 
(c)  Utility transmission crossings. 
(1)  License. All utility crossings of the Rum River or state lands within the Rum River land use district require a license from the commissioner pursuant to Minn. Stats. § 84.415. 
(2)  Permit. All utility transmission crossings constructed within the Rum River land use district shall require a conditional use permit. The construction of such transmission services shall be subject to Minn. Rules pts. 6105.0170 and 6105.0180. No conditional use permit shall be required for high voltage transmission lines under control of the environmental quality board pursuant to Minn. Stats. § 216E.10. 
(d)  Public roads. 
(1)  Construction or reconstruction permits. In addition to such permits as may be required by Minn. Stats. § 103G.245, a conditional use permit shall be required for any construction or reconstruction of public roads within the Rum River land use district. Such construction or reconstruction shall be subject to Minn. Rules pts. 6105.0190 and 6105.0200. 
(2)  Definition. The term "public roads" includes county and municipal roads, streets and highways that serve or are designed to serve flows of traffic between communities or other traffic-generating areas. A conditional use permit is not required for minor public streets, which are streets intended to serve primarily as an access to abutting properties. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1516) 
Sec. 109-340. - Subdivisions. 
(a)  Land suitability. 
(1)  Unsuitable land. No land shall be subdivided which is determined by the local government, or the commissioner, to be unsuitable because of flooding, inadequate drainage, soil and rock formations with severe limitations for development, severe erosion potential, unfavorable topography, inadequate water supply or sewage treatment capabilities or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety, or welfare of the future residents of the proposed subdivision or the community. 
(2)  Tests required. No plat or subdivision within the Rum River district shall be approved by the city until the applicant has proven to the local zoning authority through percolation-rate tests, soils boring tests and other requirements of Minn. Rules ch. 7080 without appendices, specifically as adopted by the city, that every newly platted lot found within the land use district has adequate area and a suitable location for the installation of a conforming septic tank, soil absorption system and a back-up site. 
(3)  Exception. The provisions otherwise set forth in this section and in chapter 107 shall apply to all plats except planned cluster developments. 
(b)  Planned cluster developments. A planned cluster development may be allowed only when the proposed clustering provides a better means of preserving agricultural land, open space, woods, scenic views, wetlands, and other features of the natural environment than traditional subdivision development. Developments shall also be subject to city PUD requirements, whichever are more restrictive. Smaller lot sizes may be allowed as exceptions to this section for planned cluster developments, provided that: 
(1)  Preliminary plans are approved by the commissioner prior to their enactment by the city council. 
(2)  Central sewage facilities are installed which meet the standards, criteria, rules or regulations of the state department of health and the state pollution control agency. 
(3)  Open space is preserved. This may be accomplished through the use of restrictive deed covenants, public dedications, granting of scenic easements, or other equally effective and permanent methods. 
(4)  There is not more than one centralized boat launching/docking facility for each cluster. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1518) 
Secs. 109-341-109-368. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Floodplain Management Law, Minn. Stats. § 103F.101 et seq.; local floodplain management ordinances, Minn. Stats. § 103F.121. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 109-369. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage and so as to give this article its most reasonable application. 
    Accessory use or structure means a use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure. 
    Basement means any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless of the depth of excavation below ground level. 
    Flood fringe means that portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway. 
    Floodplain means the channel or beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or watercourse that have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood. Floodplain areas within the city shall encompass all areas designated as Zone A and Zones A1-30 on the flood insurance rate map adopted in section 109-374. 
    Floodway means the bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplain that are reasonably required to carry or store the regional flood discharge. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, that is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include the term "recreational vehicle." 
    Obstruction means any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, dredged spoil, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, stockpile of sand or gravel or other material, or matter in, along, across, or projecting into any channel, watercourse, lake bed, or regulatory floodplain which may impede, retard, or change the direction of flow, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by floodwater. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle that is built on a single chassis, is 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest projection, is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. For the purposes of this article, the term "recreational vehicle" shall be synonymous with the term "travel trailer/travel vehicle." 
    Regional flood means a flood that is representative of large floods known to have occurred generally in the state and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in magnitude of the 100-year recurrence interval. The term "regional flood" is synonymous with the term "base flood" used on the flood insurance rate map. 
    Regulatory flood protection elevation means an elevation no lower than one foot above the elevation of the regional flood, plus any increases in flood elevation caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from designation of a floodway. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground or on-site utilities, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes, travel trailers/vehicles not meeting the exemption criteria specified in section 109-431 (1) and other similar items. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure where the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means, within any consecutive 365-day period, any reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair), repair after damage, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. The term "substantial improvement" includes structures that have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include: 
(1)  Any project for the improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. For the purpose of this article, the term "historic structure" shall be as defined in 44 CFR part 59.1. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1602, subd. 4; Ord. No. 06-05) 
Sec. 109-370. - Statutory authorization. 
    The legislature of the state has, in Minn. Stats. chs. 103F and 462, delegated the authority to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Minn. Stats. ch. 103F further stipulates that communities subject to recurrent flooding must participate and maintain eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program. Therefore, the city does ordain as follows. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1600, subd. l; Ord. No. 06-05) 
Sec. 109-371. - Statement of purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish and maintain the community's eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program and to minimize potential losses due to periodic flooding, including loss of life, loss of property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. The development of the floodplain district of the city could result in the potential loss of life and property, create health and safety hazards, and lead to extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief. Since development of these areas is not essential to the orderly growth of the community and since these lands are suitable for open space uses that do not require structures or fill, the city council does ordain as follows. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1600, subd. 2; Ord. No. 06-05) 
Sec. 109-372. - Warning of disclaimer of liability. 
    This article does not imply that areas outside of the floodplain district or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding and flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city of Oak Grove or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decisions lawfully made thereunder. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1600, subd. 3; Ord. No. 06-05) 
Sec. 109-373. - National Flood Insurance Program compliance. 
    This article is adopted to comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program codified as 44 CFR parts 59-78, as amended, so as to establish and maintain the community's eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1600, subd. 4; Ord. No. 06-05) 
Sec. 109-374. - Adoption of maps by reference. 
    The following maps together with all attached material are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of the Official Zoning Map and this article. The attached material includes the Flood Insurance Study for Anoka County, Minnesota, and incorporated areas and the Flood Insurance Rate Map panels enumerated below, all dated December 16, 2015 and all prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. These materials are on file in the office of the city clerk and zoning administrator. 
27003C0045E 27003C0065E 27003C0070E 27003C0157E 27003C0159E 
27003C0167E 27003C0176E 27003C0178E 27003C0180E 27003C0181E 
27003C0182E 27003C0183E 27003C0184E 27003C0186E 27003C0187E 
(Prior Code, ch. 1602, subd. l; Ord. No. 06-05; Ord. 15-07, § 1, 11-30-2015) 
Sec. 109-375. - Lands to which article applies. 
    This article shall apply to all lands designated as floodplain within the jurisdiction of the city. Floodplain areas within the city shall encompass all areas designated as floodway, zone AE and Zone A as shown on the flood insurance rate map adopted in section 109-374. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1602, subd. 2; Ord. No. 06-05; Ord. 15-07, § 2, 11-30-2015) 
Sec. 109-376. - Interpretation of floodplain district. 
    The boundaries of the floodplain district shall be determined by scaling distances on the official floodplain zoning district map. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the floodplain district, the city administrator or designee shall make the necessary interpretation based on the ground elevations that existed on the site at the time the community adopted its initial floodplain ordinance or the date of the first National Flood Insurance Program map that placed the site in the floodplain if earlier and the regional (100-year) flood profile, if available. If 100-year flood elevations are not available, the community shall: 
(1)  Require a floodplain evaluation consistent with this section to determine a 100-year flood elevation for the site; or 
(2)  Base its decision on available hydraulic/hydrologic or site elevation survey data that demonstrates the likelihood the site is within or outside of the floodplain. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1602, subd. 3; Ord. No. 06-05) 
Sec. 109-377. - Annexations. 
    The flood insurance rate map panels adopted by reference into section 109-374 may include floodplain areas that lie outside of the corporate boundaries of the city at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. If any of these floodplain land areas are annexed into the city after the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the newly annexed floodplain lands shall be subject to the provisions of this article immediately upon the date of annexation into the city. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1602, subd. 5; Ord. No. 06-05) 
Sec. 109-378. - The floodplain district as overlay zoning district. 
    The floodplain zoning district shall be considered an overlay zoning district to all existing land use regulations of the community. The uses permitted in sections 109-428 and 109-429 shall be permitted only if not prohibited by any established, underlying zoning district. The requirements of this article shall apply in addition to other legally established regulations of the community and where this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall apply. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1604, subd. l; Ord. No. 06-05) 
Sec. 109-379. - Compliance. 
    No new structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be constructed, located, extended, converted, repaired, maintained, or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this article. Within the floodway and flood fringe, all uses not listed as permitted uses in section 109-428 shall be prohibited. In addition, a caution is provided here that: 
(1)  New residential and commercial structures, new manufactured homes, and replacement manufactured homes are prohibited in the floodplain. 
(2)  Recreational vehicles are subject to the general provisions of this article and specifically sections 109-428 and 109-431. 
(3)  Modifications, repair and maintenance, additions, structural alterations or repair after damage to existing nonconforming structures and nonconforming uses of structures or land are regulated by the general provisions of this article and specifically sections 109-407 and 109-428. 
(4)  As-built elevations for elevated structures must be certified by elevation surveys as stated in this article, division 2. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1604, subd. 2; Ord. No. 06-05) 
Secs. 109-380-109-399. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 109-400. - Amendments. 
    All amendments to this article, including revisions to the official floodplain zoning district map, shall be submitted to and approved by the commissioner of natural resources prior to adoption. The floodplain designation on the official floodplain zoning district map shall not be removed unless the area is filled to an elevation at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation and is contiguous to lands outside of the floodplain. Changes in the official zoning map must meet the Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA) technical conditions and criteria and must receive prior FEMA approval before adoption. The commissioner of natural resources must be given ten days' written notice of all hearings to consider an amendment to this article and said notice shall include a draft of the ordinance amendment or technical study under consideration. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1620; Ord. No. 06-05) 
Sec. 109-401. - Permit required. 
    A permit issued by the building official or city administrator or designee as appropriate shall be secured prior to the erection, addition, modification, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair), or alteration of any building or structure or portion thereof; prior to the use or change of use of a building, structure, or land; prior to the construction of a dam, fence, or on-site septic system, prior to the change or extension of a nonconforming use; prior to the repair of a structure that has been damaged by flood, fire, tornado, or any other source; and prior to the excavation of materials or the storage of materials or equipment within the floodplain. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1612, subd. 1; Ord. No. 06-05) 
Sec. 109-402. - State and federal permits. 
    Prior to granting a permit or processing an application for a variance, the building official or city administrator or designee as appropriate shall determine that the applicant has obtained all necessary state and federal permits. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1612, subd. 2; Ord. No. 06-05) 
Sec. 109-403. - Certification of lowest floor elevations. 
    If a variance is granted to authorize the construction of a building in the floodplain, then the applicant shall be required to submit certification by a registered professional engineer, registered architect, or registered land surveyor that the finished building elevations were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this article. The building official shall maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) for all existing structures in the floodplain district. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1612, subd. 3; Ord. No. 06-05) 
Sec. 109-404. - Notifications for watercourse alterations. 
    The city administrator or designee shall notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the commissioner of the department of natural resources prior to the community authorizing any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. If the applicant has applied for a permit to work in the beds of public waters pursuant to Minn. Stats. ch. 103G, this shall suffice as adequate notice to the commissioner of natural resources. A copy of said notification shall also be submitted to the Chicago Regional Office of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(Prior Code, ch. 1612, subd. 4; Ord. No. 06-05) 
Sec. 109-405. - Notification to FEMA when physical changes increase or decrease the 100-year flood elevation. 
    As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the date such supporting information becomes available, the city administrator or designee shall notify the Chicago Regional Office of FEMA of the changes by submitting a copy of said technical or scientific data. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1612, subd. 5; Ord. No. 06-05) 
Sec. 109-406. - Variances. 
(a)  The term "variance" means a modification of a specific permitted development standard required in an official control, including this article, to allow an alternative development standard not stated as acceptable in the official control, but only as applied to a particular property for the purpose of alleviating a hardship, practical difficulty or unique circumstance as defined and elaborated upon in a community's respective planning and zoning enabling legislation and this article. 
(b)  The board of adjustment may authorize upon appeal in specific cases such relief or variance from the terms of this article as will not be contrary to the public interest and only for those circumstances such as hardship, practical difficulties or circumstances unique to the property under consideration, as provided for in the respective enabling legislation for planning and zoning for cities. In the granting of such variance, the board of adjustment shall clearly identify in writing the specific conditions that existed consistent with the criteria specified in this article, any other zoning regulations of the community, and the criteria specified in the respective enabling legislation which justified the granting of the variance. The following additional variance criteria of the Federal Emergency Management Agency must be satisfied: 
(1)  Variances shall not be issued by a community within any designated regulatory floodway. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued by a community upon: 
a.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would resulting exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(c)  Variances from the provisions of this article may be authorized where the board of adjustment has determined the variance will not be contrary to the public interest and the spirit and intent of this article. No variance shall allow in any district a use prohibited in that district or permit a lower degree of flood protection than the regulatory flood protection elevation. Variances may be used to modify permissible methods of flood protection. 
(d)  The board of adjustment shall submit by mail to the commissioner of natural resources a copy of the application for proposed variance sufficiently in advance so that the commissioner will receive at least ten days' notice of the hearing. A copy of all decisions granting a variance shall be forwarded by mail to the commissioner of natural resources within ten days of such action. 
(e)  Appeals. Appeals from any decision of the board of adjustment may be made, and as specified in this community's official controls and also state statutes. 
(f)  Flood insurance notice and recordkeeping. The city administrator or designee shall notify the applicant for a variance that: 
(1)  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage; and 
(2)  Such construction below the 100-year or regional flood level increases risks to life and property. 
Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions. This community shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its annual or biennial report submitted to the administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1614; Ord. No. 06-05) 
Sec. 109-407. - Nonconformities. 
    A structure or the use of a structure or premises that was lawful before the passage or amendment of the ordinance from which this section is derived but that is not in conformity with the provisions of this article may be continued subject to the following conditions. Historic structures, as defined in section 109-369, shall be subject to the provisions sections 109-369-109-372. 
(1)  No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged, or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity. 
(2)  A structural alteration within the inside dimensions of a nonconforming use or structure is permissible provided it utilizes flood resistant materials so as not to result in increasing the flood damage potential of that use or structure. 
(3)  If any nonconforming use of a structure or land or nonconforming structure is substantially damaged, as defined by section 109-369, it shall not be reconstructed in the floodplain district. 
(4)  A substantial improvement, as defined in section 109-370, shall not be allowed in the floodplain district. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1616; Ord. No. 06-05) 
Secs. 109-408-109-427. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 109-428. - Permitted uses, standards, and floodplain evaluation criteria. 
(a)  Permitted uses in the floodplain. The uses of land in subsections (a)(1)-(5) of this section are permitted uses in the floodplain district. These uses shall be subject to the development standards in subsection (b) of this section and the floodplain evaluation criteria in this subsection (a) of this section for determining floodway and flood fringe boundaries. 
(1)  Any passive open space use of land that does not involve a structure or a fence that does not obstruct flood flows. 
(2)  Any use of land involving the construction of a fence that does not obstruct flood flows, or the storage of materials or equipment, provided these activities do not obstruct flood flows and are located in the flood fringe portion of the floodplain and included compensatory floodwater storage area greater than or equal to the volume the activities displace. 
(3)  Recreational vehicle campgrounds or subdivisions and placement of recreational vehicles on individual lots of record if in compliance with the provisions of section 109-431. 
(4)  The structural alteration to the inside dimensions of a nonconforming structure or the repair of a nonconforming structure damaged from any source if in conformance with section 109-407. 
(5)  Structural works for flood control such as levees and floodwalls constructed to any height where the intent is to protect individual structures and levees or dikes where the intent is to protect agricultural crops for a frequency flood event equal to or less than the ten-year frequency flood event in the floodway or to any frequency event in the flood fringe. Fill placed in the floodway shall not cause an increase in the 100-year flood elevation. 
(6)  New structures, accessory structures such as garages and storage sheds, repair of substantially damaged structures, additions to nonconforming structures/uses, excavation of grounds materials, fill, except for the construction of flood control structures, construction of utilities, railroads, roads and bridges allowed in subsection (a)(5) of this section and section 109-429 respectively, decks, patios, and other similar items shall not be allowed in the floodplain. 
(b)  Standards for floodplain permitted uses. 
(1)  No fill material shall be brought on or moved from within the site to elevate structures out of the floodplain. Any fill or structure placed in the floodplain not in accordance with this article shall be removed at the property owner's expense. Fill shall be properly compacted and the slopes shall be properly protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable method. Placement of fill shall include compensatory floodwater storage area greater than or equal to the volume the activities displace. 
(2)  Storage of materials and equipment. 
a.  The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or plant life is prohibited. 
b.  Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning. 
(3)  No use shall be permitted that will adversely affect the capacity of the channels or floodways of any tributary to the main stream, or of any drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or system. 
(4)  Structural works for flood control that will change the course, current or cross section of protected wetlands or public waters shall be subject to the provisions of Minn. Stats. ch. 103G. A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the floodway shall not cause an increase to the 100-year or regional flood and the technical analysis must assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides of a stream. 
(5)  On-site sewage treatment and water supply systems. Where public utilities are not provided: 
a.  On-site water supply systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; and 
b.  New or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters and they shall not be subject to impairment or contamination during times of flooding. 
Any sewage treatment system designed in accordance with the state's current statewide standards for on-site sewage treatment systems, as amended by the city, shall be determined to be in compliance with this section. 
(c)  Floodplain evaluation. 
(1)  Upon receipt of an application for a permit for a use or other approval within the floodplain district, the applicant shall be required to furnish such of the following information as is deemed necessary by the zoning administrator for the determination of the regulatory flood protection elevation whether the proposed use is within the floodway or flood fringe or whether any fill placed in the floodway will cause an increase in the 100-year flood elevation: 
a.  A typical valley cross section showing the channel of the stream, elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the channel, cross sectional areas to be occupied by the proposed development, and high water information. 
b.  Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground, pertinent structure, fill, or storage elevations, the size, location, and spatial arrangement of all proposed and existing structures on the site, and the location and elevations of streets. 
c.  Photographs showing existing land uses, vegetation upstream and downstream, and soil types. 
d.  Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line of the stream for at least 500 feet in either direction from the proposed development. 
(2)  Floodway and flood fringe district boundaries shall be as shown on the flood boundary and floodway map panels adopted in section 109-374. Upon receipt of an application for a permit or other approval within an A zone, the zoning administrator must obtain, review and reasonably utilize any regional flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source. If regional flood elevation and floodway data are not readily available, the applicant must furnish additional information, as needed, to determine the regulatory flood protection elevation and whether the proposed use would fall within the floodway or flood fringe. Information must be consistent with accepted hydrological and hydraulic engineering standards and the standards in (3) below. 
(3)  The determination of floodway and flood fringe must include the following components and applicable: 
a.  Estimate the peak discharge of the regional flood. 
b.  Calculate the water surface profile of the regional flood based upon a hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and overbank areas. 
c.  Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the regional flood without increasing flood stages more than 0.5 feet. A lesser stage increase than 0.5 feet shall be required if, as a result of the additional stage increase, increased flood damages would result. And equal degree of encroachment on both sides of the stream within the reach shall be assumed in computing floodway boundaries. 
(4)  The zoning administrator will review the submitted information and assess the technical evaluation and the recommended floodway and/or flood fringe boundary. The assessment must include the cumulative effects of previous floodway encroachments. The zoning administrator may seek technical assistance from a designated engineer or other expert person or agency, including the Department of Natural Resources. Based on this assessment, the zoning administrator may approve or deny the application. 
(5)  Once the floodway and flood fringe boundaries have been determined, the zoning administrator must process the permit application consistent with the applicable provisions of this article. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1606; Ord. No. 06-05; Ord. 15-07, § 3, 11-30-2015) 
Sec. 109-429. - Utilities, railroads, roads and bridges in the floodplain district. 
    All utilities and transportation facilities, including railroad tracks, roads and bridges, shall be constructed in accordance with state floodplain management standards contained in Minn. Rules pts. 6120.5000-6120.6200. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1608; Ord. No. 06-05) 
Sec. 109-430. - Subdivisions. 
(a)  No land shall be subdivided and no manufactured home park shall be developed where the site is determined to be unsuitable by the city council for reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment facilities. The city council shall review the subdivision/development proposal to ensure that each lot or parcel contains sufficient area outside of the floodplain to meet code requirements. 
(b)  In the floodplain district, applicants for subdivision approval or development of a manufactured home park shall provide the information required in section 109-428(b). The city council shall evaluate the proposed subdivision or manufactured home park development in accordance with the standards established in section s 109-428 and 109-429. 
(c)  For all subdivisions containing land in the floodplain, the floodway, and flood fringe boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation and the required elevation of all access roads shall be clearly labeled on all required subdivision drawings and platting documents. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1610; Ord. No. 06-05) 
Sec. 109-431. - Recreational vehicles. 
    Recreational vehicles that do not meet the exemption criteria specified in subsection (1) of this section shall be subject to the provisions of this article and as specifically spelled out in subsections (3) and (4) of this section. 
(1)  Exemption. Recreational vehicles are exempt from the provisions of this article if they are placed in any of the areas listed in subsection (2) of this section and further they meet the following criteria: 
a.  Have current licenses required for highway use. 
b.  Are highway ready meaning on wheels or the internal jacking system, are attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities commonly used in campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks and the recreational vehicle has no permanent structural type additions attached to it. 
c.  The recreational vehicle and associated use must be permissible in any preexisting, underlying zoning use district. 
(2)  Areas exempted for placement of recreational vehicles include individual lots or parcels of record. 
(3)  There shall be no additions or appurtenances, such as decks, porches (screened in or not), patios and similar improvements on the site. 
(4)  New commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds and new residential type subdivisions and condominium associations shall be subject to the following: 
a.  Any new or replacement recreational vehicle will be allowed in the flood fringe district, provided that said recreational vehicle is removed from the floodplain in accordance with an evacuation plan approved by the city and is accessible by an elevated road access to the site in accordance with section 109-428. No fill may be placed in the floodway or flood fringe to meet the requirements of this section. 
b.  The applicant must submit an emergency plan for the safe evacuation of all vehicles and people during the 100-year flood. Said plan shall be prepared by a registered engineer or other qualified individual, shall demonstrate that adequate time and personnel exist to carry out the evacuation, and shall demonstrate that the provisions of subsections (1)a. and (1)b. of this section will be met. All attendant sewage and water facilities for new or replacement recreational vehicles must be protected or construction so as to not be impaired or contaminated during times of flooding in accordance with section 109-428 (b)(5). There shall be no placement of decks, gazebos, storage buildings/sheds, porches, building additions and similar improvements on any recreational site in the floodplain. 
(Ord. 15-07, § 3, 11-30-2015) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 15-07, § 3, adopted November 30, 2015 amended § 109-431 title to read as herein set out. Formerly, such section pertained to travel trailers and travel vehicles. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Sec. 109-432. - Accessory buildings. 
    Within an MPGCC, accessory buildings shall be setback ten feet from the side and rear lot lines except when adjacent to right-of-way, in which case the setback is 20 feet. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1308, subd. 6(E)) 
Secs. 109-433-109-462. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 

Sec. 109-463. - Screening. 
(a)  Screening in residential districts. 
(1)  Screening shall be required in residential districts where: 
a.  Any off-street parking area contains more than four parking spaces and is within 30 feet of an adjoining residential district; and 
b.  Where the driveway to a parking area of more than four parking spaces is within 15 feet of an adjoining residential district. 
(2)  In residential districts, all materials and equipment shall be stored within a building or fully screened (so as to not be visible) from adjoining properties except for laundry drying and recreational equipment, construction and landscaping materials and equipment currently being used on the premises, agricultural equipment and materials if these are used or intended for use on the premises, off-street parking of passenger automobiles and pickup trucks. The use of any residential lot whether inside or outside a building, and the use of any open portion of the half of any lot that joins any street for the storage, keeping or abandonment of junk or scrap materials, and the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles is prohibited unless otherwise permitted by this article. No motor vehicle shall be parked in a residential district if it is in an inoperative state or it is not properly licensed by the state. No construction material or other debris shall be buried for any reason, including but without limitation, on a construction site. 
(b)  Screening in nonresidential districts. 
(1)  Any business, institutional or industrial use (e.g., structure, parking or storage) shall provide screening for the use. The screening shall consist of coniferous screening, decorative fencing, a berm, or combination thereof. Coniferous screening shall include a minimum of two rows of trees not less than six feet tall above ground, staggered as appropriate to the tree species. Screening shall also be provided where a business, institutional or industrial use is across the street from a residential zone, but not on that side of a business, institutional or industrial use considered to be the front (as determined by the building inspector). 
(2)  All exterior storage shall be screened. The exceptions are: 
a.  Retail merchandise being displayed as permitted by this article. 
b.  Materials and equipment being used for construction on the premises. 
(c)  Refuse screening. In all nonresidential zoning districts, all waste material, debris, refuse or garbage shall be kept in an enclosed building or enclosed within a container. Said container shall be completely screened by a wall or an equivalent visual screen. Said screen or enclosed building shall be architecturally compatible with the principal building it serves. No construction material or other debris shall be buried for any reason, including without limitation, on a construction site. 
(d)  Type of screening. 
(1)  The screening required in this section shall consist of an attractive solid fence or wall or landscaping or earth berm but shall not extend within 30 feet or any public street where said screening in excess of three feet in height is needed. 
(2)  Where landscaping, such as a hedge, is used, the landscape feature shall provide a yearround solid screen before the requirements of this section are met. 
(3)  Natural features, such as differences in elevation, tree masses or similar natural features, may negate the need for manmade screening in certain areas. This determination shall be made by the zoning administrator. 
(4)  Maintenance. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain all screening so as not to be unsightly, a nuisance or create a hazard or safety problem. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1318, subd. 1; Ord. No. 04-03) 
Sec. 109-464. - Dumpster enclosure. 
    Trash containers kept outside a building shall be screened by an enclosure constructed on three sides with wood, break-off block, face brick, or masonry. A durable gate shall be provided where the open side of the enclosure is visible from a public street or a residential district. All gates shall provide 100 percent opaqueness and shall be constructed in conformance with standards on file in the office of planning. Such enclosures must be of sufficient size to accommodate the containers and any mechanical means of servicing the containers. They shall be located in the side or rear yard of the property in such a manner as to provide easy access thereto, and shall conform to the setback requirements for parking and driving areas. Enclosures shall be maintained in conformance with the requirements of this section. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1318, subd. 2) 
Sec. 109-465. - Landscaping. 
    Landscaping shall be provided according to standards on file in the office of planning. All sites shall be constructed with a minimum 25 percent landscaped or green space. Landscaping investments should generally reflect at least two percent of the total project construction costs. Landscaped islands shall be provided within paved areas to break up the appearance of large areas of asphalt. Landscaped areas shall be irrigated with an underground sprinkler system; islands are optional. All structures requiring landscaping and fences shall be maintained so as not to be unsightly or present harmful health or safety conditions. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1318, subd. 3; Ord. No. 04-03) 
Sec. 109-466. - Lot coverage. 
    No more than 40 percent of a lot shall be covered by buildings. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1318, subd. 3; Ord. No. 04-02) 
Sec. 109-467. - Mechanical screening. 
    All mechanical equipment such as heating and air conditioning units and electrical transformers, shall be screened or camouflaged on all sides so as not to be visible from public streets or other properties. Such screening shall be compatible with the building. Evergreen plant materials may be used to screen such equipment located on the ground. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1318, subd. 5) 
Sec. 109-468. - Driveways. 
(1)  All driveways associated with new construction of a primary use must be paved in accordance with the city's public works design manual. Exemptions from complete driveway paving may be granted by city staff for lots over 21/2 acres, provided that, at a minimum, the apron of such driveways adjoining the road right-of-way must be paved. If weather prohibits driveway paving, the responsible party may enter a site completion agreement with the city to ensure paving when weather permits. 
(2)  Secondary driveways may be allowed by permit. The public works director may grant such permit upon that traffic on the adjoining road will not be negatively impacted. At a minimum, a paved or concrete apron between the road and property line is required. 
(3)  All driveways are subject to the dimensional standards in section 109-214 of this Code. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1318, subd. 6; Ord. No. 04-03; Ord. No. 12-03, § 6, 4-30-2012; Ord. No. 15-02, § 6, 3-9-2015) 
Sec. 109-469. - Sign plan. 
    A sign plan shall be submitted with the site plan for new developments or when existing developments are being enlarged or extensively remodeled. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1318, subd. 7) 
Sec. 109-470. - Glare. 
    Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area, sign, or other structure shall be arranged so as to deflect light away from any adjoining residential zone or from the public streets. Direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from floodlights or from high-temperature processes such as combustion or welding shall not be directed into any adjoining property. The source of lights shall be hooded or controlled in some manner so as not to light adjacent property. Bare incandescent light bulbs shall not be permitted in view of adjacent property or public right-of-way. In all zoning districts, light from artificial sources shall not exceed 1.0 foot-candle as generated from adjacent properties. In all cases, a light reading of zero foot-candles is required adjacent to any structure for light generated artificially from adjacent properties. Such reading shall be measured from one foot off the ground. All public street lighting is exempt from this provision. See also section 109-196 (d)(5). 
(Prior Code, ch. 1318, subd. 8; Ord. No. 04-03) 
Sec. 109-471. - Communications towers and antennas. 
(a)  Scope. This section applies to communications towers and antennas. 
(1)  Conditional use permit required. It will be unlawful to erect or replace any tower without first making application to the city and securing a conditional use permit therefor except as hereinafter provided. The applicant will provide at the time of application sufficient information to indicate that construction, installation, and maintenance of the antenna and tower will not create a safety hazard or damage to the property of other persons. The conditional use permit will expire in the event that the applicant does not install the tower approved by such permit within one year of approval by the city council. In the event the tower is no longer used for transmission of telecommunications signals, the applicant will remove such tower and related facilities within 12 months of non-use or obtain approval of an amendment of the conditional use permit by the city council to allow other legal uses of such facilities. 
(2)  Collocation requirements. All commercial wireless telecommunication towers erected, constructed, or located within the city will comply with the following requirements: 
a.  A proposal for a new commercial wireless telecommunication service tower will not be approved unless it can be documented by the applicant that the telecommunications equipment planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved tower or building within a one half-mile search radius of the proposed tower. 
b.  Any proposed commercial wireless telecommunication service tower will be designed, structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to accommodate both the applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for at least one additional user. 
(b)  Design requirements. Proposed or modified towers and antennas will meet the following design requirements: 
(1)  Towers and antennas will be designed to blend into the surrounding environment to the maximum extent possible through the use of color and camouflaging architectural treatment, except in instances where the color is dictated by federal or state authorities such as the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(2)  Towers will be of a monopole design unless determined that an alternative design would better blend into the surrounding environment. 
(3)  Towers will be designed to accommodate civil defense sirens or lights, as approved by the city council. 
(c)  Tower setbacks. Towers will conform to each of the following minimum setback requirements: 
(1)  Towers will meet the setbacks of the underlying zoning district, with the exception of industrial zoning districts, where towers may encroach into the rear setback area, provided that the rear property line abuts another industrially zoned property and the tower does not encroach upon any easements, and the distance to the nearest structure is equal to the height of the tower. 
(2)  Towers will be set back from any property line a minimum distance equal to one-half of the height of the tower, including all antennas and attachments, provided that a professional engineer certifies that the tower is designed with its weakest stress point at the midpoint of the tower such that it will fold on itself in the event of collapse. If the tower is not designed to fold on itself in the event of a collapse, it will be set back from any property line a minimum distance equal to the height of the tower. 
(3)  Towers will not be located between a principal structure and a public street, with the following exceptions: 
a.  In industrial zoning districts, towers may be placed within a side yard abutting an internal industrial street. 
b.  On sites adjacent to public streets on all sides, towers may be placed within a side yard abutting a local street. 
c.  A tower's setback may be reduced or its location in relation to a public street varied, at the sole discretion of the city council, to allow the integration of a tower into an existing or proposed structure such as a church steeple, light standard, power line support device, or similar structure. 
(d)  Total height. Proposed structures will not exceed 175 feet in height as measured from the ground level immediately adjacent to the structure. 
(e)  Tower lighting. Tower will not be illuminated by artificial means and will not display strobe lights unless such lighting is specifically required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other federal or state authority for a particular tower. Notwithstanding this provision, the city council may, in its sole discretion, approve the placement of an antenna on existing or proposed lighting, provided that the antenna is integrated with such lighting in a manner which substantially camouflages the antenna array and related facilities. 
(f)  Signs and advertising. The use of any portion of a tower for signs other than warning or equipment information signs is prohibited. A telephone number for emergency 24-hour contact will be placed on the base of the tower or on equipment adjacent to the tower. 
(g)  Accessory utility buildings. All utility buildings and structures accessory to a tower will be architecturally designed to blend in with the surrounding environment and will meet the minimum setback requirements of the underlying zoning district. Ground mounted equipment will be screened from view by suitable vegetation, except where a design of non-vegetative screening better reflects and complements the architectural character of the surrounding neighborhood. Accessory buildings will not be more than 2,000 square feet in size. 
(h)  Abandoned or unused towers or portions of towers. Abandoned or unused towers or portions of towers will be removed as follows: 
(1)  All abandoned or unused towers and associated facilities will be removed within 12 months of the cessation of operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city council. In the event that a tower is not removed within 12 months of the cessation of operations at a site, the tower and associated facilities may be removed by the city and the cost of removal assessed against the property. 
(2)  Unused portions of towers above a manufactured connection will be removed within six months of the time of antenna relocation. 
(i)  Antennas mounted on roofs, walls, and existing towers. The placement of wireless telecommunication antennas on roofs, walls, and existing towers will be approved by issuance of a conditional use permit in the same manner as approval of new towers. 
(j)  Additional submittal requirements. In addition to the information required elsewhere in this Code, development applications for towers and antennas shall include the following supplemental information: 
(1)  A report from an independent professional engineer that: 
a.  Describes the tower and antenna height and design, including a cross section and elevation; 
b.  Documents the height above grade for all potential mounting positions for co-located antennas and the minimum separation distances between antennas; 
c.  Describes the tower's capacity, including the number and type of antennas that it can accommodate; and 
d.  Includes an engineer's stamp and registration number. 
(2)  Before the issuance of a building permit, the applicant will submit a written statement that the proposed tower and antenna comply with regulations administered by Federal Aviation Administration and 1996 Telecommunications Act 704 for EMF, NIER, and other standards, verified by an independent engineer with the applicant bearing the cost. 
(k)  Construction requirements. All antennas and towers erected, constructed, or located within the city, and all wiring therefore, will comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  All applicable provisions of this Code. 
(2)  Towers will be constructed with corrosion resistant metal or covering. 
(3)  Towers will be certified by a an independent professional engineer to conform to the latest structural standards and wind loading requirements of the Uniform Building Code and the Electronics Industry Association. 
(4)  No part of any antenna or tower nor any lines, cable, equipment or wires or braces in connection with either will at any time extend across or over any part of the right-of-way, public street, highway, sidewalk, or property line. 
(5)  Towers and associated antennas will be designed to conform to accepted electrical engineering methods and practices and to comply with the provisions of the National Electrical Code. 
(6)  All signal and remote control conductors of low energy extending substantially horizontally above the ground between a tower or antenna and a structure, or between towers, will be at least 61/2 feet above the ground at all points, unless buried underground. 
(7)  Every tower affixed to the ground will be protected to discourage climbing of the tower by unauthorized persons by erection of a security fence at least six feet in height. 
(l)  Lights and other attachments. No antenna or tower adjacent to any residential zoning district will have affixed or attached to it in any way except during time of repair or installation any lights, reflectors, flashers, or other illuminating device, except as required by the Federal Aviation Agency or the Federal Communications Commission, nor will any tower have constructed thereon, or attached thereto, in any way, any platform, catwalk, crow's nest or like structure, except during periods of construction or repair. This provision will not prohibit the attachment of an antenna mounting framework to any tower. 
(m)  Violations. Any person who will violate any of the provisions of this section will be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1318, subd. 11; Ord. No. 97-03; Ord. No. 01-06) 
Sec. 109-472. - Zero-lot line residential units in a master-planned golf course community. 
    The following provisions apply to zero-lot line residential units in a master-planned golf course community: 
(1)  There shall be no more than two residential units per single structure. 
(2)  Zero-lot-line residential units must be built side-by-side, front-to-back, or front-to-side, rather than one over another. 
(3)  Common walls must provide sound transmission protection and fire protection as required for new construction in the state building code. 
(4)  All covenants, conditions, and restrictions shall be reviewed by the city attorney and must be recorded at the developer's expense. The city may require covenants, conditions, and restrictions to preserve community standards and contribute to the goals, policies, and objectives of the city's comprehensive plan. The city shall be a beneficiary of the declarations, covenants, and restrictions. 
(5)  Two parking spaces shall be provided for each unit, one of which shall be in a garage attached to the dwelling unit. 
(6)  Sidewalks and/or trails shall be provided to connect at least one entrance to each unit to a sidewalk/trail network leading to the golf course and to any larger trail network which contacts any part of the master-planned golf course community. 
(7)  Party and corridor partitions shall be of a type rated by a laboratory regularly engaged in sound testing as capable of accomplishing an average sound transmission loss (using a nine-frequency test) of not less than 50 decibels. Door systems between corridors and dwelling units shall be of solid core construction and include gaskets and closure plates. Room relationships, hallway designs, door and window placements and plumbing and ventilation installations shall be such that they assist in the control of sound transmission from unit to unit. 
(8)  Heating and air conditioning units shall be so placed to minimize sound impact to the living and sleeping areas of residential units. Such units shall not be placed in the front of the structure or on the same side of the structure as the front door. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1318, subd. 12; Ord. No. 01-09) 
Sec. 109-473. - Collector wastewater treatment systems. 
(a)  Capacity calculation. Wastewater systems that discharge to the same geographic area, body of water, wetland, or watershed may be considered a single system for the purposes of calculating system capacity and flow unless the proposer shows that system discharge points are spaced to allow complete wastewater treatment before wastewater from each discharge point migrates to the next discharge point. 
(b)  Permits. All systems shall conform to the regulations of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) and shall obtain the necessary permits from the MPCA prior to the issuance of certificates of occupancy for any structure that discharges to the system. Systems which are below permitting thresholds shall, at the owner's expense, be reviewed by the MPCA or by an independent engineer, who shall certify that the system meets all applicable standards and is reasonably expected to treat wastewater it will receive. 
(c)  Operation and monitoring. All collector wastewater treatment systems shall be operated in compliance with all permit conditions and regulations of state, federal, and local units of government with jurisdiction, and with all recommendations of operation made by the reviewers in subsection (b) of this section. System owners and operators shall participate in and cooperate with all required monitoring and compliance testing programs. System owners and operators shall submit any notice of deficiency or noncompliance with any permit condition or regulation to the city building official within ten days of receiving such notice. 
(d)  Ownership. At the discretion of the city, collector wastewater treatment systems may be donated or sold to, or accepted by, the city under the terms of a development agreement executed by the city. Ownership, or responsibility for operation, may be transferred from the original proposer to another entity or person if such transfer is approved by the city. The city shall not unreasonably withhold approval, but the parties must show the ongoing ability of the future owner to operate and maintain the system. 
(e)  Signage. Wetlands and other bodies of water that receive discharge from collector wastewater treatment systems shall be posted conspicuously, at the owner's expense, to prevent excavation, recreational use, or other activity when the activity would compromise the treatment purpose or pose a health danger. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1318, subd. 13; Ord. No. 01-09) 
Sec. 109-474. - Lots. 
(a)  Except in planned unit developments, there shall be no more than one principal building on any lot in all residence districts. 
(b)  An access drive to every principal building shall be provided and constructed according to minimum standards of the city as set out in section 107-177. 
(c)  No building permit shall be issued for any lot which is not buildable as defined in section 101-3. 
(d)  All applicants for approval of a subdivision, plat or building permit must demonstrate compliance with the standards for a buildable lot by submitting a certificate of survey indicating a minimum 11,000 square foot area with a length-to-width area ratio that is not in excess of 4:1 (building pad). The data submitted with the certificate must include a minimum of four soil borings that demonstrate that the building pad contains at least two feet of vertical separation between redoximorphic features and the natural existing grade with one additional boring a deep boring in the house location to locate redoximorphic features, help determine the lowest floor elevation, and identify disturbed or fill soils. The deep boring shall be two feet below the anticipated lowest floor elevation to demonstrate separation to redoximorphic features. The determination of the elevation of the basement floor may be at a lower elevation if there is clear evidence indicating the presence of a confining layer of material or hardpan below which is a significant amount of unsaturated soil indicating a more accurate seasonal high water elevation. For determining individual sewage treatment system site suitability and design, applicants shall provide a minimum of four soil borings (two for the primary and two for the secondary system site locations). This data must be shown on the certificate of survey. In the alternative, the applicant may submit an evaluation of the level of groundwater showing equivalent groundwater separation based upon a thorough hydro-geologic investigation and analysis that is approved following the review and recommendation of the city engineer and building official. In addition, other methods of revealing the seasonal high groundwater elevation may be considered. All newly constructed dwelling units shall be located entirely within the 11,000 square foot building pad. 
(e)  All newly constructed dwelling units or portions thereof shall maintain a two-foot vertical separation between the bottom of the basement or lowest floor and highest evidence of mottled soil. There shall also be a two foot vertical separation between the elevation established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for Zone A (100-year flood frequency) and the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) or as determined in calculations approved by the city engineer showing the 100-year flood elevation using FIRM methodology and the lowest floor opening. If the building official shall first find that a special individual reason makes the strict letter of this subsection impractical, and modification is in conformance with the intent and purpose of this article, that such modification does not lessen any protection or any degrees of structural integrity, then the modification may be allowed at the building official's discretion. The details of any action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered into the building official's files. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1308, subd. 5; Ord. No. 99-2; Ord. No. 08-08) 
Sec. 109-475. - Relocated structures. 
    Before any house or other structure is moved onto a vacant lot, the building official shall report to the city council on structural deficiencies and whether it conforms to all current state building codes and city ordinances. The cost of the preliminary inspection will be paid at the time of the inspection. If the structure does not meet applicable regulations, the owner must provide to the building official complete and detailed plans showing the changes to be made to bring the structure into conformance with such regulations. If the city council determines that a structure would have a negative effect on surrounding property values or be incompatible with surrounding structures in the area into which it is to be moved, the council may deny issuance of a permit for such relocation. Structures to be relocated into any district within the city will be regulated by all regulations and ordinances applying to new construction. No building permit will be issued until the owner has agreed in writing that the entire building will be completed within a period of six months, the fees have been paid and a certified check or letter of credit guaranteeing completion of such changes (completion guarantee) has been received by the city. The completion guarantee will be equal to 125 percent of the cost of such changes as reviewed by the building official. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1308, subd. 9; Ord. No. 04-03) 
Sec. 109-476. - Fences. 
(a)  Permit required. Only fences greater than six feet in height shall require a building permit. 
(b)  Location of fences. 
(1)  Fences, when constructed to enclose any lot or tract of land, shall be located in such a way that the entire fence shall be completely inside the property boundary, but not on the property line. Posts and framework shall be placed within the property lines of the owner and the actual fencing material, such as lumber, pickets, etc., shall be placed on the side of the fence which faces the street or the adjacent property, with exception of agricultural wire fences. 
(2)  Fences constructed for the purpose of containing non-domestic animals shall be set back a minimum of two feet from a side or rear lot line to prevent the non-domestic animals from destroying vegetation from neighboring property. 
(3)  No fences shall be allowed or constructed on a street right-of-way. The city, or any utility company having authority to use easements, shall not be liable for repair or replacement of such fences in the event they are moved, damaged or destroyed by virtue of the lawful use of said easement. 
(c)  Construction and maintenance. 
(1)  Every fence shall be constructed in a workmanlike manner and of substantial material reasonably suited to the purpose for which the fence is to be used. Every fence shall be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair and appearance and shall not be allowed to become and remain in a condition which would constitute a public nuisance or a dangerous condition. 
(2)  Link fences, wherever permitted, shall be constructed in such a manner that the barbed end is at the bottom of the fence. 
(3)  All fences shall be constructed in conformity with the wind, stress, foundation, structural and other requirements of the Uniform Building Code. 
(d)  Residential district fences. 
(1)  In residential districts, no fence may exceed four feet in height above the ground level, in front of the front line of the residential structure, along any street or highway right-of-way, or in the front yard as defined by this section. 
(2)  Fences along the side lines to the rear of the front line of the residential structure and along the rear line, including rear lines abutting street or highway right-of-way zones, may not exceed eight feet in height above the ground level. 
(3)  The required front yard of a corner lot shall not contain any fence which may cause danger to traffic on a street or public road, by obscuring the view. On corner lots, no fence shall be permitted within the 30-foot intersection sight distance triangle. 
(4)  Barbed wire and electrical fences are prohibited in residential districts except for instances when the fence is being used to confine livestock or protect crops. 
(5)  The use of barbed wire in a residential district to protect crops must be setback a minimum of one foot within the property line and a minimum of two feet within the property line if used to confine livestock or non-domestic animals. 
(e)  Commercial and industrial fences. 
(1)  In business and industrial zones, fences may not exceed ten feet in height above the ground level. 
(2)  The use of barbed wire is prohibited, except that the top one foot of any fence greater than six feet in height along side or rear lot lines in these zones may be constructed of barbed wire. Barbed wire shall not be used, installed or constructed on fences fronting on any street. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1308, subd. 14; Ord. No. 09-04) 
Sec. 109-477. - Liquid bulk storage. 
    All uses associated with the bulk storage of oil, gasoline, liquid fertilizer, ammonia chemicals, propane and similar liquids shall comply with state standards and require a conditional use permit to ensure that fire, explosion, or water or soil contamination hazards are not present that would be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare. Liquid storage tanks having a capacity in excess of 1,000 gallons shall be prohibited in residential zoning districts. All liquid storage tanks having a capacity in excess of 1,000 gallons shall secure a conditional use permit. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1308, subd. 16) 
Sec. 109-478. - Motorized recreation; definitions. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    All-terrain vehicle (ATV) means a motorized flotation-tired vehicle of not less than three low-pressure tires, but not more than six tires, that is limited in engine displacement of less than 1,000 cubic centimeters and includes a class 1 all-terrain vehicle and class 2 all-terrain vehicle. 
    Class 1 all-terrain vehicle means an all-terrain vehicle that has a total dry weight of less than 1,000 pounds. 
    Class 2 all-terrain vehicle means an all-terrain vehicle that has a total dry weight of 1,000 to 1,800 pounds. 
    Dwelling unit means a residential building or portion thereof, including a manufactured home as defined by state statutes, intended for permanent occupancy by a family, but not including hotels, motels, boarding or roominghouses, tourist homes, trailers and structures housing livestock. 
    High density residential subdivision means a platted or metes and bounds subdivision with a majority of lots containing two acres or less in a single-family residential (SFR) zoned district, or 11/2 acres in a planned unit development (PUD) zoned district. 
    Motorized dirt bike means a vehicle traveling on two wheels and capable of cross-country travel on natural terrain without benefit of a road or trail. 
    Off-highway motorcycle means a motorized, off-highway vehicle traveling on two wheels and having a seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering control, including a vehicle that is registered under Minn. Stats. ch. 168 for highway use if it is also used for off-highway operation on trails or unimproved terrain. 
    Off-road vehicle means a motor-driven recreational vehicle capable of cross-country travel on natural terrain without benefit of a road or trail. The term "off-road vehicle" does not include a snowmobile; an all-terrain vehicle; a motorcycle; a watercraft; a farm vehicle being used for farming; a vehicle used for military, fire, emergency, or law enforcement purposes; a construction or logging vehicle used in the performance of its common function; a motor vehicle owned by or operated under contract with a utility, whether publicly or privately owned, when used for work on utilities; a commercial vehicle being used for its intended purpose; snow-grooming equipment when used for its intended purpose; or an aircraft. 
    Residential property means real property zoned or used for residential purposes, including parcels of real property. 
    Track means a course constructed for the operation of off highway vehicles (OHVs) in a repetitive, continuous manner, including the physical alteration of natural landscaping or land contours by grading or repetitive use thereby creating jumps and banked corners in a clearly identifiable area. Physical alterations involving grading of less than ten cubic yards of on-site material shall not constitute construction of a track, provided that no jumps or artificial contours exceed two feet in height. 
(b)  Use of off-highway vehicles. OHVs may be used on private residential property within the city, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Construction or use of tracks in high density residential subdivisions is prohibited. 
(2)  No permitted track may be closer than 25 feet from any lot boundary line, nor closer than 100 feet from any dwelling unit except the owner's. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1308, subd. 20; Ord. No. 08-11) 
Sec. 109-479. - Signs. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Principal entrance means that entrance of a building designed for use by customers, visitors and tenants; the term "principal entrance" does not include loading doors, service entrances, doors to storage areas, or similar entrances. 
    Shopping center means, for purposes of sign regulations, five or more adjacent commercial uses. 
    Sign means any written announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration, insignia, or illumination used to advertise or promote the interest of any person when the same is displayed or placed outside in view of the general public and shall include every detached sign. 
    Sign, advertising or billboard, means a sign that directs attention to a business, profession, commodity, service or entertainment not sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is attached. 
    Sign, area, means the area within the frame shall be used to calculate the square footage except that the width of a frame exceeding 12 inches shall constitute advertising space, or should such letters or graphics be mounted directly on a wall of fascia or in such a way as to be without a frame, the dimensions for calculating the square footage shall be the area extending six inches beyond the periphery formed around such letters or graphics in a plane figure bounded by straight lines connecting the outermost points thereof, and each surface utilized to display a message or to attract attention shall be measured as a separate sign. Double-faced signs may be permitted with the maximum square footage on each side. Multi-faced signs shall not exceed two times the area of single-faced signs. 
    Sign, business, means a sign that directs attention to a business or profession or to the commodity, service, or entertainment sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is attached. 
    Sign, flashing, means an illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not maintained stationary and/or constant in intensity and color. 
    Sign, ground, means a sign that is supported by one or more uprights, poles or braces in or upon the ground. 
    Sign, identification, or name plate in business or industrial district means a sign that states the name or address or both of the business, industry, or occupant of the lot or may be a directory listing the names, addressed, and business of occupants. 
    Sign, illuminated, means any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs or outlines illuminated by electric lights or tubes as part of the sign proper. 
    Sign, pedestal (pylon), means a ground sign erected on not more than three shafts or posts solidly affixed to the ground. 
    Sign, real estate, means a sign offering property (land and/or buildings) for sale, lease, or rent. 
    Sign, revolving, means a sign that has moving parts (structural); the term "revolving sign" does not include flashing signs which blink on and off, but may include signs which produce moving effect through use of illumination. Signs which revolve or turn on an axis point such as a pedestal, string, or post shall not be considered revolving if less than two complete revolutions per minute. 
    Sign, temporary, means any sign not exceeding 64 square feet, placed in such a manner as not to be solidly affixed to any building, structure, or land and advertising an event such as a bazaar, special sale, sporting event, or similar situation. In no event, however, shall such signs be placed on any lot or parcel of land for a period to exceed 30 days out of any 12-month period. 
    Sign, wall, means a sign attached to or erected against the wall of a building with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the plane of said wall. 
(b)  Compliance. No signs shall hereafter be erected, re-erected, constructed, altered, or maintained except as provided by this Code. 
(c)  Signs as accessory use. Signs are a permitted accessory use in all districts subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  On right-of-way. Private signs are prohibited within the public right-of-way or easements except that the council may grant a conditional use permit to locate signs and decorations on or within the right-of-way under their jurisdiction for a specified time not to exceed 90 days. No conditional use permit for such a sign shall be issued by the council if a conditional use permit or temporary sign permit had been issued in the previous 24 months to that property. 
(2)  Flashing. Illuminated flashing signs shall not be permitted in any district. 
(3)  Beams. Illuminated signs or devices giving off an intermittent, steady or rotating beam consisting of a collection or concentration of rays of light shall not be permitted in any district. 
(4)  Temporary real estate. For purposes of selling, renting or leasing property, a sign not in excess of six square feet per surface may be placed within the front yard of such property to be sold or leased. Such signs shall not be less than 15 feet from the right-of-way line unless flat against the structure. For the purpose of selling or promoting a residential project of six or more dwelling units, one sign not to exceed 32 square feet; a commercial area of three acres or more, or an industrial area of ten acres or more, one sign not to exceed 48 feet of advertising surface may be erected upon the project site. Such sign shall not remain after 90 percent of the project is developed. 
(5)  Existing signs. Signs existing on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived, which do not conform to the regulations, are a nonconforming use. 
(6)  Traffic interference. No sign may be erected that, by reason of position, shape or color, would interfere in any way with the proper functioning or purpose of a traffic sign or signal. 
(7)  Building wall signs. Signs shall not be painted directly on the outside wall of a building. Signs shall not be painted on a fence, rocks or similar structure or feature in any district. Signs shall be considered as a structure or fastened to another structure. 
(8)  Election signs. 
a.  All noncommercial signs of any size may be posted in any number from 46 days before the state primary in a state general election year until ten days following the state general election. 
b.  Except as provided in subsection (c)(8)a.: 
1.  Election signs are permitted on private property in any district, provided that such signs are removed within 30 days following the election as related to the signs. 
2.  No election sign shall be permitted in any residential district sooner than two months preceding the election relating to the sign. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1322) 
Sec. 109-480. - Permitted signs permanent. 
    Signs shall be permitted by zoning district in accordance with the following minimum standards: 
Agricultural, Residential Type Temporary, identification, ground, wall and pedestal. Number One per lot frontage. Size No more than 11/2 square feet per dwelling; 21/2 square feet for interim use permit; 24 square feet for nonresidential signs; six square feet for real estate signs. Height Not over ten feet above grade except as otherwise provided herein. Projection Any sign over 11/2 square feet shall be set back at least ten feet from any lot line. Illumination Indirect or diffused lighting of signs permitted, subject to lumination controls. GB Districts Type Temporary, identification, business, wall, ground, and pedestal. Size The aggregate square footage of sign space per lot shall not exceed the sum of four square feet per front foot of building plus one square foot per lot frontage not occupied by building. No single sign shall exceed 150 square feet. Height No ground or pedestal sign more than 25 feet above average grade. Projection Any sign shall be set back ten feet from any lot line. Illumination Illuminated signs permitted. Industrial Districts (LI) Type Temporary, identification, business, wall, ground, and pedestal. Size The aggregate square footage of sign space per lot shall not exceed the sum of four square feet per front foot of building plus one square foot per front foot of property not occupied by building. No sign shall exceed 200 square feet. Height No sign more than 35 feet above grade. Projection Any sign shall be set back ten feet from any lot line. Illumination Illuminated signs permitted.  
(Prior Code ch. 1322) 
Sec. 109-481. - Substitution clause. 
    The owner of any sign that is otherwise allowed by this article may substitute noncommercial speech in lieu of any other noncommercial speech. This substitution of copy may be made without any additional approval or permitting. 
(Prior Code, ch. 1322) 
State Law reference- Noncommercial signs, Minn. Stats. § 211B.045. 
Fee Schedule 2019 
Administration 
Assessment Searches $20.00 Copies (black and white) $0.25/page Color Printing $1.00/page Field Party Permit $50.00 Map (standard) $1.50 Return Check Charge $35.00 Staff Time 1.5 X hourly pay rate Long Distance Fax $.50 Parking Violations $10.00 plus court imposed surcharges/fees  
Building 
Basement Finish (Includes Mechanical and Plumbing) $235.00 Building Permit, value based (new residential, new commercial, remodel, additions, accessory buildings, decks, fences over 7 feet in height, in-ground swimming pools) all commercial plumbing and HVAC (new and remodel) to be value based 1997 UBC Table 1-A Fee Schedule Building Plan Review Fee (pertains to all value-based permits) 65% of Building Permit Fee Building Plan Review Fee (identical plans) 25% of Building Permit Fee per MN Rules 1300.0160 Subp 5 Set fee permits, minimum permit fee This includes residential mechanical (plumbing and HVAC), roofing, siding, windows and above ground swimming pools. Other needs as determined by Municipality and Building Official $125.00 Demolition Permit $150.00 Fence Permit $50.00 Inspection Fees (after hours, special requests) $60/hr (minimum 1 hr) Moved-In Building Per value of on-site work only Re-Inspection Fee $65/hr (minimum 1 hr) Septic System Permit (Residential) $250.00 Septic System Permit (Commercial/Other) Per valuation Septic Pumping Permit $5.00 Swimming Pool Permit $100.00 Fee for Work Performed without Permit 2X the Permit Fee  
Fire Department 
Copy of Fire Incident Report (must pick up at City Hall) $0.25/page Fireworks Permit $50.00 House Burn Permit By agreement Safe House Rental (includes delivery and pickup) $150.00 False Alarm Charge (after 3 instances in 12 months) $75.00  
Licensing 
Gambling Premise Permit $100.00 Garbage Hauler License $100.00 Tobacco License $100.00 Intoxicating Liquor On-Sale $2,500.00 Off-Sale $250.00 Sunday Sales $200.00 Wine $200.00 Club $200.00 Malt Liquor On-Sale $200.00 Off-Sale $50.00 Temporary Liquor License $25.00 per event Investigative Fee (MN Applicants) $200.00 (Out of State Applicants) City's Cost (not to exceed $10,000.00)  
Planning 
Color Maps/Printouts (8.5" X 11") $1.00 Conditional Use Permit $300.00 Conditional Use Permit Amendment $100.00 Comprehensive Plan Amendment $500.00 Application Fee $1,000 Escrow Commercial Site Plan Review $1,000 Escrow Environmental Assessment 
Worksheet/Environmental Impact Statement 
Review $5,000 Escrow Interim Use Permit $300.00 Interim Use Permit Renewal/Amendment $100.00 Park Dedication Fee in Lieu of Land $2,000 per lot created Planned Unit Development Sketch Plan 
Review $1,000 Escrow Planned Unit Development  $500.00 Application Fee $15,000 Escrow Rezoning $200.00 Right-of-Way/Easement Vacation $250.00 Subdivision Sketch Plan $1,000 Escrow Subdivision Application (Preliminary and 
Final Plat)  $500.00 Application Fee $15,000 Escrow Subdivision Application W/ Urban Services  $500.00 Application Fee $25,000 Escrow Minor Subdivision Application  $300.00 Application Fee $1,000 Escrow Variance $300.00  
    City Staff may require escrow or additional escrow based on the application. 
    Charges against escrow deposits can include professional consulting fees, staff time, materials, publications, mailings, mileage, and other expenses directly related to an application. 
;b0; 
Public Works 
ROW Excavation Fee (up to 100') $100.00 ROW Excavation Fee (for every 100' after the first 100') $30.00 Culverts $550.00 Mailboxes $80.00  
Utilities 
;b0; 
MPGCC/The Ponds Water Access Charge (WAC)  $3,500.00 ($3,000 remitted to St. Francis, 
per agreement) Sewer Access Charge (SAC) $3,500.00 Sewer Usage Fee $39.50/month Water Usage Fee per Thousand Gallons  2% above St. Francis Rate (per agreement) Water Base Rate Per Month  $16.42 ($10.42 Oak Grove/$6.00 St. Francis) 
(per agreement) Water Meter $225.00 Water Shut Off $25.00 Water Reconnect Fee $25.00 Sewer and Water Connection Permit * $50.00  
* Inspection performed by the Public Works Department 
Lake George/West Lake George Water Access Charge (WAC) $3,500.00 Sewer Access Charge (SAC) $3,500.00 Water Base Rate per Month $25.20 Water Usage Fee per 1,000 Gallons $4.80 Water Meter $225.00 Sewer Usage Fee per Month $62.00 Water Shut Off $25.00 Water Reconnect Fee $25.00 Sewer and Water Connection Permit * $50.00 Street Lights (billed quarterly, The Ponds billed monthly) Milestone, Nightingale Knoll, The Ponds, Railside $2.75 per month Wasnick Hills $4.00 per month Late utility payment fee 10% - calculated monthly  
* Inspection performed by the City of Oak Grove Public Works Department 
(Ord. No. 18-01, 3-26-2018; Ord. No. 19-01, 2-11-2019) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - PRIOR CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the Prior Code, as supplemented through April 29, 2012, that are included in the Code. 
Prior Code 
Section Section 

in Code ch. 104 2-80 ch. 112, subd. 1 10-25 chs. 112, subd. 1, 122 10-2 ch. 112, subd. 2- 
ch. 112, subd. 6 10-26-10-30 ch. 112, subd. 8 10-1 ch. 112, subd. 10 10-3 ch. 120, subds. 1-3 6-1 ch. 122, subd. 4, 20-1 ch. 122, subd. 6 ch. 124, subd. 2,4 20-1 ch. 402, subd. 1 12-56 ch. 402, subd. 5(A), (B) 12-99 ch. 402, subd. 5(D) 12-105 ch. 402, subd. 5(E) 12-101 ch. 402, subd. 5(F) 12-108 ch. 402, subd. 6, 
ch. 402, subd. 7 12-106, 
12-107 ch. 402, subd. 8 12-97 ch. 402, subd. 9 12-96 ch. 402, subd. 10 12-95 ch. 402, subd. 11 12-98 ch. 402, subd. 13 12-104 ch. 402, subd. 14 12-102 ch. 402, subd. 15(A) 12-61 ch. 402, subd. 15(B), 
ch. 402, subd. 15(C) 12-63, 12-64 ch. 402, subd. 15(D) 12-62 ch. 402, subd. 15(E) 12-65 ch. 402, subd. 16, 
ch. 402, subd. 17 12-59, 12-60 ch. 402, subd. 19 12-58 ch. 402, subd. 20 12-100 ch. 402, subd. 21 12-103 ch. 402, subd. 22(A) 12-93 ch. 402, subd. 22(B)- 
ch. 402, subd. 22(D) 12-66 ch. 402, subd. 23(A) 12-94 ch. 402, subd. 23(B)- 
ch. 402, subd. 23(D) 12-67 ch. 402, subd. 26 12-57 ch. 402, subds. 2-4 12-95 ch. 403 12-130 ch. 404, subd. 1 12-161 ch. 404, subd. 2- 
ch. 404, subd. 4 12-189- 
12-191 ch. 405 12-131 ch. 406, subd. 2 12-271 ch. 406, subd. 3 12-307 ch. 406, subd. 3(A), (B) 12-308 ch. 406, subd. 3(C) 12-312 ch. 406, subd. 3(D) 12-316 ch. 406, subd. 3(E) 12-314 ch. 406, subd. 3(F) 12-309 ch. 406, subd. 3(G) 12-315 ch. 406, subd. 3(H) 12-313 ch. 406, subd. 4 12-311 ch. 406, subd. 5 12-310 ch. 406, subd. 6- 
ch. 406, subd. 8 12-276- 
12-278 ch. 406, subd. 9, 
ch. 406, subd. 10 12-274, 
12-275 ch. 406, subd. 11(A) 12-276 12-279 ch. 406, subd. 12 12-273 ch. 406, subd. 13 12-272 ch. 407, subd. 2 12-222 ch. 407, subd. 3 12-221 ch. 407, subd. 4- 
ch. 407, subd. 6 12-223- 
12-225 ch. 407, subd. 7 12-224 ch. 601, subd. 2 14-2 ch. 601, subd. 4 16-1 ch. 601, subd. 7 2-81 ch. 603, subds. 2, 3 16-2 ch. 605, subd. 2 4-1 ch. 605, subd. 3, 
ch. 605, subd. 4 4-30, 4-31 ch. 605, subds. 5, 6 4-2 ch. 605, subd. 7 4-3 ch. 605, subd. 8 4-32 ch. 605, subd. 9 4-29 ch. 605, subd. 11- 
ch. 605, subd. 13 4-4-4-6 ch. 607, subd. 2- 
ch. 607, subd. 7 12-244- 
12-246 ch. 607, subds. 3-5 14-3 ch. 609, subd. 1- 
ch. 609, subd. 5 8-51-8-55 ch. 611, subd. 1 14-1 ch. 902, subd. 1 107-174 ch. 902, subd. 5 107-173 ch. 902, subd. 7- 
ch. 902, subd. 10 107-175- 
107-178 ch. 902, subds. 2-4 22-1 ch. 904, subd. 1 18-19 ch. 904, subd. 2(A)- 
ch. 904, subd. 2(G) 18-20-18-24 ch. 904, subd. 2(H) 18-23 ch. 904, subd. 2(I) 18-25 ch. 904, subd. 2(J)- 
ch. 904, subd. 2(M) 18-26-18-29 ch. 906, subd. 1 16-3, 16-4 ch. 906, subd. 2 16-4 ch. 908, subd. 2 20-2 ch. 910, subd. 7 22-2 ch. 910, subds. 2-5 22-2 ch. 912, subd. 1- 
ch. 912, subd. 3 103-19- 
103-21 ch. 914, subd. 1- 
ch. 914, subd. 7 14-4-14-9 ch. 1004, subds. 2-10 8-2 ch. 1008, subd. 1 8-1 ch. 1010, subds. 2-6 8-3 ch. 1012 8-4 ch. 1014, subd. 1 8-27 ch. 1014, subd. 2(D) 8-28 ch. 1014, subds. 3, 4 109-160 ch. 1014, subd. 5- 
ch. 1014, subd. 7 8-29-8-31 ch. 1014, subd. 8- 
ch. 1014, subd. 12 109-160 ch. 1014, subd. 13 8-31 ch. 1020, subd. 1 109-248 ch. 1020, subd. 2 109-247 ch. 1020, subd. 3- 
ch. 1020, subd. 5 109-249- 
109-251 ch. 1102, subd. 1- 
ch. 1102, subd. 5 109-282- 
109-286 ch. 1105 109-281 ch. 1106, subd. 1- 
ch. 1106, subd. 3 109-287- 
109-289 ch. 1108 109-290 ch. 1110, subd. 1- 
ch. 1110, subd. 7 109-291- 
109-297 ch. 1112 109-298 ch. 1114, subd. 6- 
ch. 1114, subd. 10 109-300- 
109-304 ch. 1114, subds. 1-5 109-299 ch. 1116 109-305 ch. 1302 109-1 ch. 1308, subd. 1, 
ch. 1308, subd. 2 109-3, 
109-4 ch. 1308, subd. 4 109-28 ch. 1308, subd. 5 109-474 ch. 1308, subd. 6 109-194 ch. 1308, subd. 6(E) 109-432 ch. 1308, subd. 7 109-191 ch. 1308, subd. 9 109-475 ch. 1308, subd. 10- 
ch. 1308, subd. 13 109-215- 
109-218 ch. 1308, subd. 14 109-476 ch. 1308, subd. 16 109-477 ch. 1308, subd. 17 109-195 ch. 1308, subd. 20 109-478 ch. 1309, subd. 2- 
ch. 1309, subd. 8 105-19- 
105-25 ch. 1310, subd. 1 101-4 ch. 1310, subd. 2(A)- 
ch. 1310, subd. 2(F) 109-133- 
109-138 ch. 1310, subd. 3 109-48 ch. 1310, 
subd. 4(B)(8) 109-193 ch. 1310, 
subd. 4(B)(9) 103-22 ch. 1310, subd. 5 109-27 ch. 1310, subd. 6 109-47 ch. 1310, subd. 7 109-49 ch. 1312, subd. 1, 
ch. 1312, subd. 2 109-72, 
109-73 ch. 1312, subd. 3, 
ch. 1312, subd. 4 109-73, 
109-74 ch. 1314, subd. 1- 
ch. 1314, subd. 5 109-92- 
109-96 ch. 1314, subd. 5A 109-97 ch. 1314, subd. 7- 
ch. 1314, subd. 10 109-99- 
109-101 ch. 1318, subd. 1- 
ch. 1318, subd. 13 109-463- 
109-473 ch. 1320, subd. 1 109-29 ch. 1322 109-479 109-481 ch. 1324 109-196 ch. 1326 109-102 ch. 1328, subd. 1 12-22 ch. 1328, subd. 2 12-21 ch. 1328, subd. 3(A)- 
ch. 1328, subd. 3(C) 12-23-12-25 ch. 1328, subd. 4 12-26 ch. 1402 107-1 ch. 1404 107-2 ch. 1406 107-3 ch. 1410 107-27 ch. 1412, subd. 6 107-60 ch. 1414 107-61 ch. 1416 107-28 ch. 1418 107-81 ch. 1420 107-82 ch. 1422, subd. 1- 
ch. 1422, subd. 10 107-108- 
107-117 ch. 1424 107-148 ch. 1426, subd. 1 107-149 ch. 1428 107-150 ch. 1430 107-151 ch. 1432 107-4 ch. 1434 107-152 ch. 1502 109-330 ch. 1504 109-331 ch. 1506, subd. 1- 
ch. 1506, subd. 3 109-332- 
109-334 ch. 1508 109-329 ch. 1510 109-336 ch. 1512 109-337 ch. 1514, subd. 1 109-338 ch. 1516 109-339 ch. 1518 109-340 ch. 1520 109-335 ch. 1600, subd. 2- 
ch. 1600, subd. 4 109-371- 
109-373 ch. 1600, subd. l 109-370 ch. 1602, subd. 2, 
ch. 1602, subd. 3 109-375, 
109-376 ch. 1602, subd. 4 109-369 ch. 1602, subd. 5 109-377 ch. 1602, subd. l 109-374 ch. 1604, subd. 2 109-379 ch. 1604, subd. l 109-378 ch. 1606 109-428 ch. 1608 109-429 ch. 1610 109-430 ch. 1612, subd. 1- 
ch. 1612, subd. 5 109-401- 
109-405 ch. 1614 109-406 ch. 1616 109-407 ch. 1620 109-400 ch. 1622 109-431 ch. 1704 24-20 ch. 1706 24-21 ch. 1708 24-19 ch. 1710 24-24 ch. 1712 24-50 ch. 1714 24-51 24-54 ch. 1716 24-84 ch. 1718 24-85 ch. 1720 24-49 ch. 1722 24-27 ch. 1724 24-52 ch. 1726 24-53 ch. 1728 24-55 ch. 1730 24-25 ch. 1732 24-29 ch. 1734 24-30 ch. 1736 24-22 ch. 1738 24-23 ch. 1740 24-88 ch. 1742 24-86 ch. 1744 24-87 ch. 1746 24-28 ch. 1752 24-26  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number Date Section Section 
in Code 97-03 109-471 97-06 12-271- 
12-279 12-307- 
12-316 98-01 10-3 98-05 12-161 12-189- 
12-191 99-1 12-131 99-2 107-61 109-474 99-03 109-96 00-03 109-194 01-1 107-109, 
107-110 107-176 109-92 01-02 12-56 01-04 105-19- 
105-25 01-05 109-247- 
109-251 01-06 109-92 109-471 01-09 107-149 109-96 109-102 109-214 109-472, 
109-473 02-02 12-93 02-03 103-19, 
103-20 107-109 107-173 2003-01 107-109 107-112 03-02 12-56 12-67 12-95 12-98 12-102 2003-05 107-109 03-06 103-19, 
103-20 03-09 12-93 04-02 109-94 109-194 109-214 109-292 109-466 04-03 8-4 8-27-8-31 12-130 107-60, 
107-61 107-109, 
107-110 107-116 107-177 109-29 109-48 109-92 109-102 109-160 109-194 109-196 109-214 109-291, 
109-292 109-305 109-463 109-465 109-468 109-470 109-475 04-12 107-177 05-06 109-194 05-08 107-109 107-148 107-174 107-176, 
107-177 05-10 10-25 06-01 12-223, 
12-224 06-04 12-221- 
12-225 06-05 109-369- 
109-379 109-400- 
109-407 109-428- 
109-431 06-08 24-19-24-30 24-49-24-55 24-84-24-88 08-03 18-26 08-06 103-22 109-193, 
109-194 08-07 14-4-14-9 08-08 109-474 08-10 4-30 08-11 109-478 08-13 103-22 109-193 08-14 16-3 08-15 6-1 10-2 09-02 109-194, 
109-195 09-04 109-476 09-06 109-194 09-07 16-3 09-08 24-49 09-09 20-2 09-11 107-4 10-01 2-81 14-2 16-1 10-03 18-20-18-29 10-04 14-2 10-06 24-24 24-54 10-07 2-80 10-10 24-49 10-___ 109-214 11-01 109-48 109-195 11-03 8-52 11-04 109-48 12-02  4-30-2012 16-3, 16-4 12-03  4-30-2012 1 109-298 2 109-28 3 109-194 4 8-28 5 109-214 6 109-468 7 107-177 8 109-92-109-97 8(ch. 1314, subd. 8), 
8(ch. 1314, subd. 9) 109-100, 
109-101 9 109-96 10 109-94 13-03  5-13-2013 2 8-2 13-05  6-24-2013 1-6 Adopting Ord., p. xi 13-06  9-30-2013 1       Added 109-98(b)(23) 13-08 12- 9-2013 1       Added 22-63 15-01  2- 9-2015       Added 8-56-8-62 15-02  3- 9-2015 1 109-72 2       Added 109-103 3 109-194 4 109-214 5 109-96 6 109-468 15-04  8-31-2015 1 109-92 2 101-3 15-05 10-12-2015 1 16-4 15-06 11- 9-2015 1       Added 107-4(g) 15-07 11-30-2015 1 109-374 2 109-375 3 109-428 109-431 16-01  4-25-2016 105-22 105-24       Added 105-26 16-02  7-25-2016 1 109-193 16-03  8-29-2016 1 109-98 17-01  6-12-2017 1 12-67 18-01  3-26-2018       Added App. A 18-02  3-12-2018 1       Added 2-49(e) 2       Added 2-53(d) 18-06  8-27-2018 1 109-214 18-07  8-27-2018 1 109-194 18-08 10- 8-2018 1 4-30 18-09 10- 8-2018 1 12-131 19-01  2-11-2019 App. A 19-02  2-11-2019 1 109-214 19-03  2-11-2019 1 109-214  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Minnesota Statutes. 
Minn. Stats. 
Section Section 

in Code ch. 12 Ch. 6 ch. 13 2-80 12-1 ch. 13D 2-48 14.57-14.69 12-108 16B.59 et seq. Ch. 103, Art. II 18.75 et seq. Ch. 8, Art. III 18C.205 109-249, 
109-250 18C.235 109-249, 
109-250 ch. 35 Ch. 4 60A.07, subd. 4 12-103 60A.206 12-103 69.771 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. II 84.415 109-339 88.171 8-4 93.44-93.51 109-281 109-304 103.235 109-248 103B.231 105-24 103B.255 105-24 ch. 103F 109-370 103F.101 et seq. Ch. 109, Art. X 103F.121 Ch. 109, Art. X 103F.201 et seq. Ch. 109, Art. VIII 103F.201- 
103F.227 109-298 103F.221 Ch. 109, Art. VIII 109-283 103F.301 et seq. Ch. 109, Art. IX 109-330 103F.335 Ch. 109, Art. IX ch. 103G 109-404 109-428 103G.005, subd. 15 101-3 109-281 103G.221- 
103G.2375 105-24 103G.245 109-339 103G.311, subd. 2 109-335 103G.311, subd. 6 109-335 103G.311, subd. 7 109-335 103G.405 109-293 103G.407 109-293 ch. 103H 8-1 Ch. 109, Art. VII 103H.001 109-248 103H.151 109-247 115.55 8-2 109-28 115.55(2)(b) 8-2 115.941 Ch. 12, Art. VII 115A.93 Ch. 12, Art. VII 116.07 24-19 ch. 144D 109-192 145A.05 8-2 152.01, subd. 4 22-63 ch. 168 109-478 169.011 14-2 101-3 169.04(a)(1) 16-4 169.32 16-4 169.81, subd. 5 12-246 169.121, subd. 1 22-63 169A.35 12-63 182.651, subd. 14 109-195 211B.045 109-481 ch. 216D 22-26 216E.10 109-339 237.162 Ch. 22, Art. II 237.163 Ch. 22, Art. II 237.163 subd. 2(b) 22-24 ch. 299N Ch. 10, Art. II 300.06 22-26 303.03 12-95 326B.02, subd. 6 Ch. 10 326B.103, subd. 3 109-194 326B.121 103-20, 103-21 326B.133 103-20 326B.148 103-21 333.02 12-95 340.410, subd. 5 12-66, 12-67 ch. 340A Ch. 12, Art. III 12-56 12-191 340A.101 12-56 340A.101, subd. 9 12-56 340A.301, subd. 7 12-66, 12-67 340A.401 et seq. Ch. 12, Art. III, 
Div. 2 340A.402 12-96 340A.403 12-93 340A.404 et seq. 12-94 340A.405 12-93 340A.408 12-100 340A.409 12-103 340A.410, subd. 4 12-107 340A.410, subd. 7 12-102 340A.415 12-108 340A.501 12-59, 12-60 340A.503 12-66, 12-67 340A.504 12-61, 12-62 12-64 12-66, 12-67 340A.508, subd. 3 12-108 340A.509 Ch. 12, Art. III 340A.801, 
340A.802 12-103 ch. 343 Ch. 4 343.20 et seq. 4-6 ch. 346 Ch. 4 346.52 4-29 ch. 347 Ch. 4 Ch. 4, Art. II 347.31 et seq. 4-30 347.50- 
347.565 4-32 ch. 349 Ch. 12, Art. IV 12-66, 12-67 349.11- 
349.23 12-130, 
12-131 349.19 12-130 349.213 Ch. 12, Art. IV ch. 351 Ch. 2, Art. III ch. 353G Ch. 10, Art. II ch. 364 12-1 364.021 2-80 364.06 2-80 364.09 2-80 366.011 6-1 10-2 20-1 366.012 6-1 10-2 20-1 410.01 2-1 410.33 1-7 412.013 et seq. Ch. 2 412.121 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 412.121 2-48 412.191 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II 412.191, subd. 1 2-51 412.191, subd. 2 2-48 412.191, subd. 4 2-52 412.221, subd. 6 Ch. 18 Ch. 22 412.221, subd. 17 Ch. 10 412.221, subd. 21 Ch. 4 412.221, subd. 23 Ch. 14 412.221, subd. 24 16-2 412.321 et seq. Ch. 24 Ch. 24, Art. II 412.231 1-7 412.572 et seq. 2-1 415.01 6-1 10-2 20-1 415.021 1-1 ch. 424A Ch. 10, Art. II chs. 426-435 Ch. 2, Art. IV ch. 429 22-1 107-109 429.101 20-1 435.193- 
435.195 20-2 ch. 440 Ch. 22 444.075, subd. 3 24-50 ch. 448 Ch. 18 461.12, subd. 1 Ch. 12, Art. VIII, 
Div. 2 461.13, subd. 2 12-272 461.18 12-278 ch. 462 109-281 109-283 109-289 109-370 462.354, subd. 1 2-162 462.354, subd. 2 Ch. 109, Art. II, 
Div. 2 109-47 462.355, subd. 2 101-4 462.357 et seq. Ch. 101 462.357 Ch. 109 462.357, subd. 1c 109-28 462.357, subd. 4 101-4 462.357, subd. 6 Ch. 109, Art. II, 
Div. 2 462.357, subd. 6 109-48, 
109-49 462.358 Ch. 107 462.358, subd. 2b 107-150 462.358, subd. 3a Ch. 107, Art. II 462.3593, subd. 9 109-193 462.3595 Ch. 109 Ch. 109, Art. V 462.3597 Ch. 109 Ch. 109, Art. V 463.15 14-4 463.15 et seq. 14-9 466.04 2-110 473H.03 109-93 473H.17 109-93 ch. 505 101-3 109-299 505.021 109-299 609.0332 1-7 609.034 1-7 609.08 14-3 609.32 18-21 609.50 10-1 609.595 18-24 609.685 12-276 609.6855 12-276 609.686 10-2 624.20 12-221- 
12-223 624.20- 
624.25 12-225 624.22 12-225 624.40 et seq. Ch. 12, Art. VI 18-20 645.13- 
645.151 1-2 645.35 1-4 645.36 1-4 645.49 1-3  
